www.ird.govt.nz Ref: 22 OIA1665 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 05 April 2022 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 18 March 2022. You requested the following: IRD’s policies for both working overtime an d accumulating annual leave. Overtime policy Inland Revenue does not hold any policies regarding working overtime. Rather, overtime provisions are stipulated in individuals’ employment agreements. Therefore, this part of your request has been refused under section 18(e) of the OIA, as the policy requested does not exist. Annual leave policy There is no specific policy solely on accumulating annual leave. However, I have attached a copy of Inland Revenue’s Leave Policy and Annual Leave Guidelines which address when annual leave is accrued. Right of Review If you disagree with my decisions on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decisions. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. Publishing of OIA response Finally, please note that, Inland Revenue regularly publishes, on its website, responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public. Your personal details or any information that would identify, you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you again for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Yours sincerely Erina C layton Enterprise Leader, People & Workplace Services 2 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Who this policy applies to This policy and the guidelines which support its application apply to all Inland Revenue employees. Many of the leave provisions are contained in employment agreements. Additionally, employees may have individually negotiated provisions/terms with Inland Revenue or have specific protected terms (some documents refer to these as “grandparented”). To ensure correct identification of entitlements and obligations, people leaders need to check the employee’s personnel file and their employee's agreement (including any variations). Specific practice around leave NOTIFICATION AND RECORDING Employees should notify their people leader that they intend to take leave as early as possible and specify the type of leave. Employees are required to organise leave arrangements with their people leader. The leave is entered and approved through our self service tools to maintain an accurate record of leave taken and current entitlements. In the case of domestic violence leave, the leave can be also be applied for via a union support person or HR Advice. Specific types of leave For further information check the specific guidelines which expand on many of the leave types below (Topic 2 – ‘Leave’ in our People Policies & Guidelines. The homepage also includes links to employment agreements, protected entitlements etc.) ANNUAL LEAVE Annual leave may be taken as it accrues. It must be taken in either full or half days. While generally it is the employee’s choice as to how and when they request leave, the usual expectation is that they will take annual leave within 12 months of becoming entitled to it. Employees are encouraged to take at least one long break of at least two weeks each year for rest and recreation. Inland Revenue can require an employee to take annual leave (including specifying when) but must provide a minimum of 14 days’ notice. (Situations when this may occur are covered in the annual leave guidelines). Anticipating annual leave Where applicable, the employees’ employment agreement sets out how much leave may be anticipated. An employee may anticipate some of the next year’s annual leave entitlement if their people leader approves. If the employee stops working for Inland Revenue before accruing enough leave to cover the anticipated annual leave taken, Inland Revenue will recover the difference from the final pay if possible. 1 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] PEOPLE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES Topic 2(a) – Leave Annual Leave Guidelines These guidelines provide information about requesting, accruing and using annual leave. Process and planning requirements You must enter your requests for annual leave in our self-service tools for approval by your people leader before you take the leave. The leave can only be entered in half or full days. Your people leader will approve or decline leave as soon as possible so you can make plans. Requesting your leave as far in advance as possible will increase your chances of being able to take the leave at a time that suits you and supports your leader to plan for the impact of your absence on work demands and priorities. Your leader may decline a request for annual leave if your absence at the requested time will affect the needs of the business (for example, if delivery deadlines would be affected). Your leader will let you know the reasons for declining the request and can support you in reconsidering your leave plans. The only exception to entering your leave in our self-service tools in advance, is if you’re absent from the office. For example, if you are taking annual leave because you have run out of sick leave or to extend a period of bereavement leave. Your leader will still need to approve the leave before you take it. They can enter it for you, or you can do it as soon as you return to work. How you accrue annual leave Annual leave accrues as you work, including when you are on annual and other paid leave. When you are absent on special leave without pay for more than 35 consecutive days (including weekends), you will not accrue annual leave beyond the first week of that absence. Exceptions to this are set out in the Holidays Act s16 2(a) and include parental leave, unpaid sick leave, unpaid bereavement leave and unpaid family violence leave Using your annual leave for sickness or bereavement You can ask your leader to consider a request to use annual leave to cover a period of sickness. If you have paid sick leave available then annual leave will not be approved. Depending on the circumstances, if you suffer a bereavement and you wish to have a period of time off work following the death, you may request annual leave in addition to any approved bereavement leave.