(8 digit numbers start in the second box. ( ) 18765432 1. IRD Number 2. Name of applicant (This must be the full legal name) 4. Postal address (The current residential street address or place of abode) DayMobile Number & Street/Post Box numberSuburb I, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ request approval under Section 124ZI(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 to be an accepted research and development certifier, and solemnly and sincerely declare that ): a) I am authorised to make this application for the applicant. b) The applicant is competent in applying the accounting and legal standards in relation to research and development tax credits. And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true by virtue of the New Zealand Oaths and Declarations Act 1957 ( )( ) ( ) City Postcode Your Signature: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ / / (Please note that once you receive approval your name, will be published on the Inland Revenue website.) Use this form to apply to be an Accepted Research and Development Certifier 3. Trade Name ( if different to above) Research and Development Tax Incentive - CERTIFIER application Email Name Phone 6. Name(s) of : Licensed Auditor(s) (as approved by the Financial Markets Authority) that are members of the applicant or are employed or engaged by you 7. Name(s) of : Partners, Directors, or Principals who are authorised by the business to provide R&D certificates Name Address Occupation Declared at: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Place this Date Declaration taken by (signature of person taking declaration): \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Title/position eg Notary Public, Justice of the Peace, Solicitor (full name and title of person taking this declaration): STATUTORY DECLARATION / / NAME:TITLE/POSITION: DATE: : Official Stamp Date of birth: Contact details: 5. Principal Contact person IR1241()0920 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CERTIFIER APPLICATION To be an approved R&D certifier you must be a licensed auditor (as approved by the New Zealand Financial Markets Authority), or the firm must employ a licensed auditor. The certifier will confirm expenditure is greater than $2 million per year and perform tests / review the business expenditure on the supplementary return to ensure the claim meets the eligibility tests in the legislation. NOTES Question 1 - IRD number This is the IRD number of the applicant - not the person completing the form (unless they are one and the same) Question 2 - Name of the applicant Please give us the full, legal name of the person or business that is applying to be a certifier Question 3 - Trade Name If the business uses a Trade name (as opposed to their legal name) please fill this in. If a Trade name is not used leave blank Question 4- Postal address This is the residential/physical address of the business or the residential/physical place of abode for the business. It can be a Postbox number and is required information to support any claim. If not completed, we will contact you for this information Question 5 - Principal contact person These are the contact details for the person handling the certification of the applicants’ claim. Inland Revenue will deal with this person in the first instance if any queries need to be resolved. Question 6 - Names of Licensed Auditors Any firm wishing to be a ‘certifier’ must have an Auditor within the firm. It is the auditor who will have overall responsibility for verifying the eligibility of the businesses claim. Question 7 - Name(s) of Partners, Directors, or Principals who are authorised by the business to provide R&D certificates If the firm is applying for Certifier status, we need to know the names of all partners, directors or Principals who have the authority to issue the certificate. If you are an individual who wants to obtain Certifier status state your name only. STATUTORY DECLARATION Your statutory declaration confirms that you are competent in applying the appropriate legal and accounting standards that to the R&D tax credits. Please complete all sections of the Statutory Declaration before submitting it to Inland Revenue. Once received we will process your application within 15 working days.