www.ird.govt.nz Ref: 22OIA1528 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 14February 2022 Dear Thank you for your request of 10 January 2021 made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA). You have requested the following: I am writing to request information regarding what information IRD provided to borrowers with existing loans under the Student Loan Scheme Act (1992) about the changes to contractual conditions brought about by the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 and how that information was provided. This Act made significant changes (including redefining them as no longer credit contracts under the Credit Contracts Act 1981 and changing the requirements for providing contact information to be more specific etc). I would like copies of any material, information, communication plans, letter templates etc that were sent to existing borrowers (and specifically if email were sent to borrowers for whom this information was held - and if not why not) Any other relevant material Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance (Student Loan Contract Exemption) Regulations 2010 (CCCFA) The CCCFA Regulations 2010 came into force on 4 November 2010 to oversee the exemption of student loan contracts from the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act 2003 (CCCFA). It was later revoked on 30 August 2011 by section 226(1) of the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 (the Act) due to the regulations being incorporated into the Act. At the time of the change, the student loan product also went through a legislative redesign and communication to customers incorporated all information and not only the changes to the CCCFA (2010). The changes from the CCCFA (and therefore the Act), did not change the obligation of a student loan customer having to provide contact information to the Commissioner. The changes placed certain obligations on the Commissioner around disclosure of information to student loan customers. Information being released We have located the Communication Plan – Student Loan Redesign 22 August 2011. This document provides a detailed breakdown of the planned communication strategy to the student loan customer (borrowers) base between August 2011 and April 2013. The purpose of the communications strategy was to make it easier for borrowers to understand their loans and included changes to website information and correspondence. Please note, some actions may not have been carried out, or in the exact way outlined in the plan. There was emphasis on getting this information out to both New Zealand based and overseas based borrowers. Considering there was a large population of overseas based borrowers that we did not have contact details for, a direct and general approach for our communication and marketing was used. Direct was used where we had contact details (emails, Notify Me newsletter etc.), and where we did not have details, we used wider Ref: 22OIA1528 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] general advertising both overseas and in NZ to publicise the changes (we also used nominated persons to get the information out to borrowers). In addition to the communication plan, we have also located the OBBCI Facebook Ads 27 Sept 2012. This was the proposed plan of advertising the Act changes through Facebook, as a communication channel. Some of the information in the attached documents has been withheld under section 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, specifically non- Inland Revenue employees. No public interest in releasing the withheld information has been identified that would be sufficient to outweigh the reasons for withholding. The enclosed documents contain information that is outside the scope of your request. This information has not been considered for release and has been withheld as “Not in scope”. Your request for all material, information, letter templates and copies of exact advertising material sent to existing borrowers, about the changes to contractual conditions are refused under section 18(e) of the OIA as the information no longer exists. We do not believe any other departments hold this information. As mentioned in our previous responses, under the Public Records Act 2005, Inland Revenue can dispose of templates and documents when they are no longer required, actively used or referred to. This is permitted under General Disposal Authority class 1.6. Right of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz . Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz . Publishing of OIA response Finally, please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you again for your request. Yours sincerely Jane Elley Segment Management Lead Customer and Compliance Services - Individuals