25OIA141 0 Page 1 of 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 24 October 2024 Dear Th a nk you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 26 September 2024. You requested the following: Copies of all communications between Inland Revenue and their marketing agency (or agencies). For the avoidance of doubt, this request is not intended to capture communications to the tax affairs of the agency or agencies. I am seeking all e-mail messages, letters, communications, briefing documents, records or other information exchanged between 1 September 2024 and now. Information released Please find enclosed, as Appendix A, communications, including 31 emails and attachments exchanged, with our marketing agencies between 1 and 26 September 2024. Attachments have been included where relevant following the email. I have decided to release the relevant parts of the documents in scope, subject to information being withheld under the following sections of the OIA, as applicable: •9(2)(a) – to protect the privacy of natural persons, •9(2)(b)(ii) – making available of the information would be likely unreasonably to prejudice the commercial position of the person who supplied or who is the subject of the information, •9(2)(g)(i) - maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions by or between or to Ministers of the Crown or members of an organisation or officers and employees of any public service agency or organisation in the course of their duty, •9(2)(i) – to enable a Minister of the Crown or any public service agency or organisation holding the information to carry out, without prejudice or disadvantage, commercial activities, and 25OIA1410 Page 1 of 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 15 November 2024 Dear Tha nk you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 26 September 2024. You requested the following: Copies of all communications between Inland Revenue and their marketing agency (or agencies). For the avoidance of doubt, this request is not intended to capture communications to the tax affairs of the agency or agencies. I am seeking all e-mail messages, letters, communications, briefing documents, records or other information exchanged between 1 September 2024 and now. Information requested On 31 October 2024 I extended the timeframe to respond to part of your request by 15 working days. Please find enclosed as Appendix B, the remaining 9 email communications with our marketing agencies between 1 and 26 September 2024. Attachments have been included where relevant, following the email. Table 1: Communications considered for released Date Document Title 1.09/09/2024\[Email\] RE: Article on RNZ this morning 2.11/09/2024\[Email\] RE: IR Custom Audience Lists 3.11/09/2024\[Email\] RE: IR news reports 4.12/09/2024\[Email\] RE: Custom audience lists – temporary stop on using these 5.12/09/2024\[Email\] RE: Student Loans Audience Lists 6.13/09/2024\[Email\] RE: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations 7.17/09/2024\[Email\] RE: Look-a-like audiences •Attachment 1: List of Campaigns •Attachment 2: IR sharing Economy 2024 Post Campaign Report 8.18/09/2024\[Email\] RE: LinkedIn question 9.25/09/2024\[Email\] RE: Student loans custom audience lists - older than 6 months From:Kieran Burlace To: Cc:Steven Mooney ; Christie Weir; Kendl Hambly; Katrina Fowler; Princess Whioke Subject:RE: Article on RNZ this morning Date:Monday, 9 September 2024 3:45:00 pm Hi Thanks heaps for providing that detail. We’ve had a few additional media queries come through so this could come in handy! Cheers Kieran From: < Sent: Monday, September 9, 2024 9:59 AM To: Kieran Burlace < Cc: Steven Mooney < Christie Weir < Kendl Hambly < Katrina Fowler < Princess Whioke < Subject: Article on RNZ this morning External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi Kieran, I hope you had a good weekend. I'm just checking in regarding the article that ran on RNZ this morning regarding the IR use of customer list matching with the large digital platforms including Meta and Google and LinkedIn. It seems your team is all over it, but I thought I'd share some information regarding the Google treatment of customer list matches - just in case there are any internal questions. Have a read and let me know if there are any other specific points you need covered. Customer Match Audiences on DV360 Overview Google’s Customer Match feature allows advertisers to upload customer data, such as email addresses, to create custom audiences for targeted advertising in Display & Video 360 (DV360). This document below outlines the privacy and security measures that Google employs to protect customer data and ensure compliance with privacy regulations when using Customer Match audiences on DV360. How it works? 1. Data Encryption Google implements industry-standard encryption protocols to protect all customer data uploaded to DV360. This includes encryption both in transit and at rest to safeguard data at every stage of the process. Encryption ensures that any customer data being transmitted remains secure and inaccessible to unauthorized parties. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) 2. Hashing Before Upload Customer data, such as email addresses, is hashed using the SHA256 algorithm before it is uploaded to Google. Hashing is a cryptographic process that converts email addresses into a secure, encoded format. This means that raw personally identifiable information (PII) is never exposed to Google, providing an additional layer of privacy. 3. Data Use Restrictions Google applies strict limitations on the use of customer data uploaded for Customer Match: · The data is used exclusively for the purpose of creating and managing the Customer Match audience. · Google does not use this data for any other purpose, including building profiles or enriching their data sets. · After the audience creation process, the uploaded customer data is deleted from Google's systems to further ensure privacy. · Limited data access. We won’t share your data files with other Google teams other than to create your Customer Match audiences and ensure compliance with our policies. We use employee access controls to protect your data files from unauthorized access. 4. Compliance with Privacy Regulations Google adheres to international privacy regulations, including the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA). Advertisers are responsible for obtaining explicit consent from their customers before uploading any data. This ensures that the use of Customer Match aligns with legal standards and respects customer privacy. 5. Transparency and User Control Google provides users with the ability to manage their ad preferences through Google’s Ad Settings. This allows customers to control how their data is used in advertising, including the option to opt out of personalized ads. This level of transparency ensures that users are informed and in control of their data. Summary Google’s Customer Match on DV360 is built with robust privacy and security measures. Through encryption, data hashing, strict use restrictions, and compliance with international privacy regulations, Google ensures that advertisers can safely use customer data for targeted advertising while protecting individual privacy. Hope this helps. Sources: https://support.google.com/google-ads/answer/6334160 -- Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz EO Signature 2020 s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From:Alana Tapp To: Cc:Eloise MacLeod Subject:RE: IR Custom Audience Lists Date:Wednesday, 11 September 2024 1:14:12 pm Attachments:image001.png \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hey Thanks so much – we appreciate this. And yes please – we are wanting to try and remove all custom audiences (across all our main platforms and tools) that are older than 6 months and/or are no longer in an active campaign. Hope this is not too much trouble. Thanks, Alana From: < Sent: Wednesday, September 11, 2024 12:07 PM To: Alana Tapp < < < Cc: Eloise MacLeod < Subject: Re: IR Custom Audience Lists External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hey Alana, You too We'll look into this for you. Our Google expert is @ who unfortunately is unwell today. I've CC'd into this email (who is also a Google whizz) to see if he knows the process of doing this. Alongside the Google account lists, would you like us to remove those on LinkedIn and Meta? s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz From: To:Pip Knight Subject:Re: IR news reports Date:Wednesday, 11 September 2024 11:52:03 am \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Kia ora anō, Pip Yes, it’s a very, very common industry practice. We’re not doing it with any of our other government clients – they don’t have the robust and accessible data that you hold, for a start. We’ve actively used custom audience lists for inclusion and exclusion purposes for commercial and non-profit clients. For example, targeting the owners of a car model with accessories for that car model. Have a great afternoon. Tangata Tiriti | Tauiwi | Tyke | he/him/ia KAIARATAKI | HEMISPHERE | | Book a meeting From: Pip Knight < Date: Wednesday, 11 September 2024 at 10:11 AM To: < Subject: RE: IR news reports \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Kia ora Thanks for reaching out. It has been a crazy week and unfortunately the media are not telling our story accurately. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) What has been surprising is it appears very few, if any, other government agencies use custom audience lists. How common do you think the practice of using custom audience lists is? I hope all is well at your end. Pip From: < Sent: Monday, September 9, 2024 1:32 PM To: Pip Knight < Subject: IR news reports External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Kia ora Pip I hope all is well with you. Is there any action you need from us regarding the media coverage on your use of social platforms. I know your very thorough privacy people will have addressed everything. Thanks Tangata Tiriti | Tauiwi | Tyke | he/him/ia This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From:Kendl Hambly To: Cc:Kieran Burlace Subject:Custom audience lists - temporary stop on using these Date:Thursday, 12 September 2024 12:32:00 pm Importance:High Hi and As you may have seen in the media this week, some questions have been raised about government agencies’ use of custom audience data to target customers via social and digital media channels. Whilst we know that there’s a hashing process in place and our department follows all appropriate data and privacy guidelines, we have been asked to temporarily halt the use of these whilst our IR Security Office work with us to review things. What this means for our advertising (including the current FamilyBoost campaign): We need to stop using any custom audience lists for any campaigns currently in market as soon as possible. This does not mean we need to stop advertising. Please look into alternative targeting strategies for those channels where we are using custom audience lists. I feel comfortable for FamilyBoost, that in-channel targeting techniques will still allow us to get to parents caregivers, albeit a little less directly and with a bit of a broader funnel. Happy to chat through the targeting options for each channel. I understand that this may influence both the effectiveness of campaigns and the $$ required to achieve the targeting we need. Happy to chat through things if we need to pivot $$. FYI, the below has been our response externally: “We use custom audience lists for advertising. Identifiable customer information is hashed when being uploaded to a social media platform so the social media platform will not be able to access any of your personal information. We only use Meta (Facebook, Instagram), LinkedIn and Google for this. We use custom audiences to make sure our posts are displayed to the most relevant audiences and are not shown to people who do not need to see them. We do not have the ability to identify customers who would like to opt out of advertising. However, customers can opt-out of being shown specific ads by editing their advertising preferences in the social platforms they use. We continuously review our processes to ensure we’re safe. To find out more about our guidelines on how we use social media head to: www.ird.govt.nz/about-this- site/conditions-of-use/social-media-pages-and-engagement-website” We’ll advise when we’re ok to use them again. Please sing out if you have any questions in the meantime as we work through the above. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Thanks Kendl Kendl Hambly Principal Advisor | Marketing & Communications Inland Revenue | 204 Hastings Street, Napier | 4110 Please note my hours are: Monday-Thursday 8am-5pm. Friday 8am-12pm. From: To:Steven Mooney Cc:Kieran Burlace; Princess Whioke Subject:Re: Student Loans Audience Lists Date:Thursday, 12 September 2024 2:12:01 pm External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Thanks Steven. And for the record - that's an excellent response. Bang on. On Thu, 12 Sept 2024 at 13:37, Steven Mooney < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Great news, thanks for the update. FYI, the below has been our response externally: “We use custom audience lists for advertising. Identifiable customer information is hashed when being uploaded to a social media platform so the social media platform will not be able to access any of your personal information. We only use Meta (Facebook, Instagram), LinkedIn and Google for this. We use custom audiences to make sure our posts are displayed to the most relevant audiences and are not shown to people who do not need to see them. We do not have the ability to identify customers who would like to opt out of advertising. However, customers can opt-out of being shown specific ads by editing their advertising preferences in the social platforms they use. We continuously review our processes to ensure we’re safe. To find out more about our guidelines on how we use social media head to: www.ird.govt.nz/about-this- site/conditions-of-use/social-media-pages-and-engagement-website” I’ll be in touch when we’re cleared to use audience lists again. Please sing out if you have any questions in the meantime. Cheers, Steven From: < Sent: Thursday, September 12, 2024 12:40 PM To: Steven Mooney < Cc: Kieran Burlace < Princess Whioke < Subject: Re: Student Loans Audience Lists External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Hi team, For your records, just confirming that Aal use of the first-party data across Google Search and Display has been paused. This happened just prior to midday today. We will continue with the other targeting approaches only, until you advise otherwise. Regards, On Thu, 12 Sept 2024 at 11:37, Steven Mooney < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Thanks From: < Sent: Thursday, September 12, 2024 11:36 AM To: Steven Mooney < Cc: Kieran Burlace < Princess Whioke < Subject: Re: Student Loans Audience Lists External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi Steven, Thanks for your message. I understand the request and will make that happen immediately. You're right that it doesn't stop us, as the first party activity was always a small part of the overall mix. It will just be broader using the other targeting approaches as you say. I'll get that done ASAP. On Thu, 12 Sept 2024 at 10:47, Steven Mooney < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Morning We have had an update from the business regarding custom audience lists. We’ve been instructed to pause all current activity using custom audience lists until further notice (probably just over a month). Can you please do this without Student Loan advertising? This means that we will not be supplying an audience list for October. We can still continue to target customers in other ways, just not with audience lists for now. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) This does not mean we want to stop advertising, just means our campaign will be broader. Sing out if you have any questions. Cheers Steven Mooney Senior Marketing Advisor Marketing & Communications | Whakapā me te Whakatairanga Enterprise Services | Ratonga Hinonga INLAND REVENUE | Te Tari Taake This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz s 9(2)(a) From:Kendl Hambly To: Cc: Kieran Burlace Subject:RE: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations Date:Friday, 13 September 2024 10:04:00 am Attachments:image001.png image002.png image003.png image004.png image005.png image006.png Hi Thanks for the below Yes please – happy with the targeting for both so lets please progress with that across Meta and Google and remove the custom audience lists. We’ll keep you posted on that front! Also, thanks very much for the interim update below – this is really useful and will help provide comfort to the rest of the business and our Ministers that we’re seeing great reach and engagement for FamilyBoost. Talk soon Kendl From: < Sent: Friday, September 13, 2024 9:37 AM To: Kendl Hambly < Cc: < ; Kieran Burlace < Subject: RE: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi Kendl, Hope you’re well! We can 100% apply similar targeting to below. Meta have made some changes to their audience targeting and have removed some of the options we originally suggested, so this is the new audience we have come up with for the interim: Parents with preschoolers, parents with toddlers, childcare, children’s music, early childhood education, preschool, play, family, fatherhood, motherhood, parenting, and crafts. We’ve also had a further look at Google, and it seems the current targeting capabilities are like that of Meta, where we can use demographic and interest targeting: Baby & children’s products, baby & children’s apparel, toys, child car seats, strollers & baby carriages, childcare & education, children’s apparel, childcare, early childhood education, parents of toddlers, parents of preschoolers, and parents of infants. Let me know your thoughts on these and we will get them applied today. After this, we will do some research and see if there is any better way to target our audience, and if this will have impact on our budget for these channels. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Thanks Kendl From: < Sent: Thursday, September 12, 2024 4:33 PM To: Kendl Hambly < < y Subject: Re: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Perfect! Will get those changed for you tomorrow morning! On the creative side we’re all good to go pending your approval of the attached social sheet and excluding the Te Reo translated assets and animated video. (The links to the social videos you can find in the spreadsheet). On the media side we’ve just had a quick catch up to plan how to move forward. The next steps for media to restructure this part of the campaign will be as follows... 1. Research 2. Build new potential audiences and budget restructuring 3. Present potential audiences to yourself for your feedback 4. Action these changes in Meta and Google Display. The team will be in contact mid-next week with their new research and potential audiences for you to review alongside with how this might change the media budget. Hemisphere | From: Kendl Hambly < Date: Thursday, 12 September 2024 at 3:40 PM To: < < Subject: RE: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Great thank you So the posters you’re referring to are the static versions of the billboards? Is that correct? Then yes please make sure they’re consistent with the digital versions. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From:Kieran Burlace To: Cc:Eloise MacLeod; Subject:RE: Look-a-like audiences Date:Tuesday, 17 September 2024 4:18:00 pm Attachments:image001.png Thanks That’s great, just wanted to confirm that process, but if you’ve never done that for us (or any client) that’s fine. Cheers Kieran From: Sent: Tuesday, September 17, 2024 2:26 PM To: Kieran Burlace < Cc: Eloise MacLeod < < Subject: RE: Look-a-like audiences \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi Kieran, We have not received any custom audience list for companies from any client before so not sure how the text looks like. Attaching a custom list of audience, we uploaded on LinkedIn as a test campaign internally. This is how the list looks like in the template. Is this what you are looking for? Cheers, HEMISPHERE | s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2) s 9(2) (a) Hi Eloise, Jumping in here since Katrina’s on leave. We went through all the campaigns in our ads manager to check if we have used look-a-like audience for any campaign. We couldn’t find any campaign from the system to have a look-a-like audience targeting. Attaching the list of campaigns, we found and targeting used in it. We have come across 1 campaign for sharing economy which did use look-a-like audience, but these were on a programmatic display campaign and targeted a very niche audience so taking the data from this would not be ideal, however, the look-a- like audience performance was at par with the regular custom affinity level targeting in terms click through rate. Impressions and clicks were lower compared to custom affinity level targeting; however, this could be due to the lesser budget allocated to the audience. Attached the final report for sharing economy. We can do Look-a-like audience on Meta and on display campaigns going forward to understand the effectiveness of the campaign compared to custom audience. However, these won’t be as accurate as the custom audience. Let us know if you require any further details to help with the report. Cheers, HEMISPHERE | From: Eloise MacLeod < Date: Monday, 16 September 2024 at 9:24 AM To: < < Cc: Kieran Burlace < Subject: Look-a-like audiences \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Morning team s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Campaigns R&D Loss Tax Credit 2016 Property Compliance Phase II 2017 Contrator Tax 2017 myIR Registration 2017 Families Package Media 2018 IR Tax Working Group 2018 Automatic Exchange of Information 2018 Future of Tax 2018 Budget 2018 IR4 Compliance Campaign Budget 2018 IR4 Compliance Campaign 20-21 Short Term Rentals 1819 Property Compliance 1819 Bright-line Property Compliance 1920 IR Child Support 2021 Fringe Benefit Tax Rates/Get It Right 21-22 July 7 and Ring fencing Rental Loss 2021 Bright-line Property Compliance 2021 MIQ COVID Returnees - DIGITAL OPTION 2021 Paid Parental Leave Changes 2021 Hidden Economy Real Estate 2021 Bright-line Property Compliance 2122 July 7 & Wage Subsidy 2022 Fringe Benefit Tax Common Errors 22 Modernising GST 2223 EOTY 2023 Interest Limitations 2023 7 July 2023 North Island Flood Support 2023 Individual Income Tax Assessment 2023 Bright-line 22/23 Working For Families - notices of entitlement 2324 EOTY 2024 Family Boost 2024 Individual Income Tax Assessment 2024 Interest Deductibility 2024 Working For Families - notices of entitlement 2223 7 July 2024 Sharing Economy Legislation Changes 2024 Personal Income Tax Changes 2024 Bright-line 2024 Attachment 1 - List of Campaigns Targeting Direct Bookings Persona Targeting Audience Based Targeting Custom Based Targeting Direct Bookings Interest Based Targeting Interest and Custom Based Targeting Interest Based Targeting Custom and Occupational Based Targeting Custom and Occupational Based Targeting Interest Based Targeting Interest Based Targeting Interest and Custom Based Targeting + Retargeting Custom Based Targeting Interest Based Targeting Custom Based Targeting Interest Based Targeting Interest Based Targeting Custom Based Targeting Custom Based Targeting Interest Based Targeting Custom Based Targeting Interest Based Targeting Interest Based Targeting Retargeting Custom Based Targeting Custom Based Targeting Interest and Custom Based Targeting Interest Based Targeting Interest and Custom Based Targeting Custom Based Targeting Retargeting Interest Based Targeting Interest and Custom Based Targeting Custom Based Targeting Search Custom Based Targeting Interest Based + Lookalike Targeting Search Interest and Custom Based Targeting From: To:Kieran Burlace Subject:Re: LinkedIn question Date:Wednesday, 18 September 2024 4:02:28 pm Attachments:image001.png image002.png image003.png image004.png image005.png image006.png External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. My pleasure. Happy to help you through this tricky one. On Wed, 18 Sept 2024 at 15:54, Kieran Burlace < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Thanks heaps for looking into that for us I’ll have a squiz through all this and yell out if we have any questions. Appreciate it! Kieran From: < Sent: Wednesday, September 18, 2024 12:41 PM To: Kieran Burlace < Subject: Re: LinkedIn question External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Hi Kieran, OK - a long answer follows, but I've pulled the key point that I think you might want to know here: When you upload a list of companies to LinkedIn (for example, as part of a matched audience for a B2B campaign), LinkedIn typically does not provide a way for you to view or access the individual companies after the upload. Here's how it works: 1. List Matching: LinkedIn uses the company list you upload to match it against its database of company profiles. This creates a targeted audience for your ads, but the exact companies that matched your list are not shown to you. 2. Anonymized Audience: Once the audience is created, you can only see aggregated audience data, such as the total size of the audience or performance metrics (e.g., impressions, clicks), but not the individual companies within the audience. 3. Data Privacy: LinkedIn ensures privacy by not allowing you to access specific information about the companies or users in the audience, in compliance with data protection laws and their own privacy policies. So, after uploading, you won't be able to see or download the matched companies themselves. Instead, you'll have insights into the audience performance at an aggregated level. So of IRD share that list to another LinkedIn ad account, the receiver of that audience/list cannot see the data on how it was built. https://www.linkedin.com/help/lms/answer/a424095/ Now the long answer in case it's helpful: 3. Data Privacy: LinkedIn ensures privacy by not allowing you to access specific information about the companies or users in the audience, in compliance with data protection laws and their own privacy policies. So, after uploading, you won't be able to see or download the matched companies themselves. Instead, you'll have insights into the audience performance at an aggregated level. So if IR share that list to another LinkedIn ad account, the receiver of that audience/list cannot see the data on how it was built. https://www.linkedin.com/help/lms/answer/a424095/ Hope this helps. Let me know if you need any further clarification. On Tue, 17 Sept 2024 at 17:25, Kieran Burlace < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hey Sorry, been a while since I’ve managed to chat! As you can expect things are pretty hectic here at the moment. Just a quick question on LinkedIn audience lists. If a client shares a custom audience list for companies, are you able to see the plaintext information within the company list? s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From:Princess Whioke To: Cc:Steven Mooney; Alana Tapp Subject:RE: Student loans custom audience lists - older than 6 months Date:Wednesday, 25 September 2024 2:49:00 pm Attachments:image001.png Kia ora Thank you for the update. Alana is across this for us. Once she is set up to the account, she’ll go in and set an expiration date to the lists. Thanks Ngā Mihi, Princess Whioke Domain Specialist, Communications | Marketing Inland Revenue | PO Box 2198 | Wellington 6014 From: < Sent: Wednesday, September 25, 2024 2:42 PM To: Princess Whioke < Cc: Steven Mooney < Alana Tapp < Subject: Re: Student loans custom audience lists - older than 6 months External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi Princess. OK - I've received confirmation of the situation - and it's slightly different to what I thought so it's good to have asked: The lists we have are all encrypted and we can’t download them, as you uploaded these lists. However, the encrypted lists aren’t automatically deleted from the platform. As shown below we can add an expiration date to the lists, or you can do this when they upload the list. This will then remove all users from the list on the date of expiration, making it so we can’t target this. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From:Alana Tapp To: Cc:Kieran Burlace Subject:RE: EightyOne Google account Date:Thursday, 26 September 2024 9:36:00 am Attachments:image001.png Hi I just wanted to follow up regarding the access to your Google Display & Video 360 account? If possible, I’d love to get access for our email. This is an account looked after by myself, Princess and Eloise, as we tend to be the ones handling most of the custom audience lists and data from our side. Hope this is OK. Let me know if you have any questions, Thanks. From: Kieran Burlace < Sent: Wednesday, September 25, 2024 1:10 PM To: < Cc: Alana Tapp < Subject: EightyOne Google account \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hey Are we able to get our social media account set up with access to the Inland Revenue – EightyOne Google account? The email address is Thanks Kieran Kieran Burlace Domain lead Marketing | Marketing & Communications Inland Revenue | 204 Hastings Street, Napier | 4110 PH. | s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 18(c)(i) s 18(c)(i) From: To:Steven Mooney Cc:Kieran Burlace; Subject:Student Loans September activity Date:Sunday, 1 September 2024 5:29:21 pm External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi Steven, I hope you had a great weekend. Thanks again for sorting the CMSO for the 2024/25 Student Loans campaign activity. We've done some number crunching with the budget to find an approach that gives us continuity of activity and maintains decent website visits, but trying to hold some budget back for the new creative platform when it arrives. For the September activity, we’d recommend running with a budget of This is 6% of the overall budget and will allow us to do both display and search. (Presuming you will continue with Meta ads in house). Although the video creatives are great, we noted that in July/August, search and display drove the most traffic to the website. During the July/August campaign search contributed 67% of clicks and display contributed 27% of clicks. Therefore we have focused on these channels for the September campaign. To maximise clicks but keep activity running, we’ve split the budget as highlighted below to run a small volume of display while keeping search activity high. In the proposed breakdown below, we’ve lowered unit costs for both channels based on previous over-delivery. ChannelImpressionsClicksCTRBuy TypeUnit CostTotal Gross Cost Prog Display139,2001,2530.90%CPM Search2,3261,00043.00%CPC If we notice that search volumes drop more than expected (we expect a drop due to budget), then we should consider that video activity was previously driving users to search and look to shift budgets to include video. I hope that all sounds ok to you. Over September, as we learn the timing of the new creative, we'll plan out the budgets for the rest of the campaign through to June. Let me know if you have any questions or concerns with this approach. -- Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz Appendix A s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) . TAX INVOICE Date 31/08/2024 PO Box 5080 Wellington 6145 Aotearoa New Zealand Invoice Number I001724 04 384 5994 www.hemisphere.nz Attention Christie Weir M/Inland Revenue Client Order No. YN1013820 GST: PO Box 2198 Wellington Due Date 20 Sep 2024 August media invoice for Bright-line campaign Media - Bright-line Campaign 2024Job No: IRDM0120 Media strategy, planning, buying and reporting for 2024 Bright-line campaign Contract Ref: PA1004917 Purchase Order #: YN1013820 Media Management TimeRateAmount Media Strategy, Planning & Buying (AOG) 1:45 0:45 0:15 3:15 Media PlacementAmount Due Date: 20 Sep 2024Subtotal4,228.75 s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 18(c)(i) s 18(c)(i) s 9(2)(a) I001724 | Page 2 of 2 15% GST on Income634.31 Total 4,863.06 Less Amount Paid0.00 Amount Due 4,863.06 Please pay on the 20th of the month following this invoice. Direct Credit payments to ASB Please contact if you have any questions. Ngaa mihi nui. s 18(c)(i) s 18(c)(i) Not in scope Not in scope As it is the end of the month, I am just working through this now. and I have caught up to confirm the budget split, as per the pitch brief, and his CMSO Below is a breakdown of how I see the creative costs being spread out - let me know if you’re happy with this. We need to chat through the AOG fee a little more I think - if possible, could you please give me a buzz (I feel like a call will save us plenty of email time). Most of the time, clients see this as in addition to the overall budget as it is essentially a straight in and out but understand that everyone is slightly different. Worth having a chat about. August: (which includes the AOG fee) September: October: November: December: The total for the above is . Which conveniently this leaves just enough within the PO, to cover the AOG fee on creative services ( +GST). This would then take the total to (which still fits nicely inside the PO). If you’re happy to proceed with this, disregard my above note on AOG fees. Timeline We will aim to share an updated deck (that reflects your latest changes) by COP Wednesday 4th September. I will need to share this one with you as I am on leave. If you could please share feedback by COP Monday 9th September that would be great. That way I can pick up your feedback once I am back on deck post leave. If you need longer to come back to us, just let me know. Pending Monday 9th September feedback, we will then aim to share final assets with you for approval by Thursday 12th September (we have an agency away day Friday 13th September). s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(i) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(i) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope From:Eloise MacLeod To: Subject:IITA Date:Friday, 6 September 2024 8:57:00 am Attachments:image001.png Morning Happy Friday! How are you? I heard from our accounts team yesterday saying our ITA invoices are at when we budgeted for Firstly, is this correct from your records? And if so, do you know why it went over? Thanks Eloise Eloise MacLeod Principal Advisor | Marketing & Communications Inland Revenue | 204 Hastings Street, Napier | 4110 PH. | s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(i) From:Eloise MacLeod To: Subject:RE: RE- EOTY - IITA Creative Brief Date:Friday, 6 September 2024 11:17:00 am Attachments:image001.png image002.png image003.png image004.png Thank you!!! Nice to have a lil chat too From: < Sent: Friday, September 6, 2024 10:52 AM To: Eloise MacLeod < Subject: FW: RE- EOTY - IITA Creative Brief External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Kia ora Eloise Thanks for the chat on the phone! Here’s the email chain in which we discussed the extra for the End of Tax Year campaign Ngā mihi Ngāti Raukawa | Ngāi Tahu | he/him | KAIWHAKAHAERE KAUPAPA | Hemisphere n ed nn t g mceb ok Sent from Hemisphere, Level 1, 58-60 Oriental Parade, Te Whanganui-a-Tara Wellington, Aotearoa New Zealand. The information contained in this document is confidential to the addressee(s) and may be legally privileged. If you have received this e-mail message in error, please delete it and notify me. Thank you. Any view or opinions expressed are mine and may not be those of Hemisphere. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2) (b)(ii) From: To:Kendl Hambly Cc: Subject:Re: Music & Voiceover Licencing Date:Friday, 6 September 2024 1:02:06 pm Attachments:image001.png image002.png image003.png image004.png image005.png External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hey Kendl! It's sunny so it's great! I'd say that's easy enough, let me do some investigating and I'll get back to you Have a great weekend if we don't speak sooner! she/her | KAITOHUTOHU RATONGA KIRITAKI ​ From: Kendl Hambly < Sent: Friday, 6 September 2024 11:14 am To: < Cc: < Subject: RE: Music & Voiceover Licencing \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi All good this end thanks and happy it’s Friday Hope you’re having a good one too? Outside of social and digital media (Meta and TikTok advertising, hosting on YouTube), possibly embedding on our website (although not initially) , and perhaps the likes of possible future Stuff editorial articles, I can’t think of anywhere else we’d use it at this stage. Timing-wise, at least a few years as obviously FamilyBoost is brand new and customers will come into the FamilyBoost system at different points and will need educating. What are the options? Thanks Kendl From: < Sent: Friday, September 6, 2024 10:44 AM To: Kendl Hambly < s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From: To: Cc:Steven Mooney; Kieran Burlace Subject:Re: INV6142 PO-YN1014621 overspend Date:Wednesday, 11 September 2024 11:50:30 am Attachments:Tax Invoice INV6142 - \[IRD0005\] Student Loan Campaign - Round Two (1).pdf External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi all, I have amended the invoice (reduced it by $2.66). Hope this does the trick! Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz On 10/09/2024, at 5:09 PM, < wrote: Hi Steven, Yes of course - I've copied in who will action this as that PO is via EightyOne limited. No problems at all. On Tue, 10 Sept 2024 at 10:34, Steven Mooney < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Morning s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Tax Invoice EightyOne Limited Level One, Press Hall 80 Willis Street Wellington 6011 New Zealand 10 915 5993 Inland Revenue Kieran Burlace Inland Revenue Accounts Payable 55 Featherston Street Wellington, 6011 New Zealand JOB NUMBERIRD0005 INVOICE NUMBERINV6142 PO NUMBERYN1014621 ISSUED ON30 Aug 2024 DUE ON13 Sep 2024 \[IRD0005\] Student Loan Campaign - Round Two This invoice is for the . It covers both .  SUBTOTAL 12,000.00 15% GST ON INCOME (15%) 1,800.00 TOTAL (NZD) 13,800.00 Hopefully, this shouldn't come as a surprise, so please get in touch if anything doesn't align with your expectations. Payments can be made to: KIWIBANK LIMITED Ground Floor, New Zealand Post House, 7 Waterloo Quay, Wellington 6011, New Zealand Account number: SWIFT code: KIWINZ22 Please include full name, account number, and invoice number when making payments. Payment terms: Please refer to the due date shown on the invoice. Please send remittances to New Zealand GST number: Attachment: EightyOne INV6142 Student Loan Campaign s 18(c)(i) s 18(c)(i) s 18(c)(i) s 9(2)(b)(ii)s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(b)(ii) From: To:Kieran Burlace; Steven Mooney Cc: Subject:Re: Pitch Presentation - EightyOne Date:Wednesday, 11 September 2024 1:58:25 pm External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hey team, Just closing the loop on this chain - please disregard any creative costs / planning / projection what was originally outlined (in the previous emails). Confirming that the pitch fee has been invoiced as agreed but at this stage, as there is no additional creative work going forward we won’t be needing to invoice for anything! Should any new work be briefed, we can work out the payment plan then. Given the new ASO for EightyOneM and the refreshed PO numbers - I will leave to invoice going forwards. Any questions, just let me know. Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz On 4/09/2024, at 2:26 PM, < wrote: In the original brief, it stipulated that the campaign budget for creative development (if the new creative concept is approved) would be <Screenshot 2024-09-04 at 2.23.25 PM.png> That's where that number came from. Thanks for the ASO note. I think previously the agency has forgotten to charge it - so have had to fund it themselves. This time around we want to make sure we're charging it correctly. (I may be wrong on that as I'm not s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(i) involved in 81 creative invoicing). But we can include it within the overall budget no problems. Thanks! On Wed, 4 Sept 2024 at 13:43, Kieran Burlace < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Yeah sorry about the confusion. It’s been a fun time working through this with our procurement team too. Cool, sounds like PO YN1014706 is sorted PO YN1014621 is a continuation of last years ASO. So let’s stick with the AOG fee as it was applied last year. When you say ‘creative cost for the new platform what is this referring to? Cheers Kieran From: < Sent: Tuesday, September 3, 2024 5:19 PM To: Kieran Burlace < Cc: < Steven Mooney < Subject: Re: Pitch Presentation - EightyOne External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi Kieran, is on leave this week (lucky!) so I'm jumping in to acknowledge your email and respond based on my understanding of the situation. Firstly - the media bit. PO YN1014706 (media through to June 2025) I think we're all good on this. I've proposed a lighter month for September to keep the lights on but also keep some budget up our sleeves for when the new creative is ready. My action is to plan out the remainder of the period to June - but this will need to change once we know the timing of the new creative. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(i) s 9(2)(i) From: To:Steven Mooney Cc: Kieran Burlace Subject:Re: Student Loans - creative updates Date:Wednesday, 11 September 2024 10:34:03 am Attachments:IRD0007 Student loan pitch 2 0.pdf External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hey Steven, Thanks for your time yesterday - good to chat. By the sounds of things, sweets were the winner on the day! As promised, I have attached the revised creative that we have tweaked based on your feedback. It sounds like this is much closer to what you were expecting to see in the second round so I am interested to see what the wider team think too. As for next steps. You mentioned that regardless of internal feedback based on this revised concept, you plan to run the sweets creative. With that said, I will leave it with to plan and book the media to run for this creative direction. On the call I mentioned that the media plan will need to be based off assets that have already been created and run (therefore are exisiting within media files so they can just be re despatched). If there was a recommendation (and approval) to change the channels that we run on and therefore the need to create new assets, there would be additional creative costs involved which I can easily quote up for you. Just on that, reminded me yesterday that part of his new plan was to introduce Duolingo. The specs for Duolingo are yet to be confirmed but should they be different to what we have run previously, we will need to make these. The other point of consideration is that this brief asks us to talk to people who are about to leave (a change from the original brief where we were only talking to people who were already over there). As we know, the sweets creative was created with the audience being overseas student loan customers only. The sweets themselves were designed to resonate with this audience in a nostalgic way, to get them to engage. From a messaging point of view, this is also written with this audience in mind - the ones who have left. There is perhaps a way that this thinking / idea could be tweaked so that you’re ’taking a bit of home with you’ as opposed to only appealing to the audience who are already over there but, this would take some creative thinking time to work how we most effectively say that. Have a think if you would like us to look into what we could say, to this new audience, with the exisiting sweets creative. I know I mentioned it on the phone Steven but just to confirm, I (and EightyOne creative, design and production teams) will not be present in any WIPs / meetings related to the campaign unless requested (i.e. we do decide to tweak the current sweets messaging) and additional budget allows. I was across the media WIPs / meetings last campaign as a portion of the budget was allocated to client service time to cover this. I hope that all makes sense, please feel free to give me a call if you have any questions - happy to chat anything through. if I have missed anything - please feel free to jump in! Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz On 9/09/2024, at 4:01 PM, Steven Mooney < wrote: s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Yeah of course. Does tomorrow at 3pm work? I’ll set up a teams meeting. Cheers, Steven From: < Sent: Monday, September 9, 2024 3:20 PM To: Steven Mooney < Cc: < Kieran Burlace < < Subject: Re: Student Loans - creative updates External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hey Steven, Thank you for your response. I would be keen to jump on a call and chat through the deck that the team shared with you and your latest feedback. I am available this afternoon if you want give me a call, otherwise we can chat tomorrow morning if that suits better? Let me know. Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz EO Signature 2020 On 9/09/2024, at 3:03 PM, Steven Mooney < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi and s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Thanks for sharing the revised concepts. This hasn’t hit the mark unfortunately. We will not be going forward with one of the new creative concepts and will continue with the sweets creative. I think there has been a misunderstanding when it comes to the requested changes for the creative. Is there a reason we have stepped away from the Teal Elephant? A pink inflatable does not carry the same weight as the realistic teal elephant. It was a struggle to connect this creative to New Zealand student loans. We thought addressing it on the side of the elephant could have been an option to test with our customers. However, with the new creative, we have lost this all together. I loved the “you know it’s there. We know it’s there” messaging from the original concept. Would have just needed a tweak to the CTA in regard to making a payment. I’ve put some additional notes against my points on the original feedback. Elephant in the room The grey and teal are very cold are we able to warm up the imagery? This can be adding colour or a tint to the black and white background. Talent with their heads down look very depressed. It’d be great if the talent were more alive and less depressed because of their NZ student loan. Especially in the original subway creative, the man on his phone next to the Elephant looks down. Not a feeling we want for our customers overseas with SL debt. Change “Student Loan” to “NZ Student Loan” on the elephant. This was a must have for this creative to work for us along with the student loan amount on the Elephant. Otherwise, the creative is not addressing that is the referencing a New Zealand student loan amount. Could we see this creative in a vertical format? Was this the reason why we’ve changed the elephant creative? Our preferred creative from the Eighty One pitch was the Tidy Kiwi campaign. But as previously mentioned, this is a concept that we cannot use due to trademark restrictions. This is a disappointing result from where we were at the with original pitch. We will continue with Eighty One Media until June as previously agreed. Let’s put our focus back into the sweets creative and how we can generate the best results with that. Happy to talk this through with you if required. Thanks Steven From: < Sent: Wednesday, September 4, 2024 3:57 PM To: Kieran Burlace < Steven Mooney < Cc: < < Subject: Student Loans - creative updates External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi folks, In absence, I'm sharing with you the "elephant in the room" concepts with the revisions made that were requested. I know I'm just the media guy - but I'm loving them. And also the tone of the copy too. I realise these are going to be tested, so let us know if you need them provided in different formats for the testing. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) And of course, if you have any other comments or requests. -- Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz EO Signature 2020 This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Tax Invoice EightyOne Limited Level One, Press Hall 80 Willis Street Wellington 6011 New Zealand 10 915 5993 Inland Revenue Christie Weir Inland Revenue Accounts Payable 55 Featherston Street Wellington, 6011 New Zealand JOB NUMBERIRD0006 INVOICE NUMBERINV6150 PO NUMBERYN1014777 ISSUED ON31 Aug 2024 DUE ON20 Sep 2024 \[IRD0006\] HE Getting It Right Pitch5,000.00 SUBTOTAL 5,000.00 15% GST ON INCOME (15%) 750.00 TOTAL (NZD) 5,750.00 Attachment: EightyOne INV6150 HE Getting It Right s 9(2)(b)(ii) Hopefully, this shouldn't come as a surprise, so please get in touch if anything doesn't align with your expectations. Payments can be made to: KIWIBANK LIMITED Ground Floor, New Zealand Post House, 7 Waterloo Quay, Wellington 6011, New Zealand Account number: SWIFT code: KIWINZ22 Please include full name, account number, and invoice number when making payments. Payment terms: Please refer to the due date shown on the invoice. Please send remittances to New Zealand GST number: s 18(c)(i) s 18(c)(i) s 18(c)(i) From:Kendl Hambly To: Cc: Subject:RE: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations Date:Monday, 16 September 2024 4:06:00 pm Attachments:image001.png image002.png image003.png image004.png image005.png Hi Thank you No further feedback on the video. So just the three points I sent through last week please. We handle the uploading of the video file and SRT/caption files. So if you could just send them through when you send the final video through that would be fab! Can we add x2 caption files to the one video that people can choose from? Or would we need to upload two videos separate videos with two separate caption files? Thanks Kendl From: < Sent: Monday, September 16, 2024 12:59 PM To: Kendl Hambly < Cc: < Subject: Re: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Amazing! Nice job on getting these in so fast Kendl! We'll add these to the digital billboards and get them off to media asap. On another note, it's time to refocus on the video. Did you have any other feedback from the stakeholders about the first cut? I'd also like to ask you the process for the subtitling of this vid. Are you able to give us access to your YouTube so we can upload the translations for you? Or would you like us to provide them to you to get done on your side? Let me know she/her | KAITOHUTOHU RATONGA KIRITAKI ​ From: Kendl Hambly < s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Sent: Monday, 16 September 2024 10:37 am To: < Cc: < Subject: RE: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Morning Hope you had a nice weekend? Please see attached for the te reo translation for the ‘outdoor’ digital board/static poster advertising. Sing out if you have any questions. Look forward to seeing the final proofs Thanks Kendl From: < Sent: Thursday, September 12, 2024 4:33 PM To: Kendl Hambly < < > Subject: Re: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Perfect! Will get those changed for you tomorrow morning! On the creative side we’re all good to go pending your approval of the attached social sheet and excluding the Te Reo translated assets and animated video. (The links to the social videos you can find in the spreadsheet). On the media side we’ve just had a quick catch up to plan how to move forward. The next steps for media to restructure this part of the campaign will be as follows... 1. Research 2. Build new potential audiences and budget restructuring 3. Present potential audiences to yourself for your feedback 4. Action these changes in Meta and Google Display. The team will be in contact mid-next week with their new research and potential audiences for you to review alongside with how this might change the media budget. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Hemisphere | From: Kendl Hambly < Date: Thursday, 12 September 2024 at 3:40 PM To: < < Subject: RE: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Great thank you So the posters you’re referring to are the static versions of the billboards? Is that correct? Then yes please make sure they’re consistent with the digital versions. Sounds good, thanks for that! Cheers Kendl From: < Sent: Thursday, September 12, 2024 2:38 PM To: Kendl Hambly < < Subject: Re: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hey Kendl, Thanks so much for this. All good on the copy change for the digital billboards, however, the printed posters that are also going out have the exact same copy/design. So we’re just wanting to make sure that these are consistent. Let me know if you’d like the printed posters changed as well to match the digital billboards, otherwise we’ll keep them the same We’re just about to have a hui regarding your targeting emails today so will send you a social sheet with the copy after that for approval. Hemisphere | s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From: Kendl Hambly < Date: Thursday, 12 September 2024 at 2:31 PM To: < Cc: < Subject: RE: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi I don’t think it’s necessary to update those as the messaging is slightly different in those – they’re structured as questions rather than statements, there’s a few qualifying questions/criteria (rather than just the income reference) and the order of the messaging is different. Going back to the approvals a few months ago, this is what I signed off for the digital ads: FamilyBoost is here Do you pay for early childhood education? Is your household income less than $180,000? FamilyBoost is a payment that partially refunds your early childhood education costs You can register and claim your first payment now. Find out more If that’s correct then I think those are fine. I’ve searched my email folders and SharePoint folders and can only see my approvals for phase 1a and phase 1b social media copy. Attached. Can’t find anything for phase 2 social media copy being approved. Could you forward me the phase 2 copy please for review/approval? Hopefully it’s the same go as above When you refer to posters are you meaning the billboards? Thanks Kendl From: < Sent: Thursday, September 12, 2024 1:33 PM To: Kendl Hambly < Cc: < Subject: Re: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations Importance: High \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Kia ora Kendl s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Just a quick question: With your amended copy to remove the ‘$180k’, do you need the new proposed copy to appear on all the assets including the posters, HTML digital ads and social video ads? If so, could you please let me know as these assets were ready for despatch but would need reworking asap. Thanks! Ngā mihi he/him/ia Upoko Auaha | HEMISPHERE | From: Kendl Hambly < Date: Thursday, 12 September 2024 at 11:57 AM To: < Cc: < < Subject: RE: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Happy Thurs! Sorry about the delayed reply. You might’ve seen some of what has been keeping us really busy in the media this week. I’ll be sending you a separate email relating to this shortly. I’ve asked for the digital billboard copy to be translated by DIA Translation Services (our official translator) by EOP Monday. This is usually the quickest they can turn this around...so I’m moving on this and pushing that as much as I can. I have amended the digital billboard wording slightly. Please see below. The ‘$180k’ reference is just one of the eligibility criteria, so I think the below is better at keeping that statement a bit more high-level (and reduces the copy). I’ve reflected this in the wording I’ve provided to DIA Translation Services. FamilyBoost Is a payment that partially refunds households for early childhood education costs. If you’re eligible, you can register and claim your first payment now. Find out more ird.govt.nz/FamilyBoost Assume in your third bullet point you’re referring to the digital billboard creative? I’m happy with the design/layout. But please note again the copy change I’ve indicated above. If you could send me a final proof with this updated, I’ll approve from there We’ll obviously have to approve the Te Reo version separately once that copy is through. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) The video is looking great thank you! This will be so helpful for customers I’ve sent this to key stakeholders for a final looksie too. I’ve told them the feedback I’m providing and noted that only minor visual tweaks can be made at this stage, so I’m not expecting much, if anything. But I’ll follow-up this email if I do. I have just three minor tweaks: 0.37 – Can we please add ‘Separated caregivers can each claim FamilyBoost’ as a line at the bottom of this slide (as a statement rather than a bullet point)? 0.50 – Agree – lets please add (as a statement rather than a bullet point) ‘You can claim FamilyBoost if you have ECE costs’ at he bottom of the slide 1.37 – When we talk through this list “You'll also need the full name, date of birth and IRD number of each child attending ECE. If you have a partner, their full name, date of birth and IRD number, your New Zealand bank account details.” We awkwardly sit on the myIR laptop transition for ages. Instead of staying on that slide/transition can we please add an additional slide that lists this info with an image of the child perhaps with a caregiver or two (like the one you’ve create for the ECE provider’s info list)? So for example, the copy on the additional slide could be structured as so: You'll need: the full name, date of birth and IRD number of each child attending ECE If you have a partner, their full name, date of birth and IRD number your New Zealand bank account details. Thanks Kendl From: < Sent: Tuesday, September 10, 2024 11:27 AM To: Kendl Hambly < Cc: < < Subject: Feedback on animated video and te reo translations External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Kia ora Kendl, Hope you're well and had a great weekend! A few things here for you... In Phase One of Family Boost, you provided us with the te reo translations for the digital billboards. I've attached the document that we received from you last time as reference. Are you able to send through the translations for the Phase 2 copy as well please in the same format? The phrases we need translated are... “FamilyBoost ... is a payment that partially refunds early childhood education costs.” “If your household income is below $180,000, you can register and claim your first payment now.” “Find out more ird.govt.nz/FamilyBoost” We have the first cut of the animated video here for you to review. Some questions for you to think about from the team... 0:50 — Wondered whether we add text below the bullet points: ‘You can claim FamilyBoost’ at the same time as the VO says ‘You can claim FamilyBoost’. 2:59 — In this version, we kept the VO stating the quarterly periods as felt it highlighted the s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) claim from for each of the quarters and meant there was interaction between the graphics and the VO. Attached is the final poster design. I know you’ve given sign off on the creative and the rearrangement but if you could give a final sign off on this design (as this will be the design given to all of the asset sizes) before we send it out that would be great! Thanks in advance and let me know if you have any questions! she/her | KAITOHUTOHU RATONGA KIRITAKI ​ Hemisphere Sent from Hemisphere, Level 1, 58-60 Oriental Parade, Te Whanganui-a-Tara Wellington, Aotearoa New Zealand. The information contained in this document is confidential to the addressee(s) and may be legally privileged. If you have received this e-mail message in error, please delete it and notify me. Thank you. Any view or opinions expressed are mine and may not be those of Hemisphere. This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From: To:Kendl Hambly Cc: Subject:Re: Te red digital billboards for review Date:Monday, 16 September 2024 4:20:00 pm Attachments:image001.png image002.png image003.png image004.png image005.png image006.png \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Ok no worries! Yes they don’t go out yet but need to be tested and go through processes with the media companies which have certain creative deadlines before the go-lives which is why we have an earlier due date for them Hemisphere | From: Kendl Hambly < Date: Monday, 16 September 2024 at 4:17 PM To: < Cc: < Subject: RE: Te red digital billboards for review \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi These are good to go. The only thing I thought I’d call out is whether we should have the h in He lowercase the same as we have in the landscape version? s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From: To:Steven Mooney; Princess Whioke Cc:Kieran Burlace Subject:Student Loans performance meeting call report Date:Tuesday, 17 September 2024 5:45:40 pm External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi folks, Thanks again for your time this morning. Just covering off the discussion points and actions I promised: I took you through the new dashboard for the September activity, and compared that to the August activity. Search CTR is holding up, and display CTR is actually better than July/August sitting over 1% currently. Thats impressive. The new dashboard is here . Bookmark that and jump in any time. As you'll see the format is new and note there are 3 tabs: Overview, search and display (More will be added as we add more channels). We discussed the issue with the search activity in Canada. Turns out that the organisation called IRD in Canada (International Road Dynamics - see their site here) is about to change names so that will make our issue go away. The plan from here is that before the end of September I will build a plan that takes us through to the end of June, spending budget (including this month). We agreed that we will continue with just the sweets assets that exist, and keep an eye out for any insights that we might like to act on, or any signs of fatigue. In which case we can discuss new creative opportunities at that time. Until then - stay warm! Let me know if you have any questions. -- Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(i) From: To:Christie Weir Cc: Subject:Re: HE / GIR EightyOne Pitch Date:Wednesday, 18 September 2024 4:05:14 pm Attachments:image001.png image002.jpg External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hey Christie, Thanks for this. I'll work through our targeting options and pull the plan together accordingly. Will come back to you with any questions. On Wed, 18 Sept 2024 at 14:37, Christie Weir < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Couple of updates to the target audience section in the brief – primary and secondary. Letters to the are scheduled for 25 Sep – we can be in market from 2 Oct onwards. I’ll get the by the end of this week to help with out of home bookings. And confirming 67% have a tax agent (I was surprised! And yes we’re doing work via our external relationships team in this space). Our behavioural insights team are trialling a letter to the (letter A vs letter B (with a control group). They are aiming to send the letter this year (I’ll keep you updated on timings) but we need to cover them in our secondary audience layer. Additions highlighted. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 18(c)(i) s 18(c)(i) s 18(c)(i) s 18(c)(i) From: To:Kendl Hambly ; Cc: Subject:Re: Animated video final cut Date:Thursday, 19 September 2024 3:40:53 pm Attachments:image001.png image002.png image003.png image004.png image005.png image006.png External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hey Kendl, Feeling a little better today, thank you That sounds great, and yes all correct! The te reo subtitling is being delivered to us with timestamps to make sure they are loaded at the right times, so you'll likely have to do some manual work adjusting the captions to the times in Youtube for this one, but that shouldn't take too long Will forward them onto you when they're done. she/her | KAITOHUTOHU RATONGA KIRITAKI ​ From: Kendl Hambly < Sent: Thursday, 19 September 2024 3:29 pm To: < < Cc: < Subject: RE: Animated video final cut \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Hope you’re feeling a bit better today? We upload frequently so am aware of how to load everything – I just have never uploaded multiple caption files to one video before. I’ve just had a look at the back-end and it looks like we can attach multiple caption files to the one video, and then from there customers just choose the one appropriate for them?...but please correct me if I’m wrong – am happy to have a refresher if need be Thanks Kendl s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From: < Sent: Thursday, September 19, 2024 3:15 PM To: Kendl Hambly < < Cc: < Subject: Re: Animated video final cut External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Perfect thanks Kendl! This is now getting translated and we're hoping to have the te reo subtitles early next week. In regards to uploading it to Youtube, and inputting the different subtitles, it's fairly simple process but it might be easier for us to walk you through it in an online meeting? Would this work for you? she/her | KAITOHUTOHU RATONGA KIRITAKI ​ From: Kendl Hambly < Sent: Thursday, 19 September 2024 3:11 pm To: < Cc: < < Subject: RE: Animated video final cut \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Sorry just had another chance to watch it. Yes definitely happy with it - approved Thanks Kendl From: < Sent: Thursday, September 19, 2024 9:45 AM To: Kendl Hambly < Cc: < < Subject: Re: Animated video final cut \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Great and yes, I agree with the idea of splitting the Meta creative. Sounds like a plan Are you also happy to give final approval on the explainer video? Ngā mihi he/him/ia Upoko Auaha | HEMISPHERE | From: Kendl Hambly < Date: Thursday, 19 September 2024 at 9:31 AM To: < Cc: < < Subject: RE: Animated video final cut \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Oh no, I hope she’s feeling better today ☹ Re licensing, perfect – that sounds sufficient! Re TikTok and Meta, sounds good. I’d prefer a combination on Meta – we can observe how things go and can always pivot to just the HMTL promo if the long-form video isn’t getting the results we expect. Thanks Kendl From: < Sent: Wednesday, September 18, 2024 4:07 PM To: Kendl Hambly < Cc: < < Subject: Re: Animated video final cut \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Kia ora Kendl unfortunately had to head home sick ☹ However, yep I’m happy with the video too so will wait on your final approval tomorrow! To answer your other points: The music license purchased at the start of the campaign supports all asset use. The talent license is 24 months for advertising use (can be rolled over beyond that) and indefinite use on the IR website. RE: TikTok and Meta use, this has definitely grown as a bigger video than was initially thought! So, our idea for the best approach would be: TikTok: We run a 15sec promo video based on the HTML ads. This would suit the channel as short, sharp and promotional focussed content. Clicking the ad button would then take you to the landing page where you’ll be able find out more information (including hopefully view the explainer video). Meta: We run a 15sec promo video based on the HTML ads. Or, we could run a combination of the 15sec promo video based on the HTML, and run the landscape explainer video as a newsfeed post ad (with copy to say ‘here’s a video to tell you more about FamilyBoost and how to claim’). Let me know if you have any questions, otherwise we’ll wait to hear from you. Thanks Kendl. Ngā mihi he/him/ia Upoko Auaha | HEMISPHERE | From: Kendl Hambly < Date: Wednesday, 18 September 2024 at 3:01 PM To: < Cc: < < Subject: RE: Animated video final cut \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Thanks for this. It looks and sounds great I’ll check it again with a clear head in the morning and come back to you with final approval. In the meantime, where did you get to with the music and voiceover licensing for the video? Also, I’ve just refreshed my memory and had a look at the media plan and it looks like we’re still planning on using the explainer video on Meta and TikTok video advertising? Just double checking this as the video has probably turned out a bit longer than we expected and I just want to make sure we’re still ok on that front! Thanks Kendl From: < Sent: Wednesday, September 18, 2024 11:12 AM To: Kendl Hambly < Cc: < < Subject: Animated video final cut External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Ata mārie Kendl, Hope you're well. We've gone through and made those changes to the animated video for you to review. FamilyBoost\_16x9-V2.mp4 Notes from the feedback: 0:37 — ‘Separated caregivers can each claim FamilyBoost’ added below the bullets. 0:50 — ‘You can claim FamilyBoost if you have ECE costs’ added below the bullets. 1:37 — We have added an additional slide but it wasn’t working very well when we tried bringing the child in at the earlier time. So, instead we interacted with the laptop screen whereby that minimises to the left of screen to allow the new text bullets to appear. This then transitions nicely to the child and then the word ‘ECE’ appearing on the building as ‘ECE’ is spoken by the VO. Let me know if you have any final feedback! she/her | KAITOHUTOHU RATONGA KIRITAKI ​ Hemisphere s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Sent from Hemisphere, Level 1, 58-60 Oriental Parade, Te Whanganui-a-Tara Wellington, Aotearoa New Zealand. The information contained in this document is confidential to the addressee(s) and may be legally privileged. If you have received this e-mail message in error, please delete it and notify me. Thank you. Any view or opinions expressed are mine and may not be those of Hemisphere. This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz From: To:Christie Weir Subject:Re: Getting it right / shops Date:Friday, 20 September 2024 10:21:47 am External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hiya, Thanks for the response. I thought that might be the case. Potentially we can shorten the extension required - we’re working through the application now, fingers crossed it’s all ok for Monday, but if not we can review timings based on capturing on Thursday. Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz On 20 Sep 2024, at 10:18 AM, Christie Weir < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Morning, We advise you go ahead with the permit. Can we relook at the timings and aim for 2 ish days instead of 3 -4 days? Thanks Christie From: < Sent: Friday, September 20, 2024 9:01 AM To: Christie Weir < Subject: Re: Getting it right / shops External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Morena Christie, Happy Friday! We are photographing the shops today, which we have sought and gained approval for, which is great. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(b)(ii) We have liability insurance (which we have provided council as part of the permit application), but I wanted to ensure you were happy that if we don’t get it in time, we can proceed based on our own insurance coverage? Let me know what you think. I wouldn’t normally actually bring it up, but thought I’d be transparent here so we’re all comfortable. Our photographer isn’t available Tuesday & Wednesday so we don’t want to wait for the definite permit and push out as that would push out the campaign by 3-4 days. Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz <~WRD0000.jpg> On 18 Sep 2024, at 2:06 PM, Christie Weir < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Agreed! Also.. Log off now! From: < Sent: Wednesday, September 18, 2024 2:05 PM To: Christie Weir < Subject: Re: Getting it right / shops External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. I’m actually only part time and not supposed to work any Wednesdays! But we’ve been a bit crazy busy of late, so fingers crossed I can stick to it next week. Tell me to go away if I email you that day! Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a s 9(2)(a s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(b)(ii) | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz <~WRD0005.jpg> On 18 Sep 2024, at 2:03 PM, Christie Weir < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Maybe make it birthday week haha. Hope you’ve got the day off? From: < Sent: Wednesday, September 18, 2024 2:01 PM To: Christie Weir < Subject: Re: Getting it right / shops External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Cool thanks. I think we’ll shoot the 3 preferred first (shops and landscapes) and then on the second day, grab our backups, if time allows. 25th is my birthday. Sounds like a good day to be reminded about paying tax. Haha. Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz <~WRD0004.jpg> On 18 Sep 2024, at 1:57 PM, Christie Weir < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Will they shoot those 3 recommended or will they do a couple more for back up options? Sounds good re timings. The letters to the will be sent on 25 Sep so we can be in market targeting them from 2 Oct onwards. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 18(c)(i) From: < Sent: Wednesday, September 18, 2024 1:51 PM To: Christie Weir < Subject: Re: Getting it right / shops External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Oh lovely, thanks for confirming. We will be shooting Friday & Monday, so we’re running a few days behind. Attached is an updated timeline, let me know how this sounds? This is worst case scenario, I imagine we will be able to be quicker next week, but I hesitate to over promise and under deliver! Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz <~WRD0003.jpg> On 18 Sep 2024, at 1:47 PM, Christie Weir < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi These look good to me – thanks. How are we going time wise? Should we have the visuals for approval by COB Friday? Christie From: < Sent: Wednesday, September 18, 2024 10:05 AM To: Christie Weir < Subject: Re: Getting it right / shops External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Hey Christie, Just on top of the below, here is our preferred 3 (in situ in quick mock ups). They are all takeaway shops at the moment, but our retoucher will be making them more generic, and nicer than they currently are. We can easily modernise them with cleaner, more modern windows as required. What these do really well is instantly convey the idea of a Kiwi shop, we can easily build on them to make them what we want. Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz <~WRD0002.jpg> On 18 Sep 2024, at 8:56 AM, < wrote: Morena Christie, Here are our favourite 10 shops. Our aim is to narrow it down to 6, and capture all of them, as we work on finalising the permission/releases. Let me know your thoughts on these. Just noting, they will be stripped of any branding, tidied up in terms of edges and corners/poles/power lines. Thanks! Ngā mihi, <Tax locations 2.pdf> Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz <~WRD0002.jpg> On 17 Sep 2024, at 9:53 AM, Christie Weir < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a s 9(2)(a s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Morning, Thanks for these. Thoughts Looking a bit tired.. didn’t we agree for a more classic look that was delivered in the second concept round? Less shabby: <image001.png> Assuming the images will be cleaned up and the existing shop branding will be replaced with generic signage? I’m guessing the businesses owners have agreed for these images to be used in advertising too? These two are more what we were thinking to work across all sectors <image002.png> From: < Sent: Monday, September 16, 2024 3:52 PM To: Christie Weir < Subject: Getting it right / shops External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hey Christie, Three attachments - a range of landscapes, shops and then a follow up of our preferred 3. Noting these obviously will need a bit of retouching, but we think our prefer are a good range of shapes/sizes. Let me know what you think. Looking to photography this week once the weather lightens up! Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz <~WRD0003.jpg> This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From: To:Christie Weir Cc: Subject:Re: Sep billing Date:Monday, 23 September 2024 10:39:38 am External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Ah sorry you are correct, I meant Apologies. Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz On 23 Sep 2024, at 10:33 AM, Christie Weir < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Sounds like a good night! PO for Eightyone is and you’re billing in Sep? From: < Sent: Monday, September 23, 2024 10:30 AM To: Christie Weir < Cc: < Subject: Re: Sep billing External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Morena Christie, Aww that sounds lovely! I had my husband’s 40th dinner party Saturday night so Sunday was a very very low key on the couch day! s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(i) s 9(2)(i) s 9(2) (b(ii) Of the for EightyOne, we will invoice the rest this month, as due date (20 October) will be following delivery of the campaign, but also we have suppliers we need to pay (photographer, producer, location manager). Let me know if any issues with that. Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz <~WRD0000.jpg> On 23 Sep 2024, at 10:11 AM, Christie Weir < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Morning Hope it was a good weekend Blosom festival here on Saturday with carnival rides and a parade which was pretty fun. Can you give me a heads up on expected billing for Sep? Once the media schedule is through i can plug month by month into the forecasting budget but just in the meantime I need this month’s. Eightyone and Eightyone Media. @ should have the locations through by mid week. Thanks Christie Weir Principal Advisor | Marketing & Communications Inland Revenue | 204 Hastings Street, Napier | 4110 Just to let you know, I work part-time from 9.30am to 2.30pm. <image001.png> This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 18(c)(i) s 9(2)(i)s 9(2)(b)(ii) From:Christie Weir To: Cc:Kieran Burlace; Subject:RE: Bright-line 2024 post campaign report Date:Tuesday, 24 September 2024 8:04:00 pm Attachments:image001.png image002.png image003.png image004.png image005.png Thanks What a fantastic CTR! Awesome work We’ll take a look and be in touch with any questions. Christie From: < Sent: Tuesday, September 24, 2024 1:36 PM To: Christie Weir < Cc: Kieran Burlace < < < Subject: Bright-line 2024 post campaign report External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Good afternoon Christie, I hope you're having a great week so far! Please find the 2024 Bright-line post campaign report attached. Some of the highlights of this years campaign include: 3,054,089 impressions were delivered, leading to 71,640 clicks An outstanding click through rate of 2.35% (compared to 0.87% last year) A low cost per click of Over 48,000 website sessions to the bright-line and buying and selling landing pages. Once you have reviewed the report, please let us know if you have any questions s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2) (b)(ii) From: To:Kendl Hambly Cc: Subject:Re: Animated Video for Meta for you to review. Date:Wednesday, 25 September 2024 4:20:51 pm Attachments:image006.png image007.png image008.jpg image009.png image010.png image011.png image001.png image002.jpg image003.png image004.png image005.png \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Kia ora Kendl, Awesome! Those changes have been made for you now. All in the same link she/her | KAITOHUTOHU RATONGA KIRITAKI | Ake ake ake – A Forever Language Proudly part of Te Huihui o Te Kakau Sent from Hemisphere, Level 1, 58-60 Oriental Parade, Te Whanganui-a-Tara Wellington, Aotearoa New Zealand. The information contained in this document is confidential to the addressee(s) and may be legally privileged. If you have received this e-mail message in error, please delete it and notify me. Thank you. Any view or opinions expressed are mine and may not be those of Hemisphere. From: Kendl Hambly < Date: Wednesday, 25 September 2024 at 4:14 PM To: < s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Cc: < < Subject: RE: Animated Video for Meta for you to review. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi This is looking good. Just a few minor adjustments from me. For the headline for the newsfeed video ad (short) and static ad, could we please change it from ‘FamilyBoost is here’ to ‘Register and claim now’. Assume the short newsfeed video visual will have text display as it plays? Re the explainer video ad, could we please tweak the post text ever so slightly: ‘Find out how to register and claim FamilyBoost. A partial refund to eligible households for early childhood education costs to eligible households .’ No changes for the TikTok ad Could you please send me a final copy? Thanks Kendl From: < Sent: Tuesday, September 24, 2024 1:46 PM To: Kendl Hambly < Cc: < < Subject: Animated Video for Meta for you to review. External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Kia ora Kendl, Here is the link to the social sheet (including links to the final animated explainer video). s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From:Alana Tapp To: Subject:RE: CSO report - July Date:Wednesday, 25 September 2024 8:07:00 am Attachments:~WRD0000.jpg image001.png Thank you! Sorry, I didn’t receive it last week. How odd! But much appreciate you sending this through. From: < Sent: Tuesday, September 24, 2024 2:29 PM To: Alana Tapp < Subject: FW: CSO report - July \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi Alana I just send this over last week – let me know if you don’t get it this time. Thanks From: Sent: Wednesday, 18 September 2024 2:01 PM To: Alana Tapp < Subject: RE: CSO report - July Hi Alana Oh yes, of course! Attached. This might have just gone across to Ali. Thanks From: Alana Tapp < Sent: Wednesday, 18 September 2024 9:50 AM s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) To: < Subject: CSO report - July \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi Thanks for supplying the financial information yesterday. I’m just now realizing that I don’t seem to have a record of the CSO campaign report that we did at that same time as the CCS campaign. Is there a report you can send me for the CSO campaign outlining the clicks, impressions, and general successfulness of the results? Thanks. Alana Tapp (she/her) Domain Specialist | Marketing & Communications Inland Revenue | 204 Hastings Street, Napier | 4110 This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) The main goal for this campaign was to drive awareness to the Inland Revenue career site, focusing on the Customer Service Officer role. We’ve seen an excellent result across this campaign. This CSO campaign has pulled in over 352,000 impressions in total, across all platforms. Along with this, we have seen very good engagement with great Click Through Rates (CTR) in all platforms, meaning that the people seeing your ads have interacted with the content in a positive way. Due to the good performance of this campaign and quality results in candidates, this campaign has been turned off, at request of IR, thus cutting the campaign live time short. Whilst good results were seen for this campaign, due to the short timeframe of this being live, ZEIL did not have enough time to be live to produce effective results. This is why we see low performance with this platform. Seeing as this campaign performed very well, we recommend for future CSO campaigns, to use the same advertising platforms so that good results can be seen again. CAMPAIGN OVERVIEW From:Kendl Hambly To: Cc:Alana Tapp Subject:RE: Animated Explainer Video for Youtube Date:Thursday, 26 September 2024 12:55:31 pm Attachments:image007.png image008.jpg image009.png image010.png image011.png image012.png image013.jpg image014.png image015.png image016.png image017.png \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Thanks very much From: < Sent: Thursday, September 26, 2024 11:41 AM To: Kendl Hambly < Cc: Alana Tapp < Subject: Re: Animated Explainer Video for Youtube \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hey Kendl, SRT files attached for you she/her | KAITOHUTOHU RATONGA KIRITAKI | Ake ake ake – A Forever Language Proudly part of Te Huihui o Te Kakau s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Sent from Hemisphere, Level 1, 58-60 Oriental Parade, Te Whanganui-a-Tara Wellington, Aotearoa New Zealand. The information contained in this document is confidential to the addressee(s) and may be legally privileged. If you have received this e-mail message in error, please delete it and notify me. Thank you. Any view or opinions expressed are mine and may not be those of Hemisphere. From: Kendl Hambly < Date: Thursday, 26 September 2024 at 11:15 AM To: < Cc: Alana Tapp < Subject: RE: Animated Explainer Video for Youtube \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Thanks From: < Sent: Thursday, September 26, 2024 10:11 AM To: Kendl Hambly < Cc: Alana Tapp < Subject: Re: Animated Explainer Video for Youtube \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Apologies Kendl! Sorry still getting a hang of things. Will work on these today and get them over to you she/her | KAITOHUTOHU RATONGA KIRITAKI | s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From: To:Christie Weir Cc: Subject:Re: Getting It Right media plan Date:Thursday, 26 September 2024 11:38:23 am Attachments:~WRD0001.jpg External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Thanks Christie. We'll proceed with the bookings, and also come back to you next week with further detail on the SJS opportunity. Have a great day. On Thu, 26 Sept 2024 at 11:18, Christie Weir < wrote: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Thanks Yes let’s go ahead and book. @ how are the timings for the creative going? From: < Sent: Thursday, September 26, 2024 11:14 AM To: Christie Weir < Cc: < < Subject: Re: Getting It Right media plan External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Sent: Wednesday, September 25, 2024 8:44 PM To: Christie Weir < Cc: < < Subject: Getting It Right media plan External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Hi Christie, Just coming back to you as promised with the detailed media plan for the Getting It Right campaign for your review and approval. Couple of points: - We've scheduled the first two phases against the known sectors and timings - The last two are just placeholders until we get those confirmed by you - We've now got the always-on layer that incorporates the secondary sectors. this will mostly utilise display and search, and will be an excellent opportunity for us to test all sorts of different approaches to see what works and optimise over time. This is what we've done with the Student Loans campaigns with great effect. from our media team has built this, and in the process has come up with a couple of new ideas that weren't in the pitch. One involves Neighbourly and one is with Student Job Search (The details for this are still being finalised so we'll update you as soon as we've locked them down). If you're free as some point we can talk you through these as I think they're novel ways to find our small business owners to deliver the message in a relevant context. Finally - we've held a small amount as a contingency to be able to apply once we have identified the platforms, formats, and targeting techniques that work best. s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Attached are the media schedule as well as a short slide deck that explain the different tactics. We'll update this with the SJS info as son as we get it. Let us know if you have any questions. -- Ngā mihi, Kia kaha, kia maia, kia mākoha Aotearoa. (Be strong, be brave, be kind) Level 1, Press Hall 80 Willis St, Wellington 6011, New Zealand PO Box 25489, Wellington 6140 | Follow us on LinkedIn | eightyone.co.nz Image removed by sender. EO Signature 2020 This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)