Ref: 22OIA1804 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 16 May 2022 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received 19 April 2022. You requested: The proportion of NZ Citizens and Residents who are net contributors\* vs net recipients\*\* of tax for the years 2000 – 2021. Please also supply this information broken down by age group, gender, income level and ethnicity. \*including GST, fuel, alcohol and other such taxable items – If data is not collected with this level of specificity, please supply the best figures relating to net tax contributors. \*\* including infrastructure, benefits etc. – if data is not collected with this level of specificity please supply the best figures relating to net tax recipients. Information refused Indirect taxes such as GST, fuel and alcohol excise are administered through third parties such as retailers and are not collated in a way that the tax paid is attributable to the person purchasing the item. Therefore, I have decided to refuse this part of your request under section 18(g) of the OIA as the information is not held by Inland Revenue, and we do not believe it is held by another agency. Attributable information on collective expenditures such as infrastructure, and on ethnicity is also not held by Inland Revenue and is also refused under section 18(g) of the OIA. Information released The information you have requested that can be released, is provided in the tables attached to this request. The tables partially respond to the request for the 1999-2000 to 2019-20 income years. Information for the 2020-21 income year is not available as tax returns are still being filed for that year, and the data will be incomparable with the previous year’s information. The released information relates to the net outcomes from personal income tax, taxable transfers, and Working for Families 1 Tax Credits. For the purposes of this release, net taxes and transfers have been defined as follows: Taxable income: Income from all sources taxable to the individual, which does not include amounts taxed in another entity such as a company or trust. Individual taxable income can include taxable transfers such as some welfare benefits 1 Previously Family Assistance Ref: 22OIA1804 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] or New Zealand superannuation. It does not include non-taxable transfers such as the accommodation supplement or the winter energy payment. It does not include any Working for Families received. If taxable income is negative (from a loss, for example), it is replaced with a zero. Tax: Tax on “taxable income” (as above) less rebates such as the donations tax credit, the housekeeper tax credit, the child tax credit, the independent earner tax credit, or the low-income tax credit. The offset from the rebates is capped, i.e., it cannot exceed the tax payable. Net tax: Tax (as above) less gross transfers. Combined transfers can be bigger than the tax, resulting in a negative net result, considered a “gain” from the tax/transfer system. If tax is larger than gross transfers, this counts as a “loss” from the tax/transfer system. Transfers: The transfers included in the above net tax calculation are below. Taxable transfers are marked with an asterisk: • Gross New Zealand superannuation\*. • Gross taxable welfare benefits\* (examples are Jobseeker and sole parent support). • Gross paid parental leave\*. • Gross student allowances\*. • Working for Families – previously Family Assistance. The entire family entitlement is attributed to the family’s nominated “principal caregiver”. Non-transfer income: For the requested income level distributions, we have supplied two sets of income tables; one using taxable income which includes taxable transfers, and one using “non-transfer income” which excludes these transfers. Denominator for the percentages The released tables all contain percentages, specifically the percentage of the measured population who “gain” from the taxes and benefits as described above. The measured population is defined as anybody who filed a tax return (even if this was a nil return), or received a tax square-up, or who had PAYE income (a wage/salary job or a taxable welfare benefit). This population numbers 2.9 million people in 1999-2000 and this gradually grew to 3.9 million people by 2017-18. The likelihood of receiving a tax square-up has changed over time, and from 2018-19 onwards included square-ups of tax on interest earned in bank accounts. This brought a large number of additional people – many of them children and net taxpayers on their small amount of interest earnings – into the measured population. The 2018-19 year hence represents a structural break in the requested series, and this is highlighted in the released tables. The volumes in that year were 4.3 million people. The measured population does not include people with no income unless they filed a tax return. It does include part-year cases. Further information on the released tables Table 1: Proportion by gender with a net gain from income tax and transfer system Inland Revenue does not collect information on gender, but inferences can be made from each person’s title (Mr, Mrs etc). Where a title is not gender-specific, the person has been randomly allocated. Table 2: Proportion of age group with a net gain from income tax and transfer system