24OIA23 70 Page 1 of 2 17 July 2024 D ear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 23 June 2024. You requested the following (numbered for ease of reference): 1.Which role within the organisation is responsible for the overall strategic direction of data systems and processes, and at which level (e.g., Tier 1, 2, 3) within the organisation's hierarchy? Please briefly describe the key responsibilities of this role. 2.Does the Organisation have a published Data Strategy? If yes, please provide the document and briefly describe how it is being implemented. 3.Does the organisation make use of, or reference to, the Data Capability Framework (DCF) published by Statistics New Zealand? Question 1 The Strategic and Investment Board (SIB) is an Inland Revenue Executive-Level Governance Board and is responsible for Inland Revenue’s strategic direction. This group is chaired by the Commissioner and Chief Executive of Inland Revenue and has membership of Tier 1 and 2 leaders. Alongside SIB, is a second Executive-Level Governance Board named t he Data and Information Governance Authority (DIGA). This Authority ensures right-sized, sustainable, and efficient data and information governance which delivers oversight, transparency, and accountability in Inland Revenue’s stewardship and use of data and information as assets. The SIB Charter and DIGA’s Terms of Reference outline their key responsibilities and membership. These have been released to you as Appendix A. Question 2 The document Business Solution Blueprint – Intelligence Led provides the foundation on how Inland Revenue looks at data, analytics and intelligence as a driver for its digital organisation. This is available on Inland Revenue’s website at: IR BT Business Solution Blueprint Intelligence Led (ird.govt.nz). The AI Strategic Considerations document includes strategic considerations around the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI), primarily generative AI. This is released to you as Appendix B. T his document contained some information determined not in scope of your request. This information has not been considered for release. 24OIA2370 Page 2 of 2 Question 3 Inland Revenue has used the Data Capability Framework published by Statistics New Zealand informally to assist in our work in data quality. The framework has helped Inland Revenue shape its data quality management work programme, but engagement with the framework has not been formal. Inland Revenue has, however, been involved in a data and analytics maturity assessment as part of the OECD Forum on Tax Administration membership. This assessment is highly similar in nature to the Data Capability Framework published by Statistics New Zealand. Right of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: commissionerscorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. Publishing of OIA response We intend to publish our response to your request on Inland Revenue’s website (ird.govt.nz) as this information may be of interest to other members of the public. This letter, with your personal details removed, may be published in its entirety. Publishing responses increases the availability of information to the public and is consistent with the OIA's purpose of enabling more effective participation in the making and administration of laws and policies and promoting the accountability of officials. Thank you again for your request. Yours sincerely Tin a MacLean Intelligence Leader - Data Appendix A 3 Information Governance Team Support The Authority is supported by the Information Governance team. They are responsible for: • ensuring the Authority follows good governance principles and practices • working with the Chair to set the agenda, considering key enterprise issues and decisions required • providing support, advice and quality assurance for Authority papers, with the mandate to refuse any that do not meet quality standards • ensuring that minutes reflect decisions and key discussion points, and that decisions are communicated to the people who need to know. Attendees and observers At the Chair's discretion, people are invited to attend Authority meetings to provide input as needed. Observers may attend with approval from the Chair. Observers do not contribute to the Authority's discussion unless a member asks them to. Logistics Meetings The Authority meets quarterly, and members are advised of the meeting dates set for the year. Additional meetings may be scheduled when needed, and members are notified of these as early as possible. All procedures, rules and practices for regular meetings stay in place for additional meetings. In some circumstances it may be necessary for papers to be circulated for feedback and decisions outside of meetings. The Chair's agreement is required for these 'out-of-cycle' items. Agendas and papers The agenda and papers are made available to Authority members four working days before the meeting. The Chair decides whether to accept late agenda items and papers on the Information Governance Team's recommendation . Papers should be on the governance template (a choice of Word or PowerPoint) and should include a purpose statement and recommendations . 4 Quorum A quorum of 50% of members including the Chair, is required for decisions to be made. If there is no quorum, the Chair decides whether to reschedule the meeting. Minutes of meetings The Information Governance Team writes the minutes and provides them to the Authority for their following meeting. Within that following meeting, the Authority is asked to approve the minutes as an accurate record. Review  To enable ongoing improvement, the Authority will review its performance at approximately six-monthly intervals. Reviews will be recorded in the minutes.  Version Control The most recent document will be included in the footnote 1 for continuity. 1 Version 2.0 2024.03.26 Appendix B Table of Contents BackgroundStrategic Considerations Strategic Alignment Pg 10 4 Roadmap Our Customer Pg 12 5 Our People Pg 16 6 How We Work Pg 20 7 Our Approach Pg 24 8 Data & Digital Pg 28 9 Landscape Pg 32 10 Background & Context Pg 4 1 Approach Pg 5 2 Framework Introduction Pg 7 3 Use Case Prioritisation Pg 36 11 Roadmap Introduction Pg 39 12 Roadmap Foundations Pg 44 13 Roadmap Options Pg 53 14 2 Executive Summary At Inland Revenue we have a structure and governance in place for AI and are now looking to further developstrategic considerations and a roadmap for this capability. This isa key input to Inland Revenue’s Enterprise Strategy and long-term planning. We have established a strategic framework to guide the secure and effective adoption of artificial intelligence (AI) within Inland Revenue. Our AI strategy consideration pack is informed by comprehensive research and collaboration with experts, and it presents an approach structured around seven strategic pillars that resonate with our organisational goals, ensure fair user experiences, and maintain secure, transparent innovation. Key Components: •Strategic Considerations: The foundations of our AI strategy consideration pack are pillars that align with our organisational aims, champion inclusivity, fortify security, prepare infrastructure, and conform to regulatory standards. •Prioritisation and Roadmap: We introduce a prioritisation model for AI initiatives, coupled with a phased roadmap. This framework provides direction for foundational and optional activities from the initial stages through to broader implementation. •Impact on Inland Revenue: This framework allows us to carefully consider ways to integrate AI into IR'soperations and people capabilities. AI has the potential to increase operational efficiency and enhance thecustomerexperience, whilst supporting IR's broad roles as defined in our enterprise strategy. Background & Context •At Inland Revenue we have a structure and governance in place for AI and are now looking to further developstrategic considerations and a roadmap for this capability. This isa key input to Inland Revenue’s Enterprise Strategy and long-term planning. •Through this work, we have identified and developed pertinent strategic considerations for Artificial Intelligence and concluded with high-level roadmap options for prioritisation. Our approach included drawing on key inputs to support the development of AI strategic considerations and a use case prioritisation framework to feed into a clear roadmap to safely uplift our Artificial Intelligence (AI) capabilities and enable us to better leverage AI to meet our strategic goals. Our Approach Informs...Informs... I N P U T S Thought Leadership G lobal thought leadership, loc al c onsiderations and dis c ussions with D eloitte s ubjec t matter experts Ref erence Documents 2 3 referenc e documents have been inc orporated from I R Meetings f or input and review 3 A I O versight G roup M eetings, 3 A I Working G roup meetings, and 5 A I Strategy & Roadmap Sub-G roup M eetings WG Use Cases 2 0 us e c ases incorporated from the A I bac klog Interviews 2 0 I R s takeholders provided input, ac ros s 9 interviews P A T H F O R W A R D AI Roadmap Foundations AI Roadmap Use Case Options A I S T R A T E G I C C O N S I D E R A T I O N S Strategic Alignment, Our Customers, Our People, How We Work, Our Approach, Data and Digital, Landscape U S E C A S E P R I O R I T I S A T I O N \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Strategic Considerations Introduction to the Strategic Considerations Framework •We have developed a framework guiding the use of AI in our operations and strategic outlook, consisting of seven essential pillars: Strategic Alignment, Our Customers, Our People, How We Work, Our Approach, Data & Digital, and Landscape. •This dynamic framework integrates our alignment with endorsing socially accountable, fair, transparent, secure, and confidential AI systems. •We're committed to enhancing workforce understanding of AI, fostering innovative partnerships, creating a solid digital ecosystem and manoeuvring through potentially turbulent political and other environmental factors. •As we strive towards excellence, we adhere to trustworthy AI principles and international standards; we respect the data sovereignty and other Te ao Māori considerations, all while focusing on stewardship, efficiency, effectiveness and promoting a culture of continuous growth and learning. 7 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] AI Strategic Considerations Strategic considerations are the factors and elements that we seek to consider when shaping our approach towards AI. They include factors internal to Inland Revenue and external influences both locally and internationally. We explore each in more detail next. H O W W I T H W H A T W H Y W H O S t e w a r d s h i p | E f f e c t i v e n e s s & e f f i c i e n c y | B r o a d e r C o n t r i b u t i o n | E f f e c t i v e n e s s & E f f i c i e n c y STRATEGIC ALIGNMENT Framing AI in the context of our strategies, how can AI be an enabler, what are the key opportunities, challenges and risks Understanding the wider context that may influence our approach to implementation of AI Enabling us to drive positive outcomes for our customers andimproveoranga for current and future generations Integrating AI with human workflows and redefining talent models while winning hearts and minds through effective communications & change management Integrating AI into our ways of working and processes to enhanceoutcomes, whileleveraging connections to innovate and work with our eco system partners . Applying Trustworthy AI best practice​ to ensure we support ethical,responsible and culturally safe use of AI while prioritising customer confidentiality in a fair and transparent way Utilising the appropriate AI technology & platforms in place to operationalise AI assets, including vendor strategy, interoperability & environments P o l i t i c a l & P u b l i c S e c t o r C o n t e x t R e g u l a t o r y L a n d s c a p e A u t h o r i s i n g E n v i r o n m e n t V a l u e D r i v e r s T e A o M ā o r i I n c l u s i v i t y & D i v e r s i t y I n n o v a t i o n & P a r t n e r s h i p s F u n c t i o n a l C a p a b i l i t y P o l i c y S e c u r e & C o n f i d e n t i a l O U R A P P R O A C H R e s p o n s i b l e , F a i r & T r a n s p a r e n t I n t e r n at i o n a l B e s t P ra c t i c e A r c h i t e c t u r e D i g i t a l E c o s y s t e m D A T A & D I G I T A L D a t a & I n f o r m a t i o n F o u n d a t i o n s O U R C U S T O M E R S H O W W E W O R K O U R P E O P L E C h a n g e & C u l t u r e T e T i r i t i T r a i n i n g & F l u e n c y L A N D S C A P E A deep dive into each pillar & element follows Framework T he framework outlines the s trategic c onsiderations to ens ure alignment with fair, trans parent, s ecure, and c onfidential AI s ystems 7 essential pillars E ac h pillar inc ludes fac tors internal to I nland Revenue and external influences both loc ally and internationally 19 elements U nder eac h pillar s its various elements whic h s hould be c ons idered when s haping our approac h towards A I 9 Strategic Alignment •Effectiveness & Efficiency: By integrating AI, we can optimise our resource utilisation and streamline operations, enhancing our decision-making capabilities and improving our overall effectiveness and efficiency through optimisation and automation. •Stewardship: Stewardship is crucial as we implement AI, and with careful planning and strategic allocation of resources, we can improve our adaptability, safeguard existing systems, and maintain the integrity and the relevancy of the tax and social policy system. •Broader Contribution: As we strive to make a broader contribution to New Zealand, integrating AI can enhance cross-departmental data processing and enhance our capabilities for efficient partnerships, fostering holistic insights and innovative solutions. Effectiveness & Efficiency Stewardship Broader Contribution S t e w a r d s h i p | E f f e c t i v e n e s s & e f fi c i e n c y | B r o a d e r C o n t r i b u t i o n | E f f e c t i v e n e s s & E f f i c i e n c y STRATEGIC ALIGNMENT Framing AI in the context of our strategi es, how can AI be an enabler, what are the key opportuni ti es, chal l enges and ri sks Strategic Alignment S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Aligning the use of AI to accelerate the realisation of our organisation’s aspiration and outcomes. Our Enterprise Strategy is central to shaping the approach to AI. This strategy revolves around four key elements: our people, the driving force behind our operations; our customers, who guide our operational focus; supporting the Crown to be a better Treaty partner, promoting equitable services across Aotearoa New Zealand; and maintaining the integrity of the tax and social policy system, our underlying cornerstone. AI holds the potential to strengthen these pillars by streamlining processes, anticipating risks, and optimising public service delivery. However, as AI innovations and data flow escalate, stewardship becomes more critical. Falling behind in this rapidly evolving field could jeopardise our ability to effectively maintain our services. It's also crucial that te ao Māori principles are deeply woven into our strategy. By aligning AI with our objectives, we can strive towards promoting ‘Oranga' via cross- government cooperation, robust social policy, and revenue generation. This combined strategic precision and deepened operational understanding could significantly elevate our performance. •We have leveraged technology for outcome improvement and efficiency gains throughout our history. While AI technologies are emerging and advancing quickly, they are simply the next tool for us to leverage to empower our people to further the interests and improve the delivery to our customers and New Zealanders as a whole. •Combining Artificial Intelligence (AI) with our service delivery can optimise resource utilisation and streamline operations. This would enhance result-oriented decision-making in Aotearoa New Zealand by leveraging machine learning models for accurate tax prediction and ensuring effective resource allocation. AI can also facilitate continuous innovative solutions that improve service delivery. •Fostering an AI-enabled ecosystem can promote stewardship by improving adaptability and safeguarding existing systems. Predictive analytics offer the ability to proactively adjust to future customer trends. Coupled with AI-enhanced cybersecurity, this would bolster legislative, asset, and resource integrity. Additionally, implementing AI-oriented training programs would ensure the workforce evolves in line with technological advancements. •Embracing shared AI platforms amongst public services can heighten the broader contribution of IR to New Zealand. Through rapid processing of cross-departmental data, AI can enable generation of holistic insights and innovative solutions. Moreover, the automation capabilities of AI can foster partnerships with other agencies to improve the efficiency and quality of public services. K E Y I N S I G H T S Strategic Alignment & Stakeholder Engagement R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.DI\_CIR\_State-of-AI-4th-edition.pdf (deloitte.com) In order to optimise its operational effectiveness, we should consider transforming our perception of the synergies with our ecosystem partners and maximising the potential of data-driven strategies. This involves emphasising strategic alignment and innovation while observing a cautious approach towards risks. AI technology has a critical role in propelling the development of enterprise and refining various strategies rather than functioning on its own, with notable impacts on managing brand reputation and enhancing customer communication quality. Interviewees: Mary, James, Mike. •Suc c essful AI integration c ould enhance efficiency, effec tiveness, s tewardship princ iple alignment, and broader public s ervice delivery in A otearoa N ew Zealand, as well as c onfer a 1 .7 times greater likelihood of ac hieving exceptional outc omes for organis ations with enterprise-wide AI s trategies \[1 \]. •Suc c essful AI integration is c omplex and diffic ult, with only 2 8 % of organis ations ac hieving high outc omes from A I deployments in 2 0 21 \[1 \]. L arge-scale public s ervice organisations like I R may enc ounter extra barriers when adopting AI at s c ale. •As nearly 50% of organisations have reportedly experienced poor AI outcomes, it's evident that introducing AI into our systems poses a risk to upholding the principle of stewardship. Indeed, any related regulatory failures could jeopardise the integrity of the tax system. To avoid undermining public confidence and operational stability, careful planning of AI initiatives is key to ensure they enhance, rather than detract from, our efficiency and capability \[1\]. •With a potential for AI initiatives to become costly diversions, there's a clear risk of straining our resources without delivering the promised benefits. Thorough planning, strategic allocation of resources, and prudent execution can help manage this risk and ensure meaningful return on investment. •To navigate societal implications, it's pivotal for us to anticipate possible disruptions, continually assess societal responses, and create an inclusive communication strategy to engender trust and promote understanding among stakeholders. Our Customers •Value Drivers: We aim to leverage AI to enhance efficiency, decision-making, and service delivery, refocusing our resources on higher-value innovations for improved customer outcomes. •Te Ao Māori: We seek to ensure that data sovereignty principles underpin all AI initiatives, recognising Tangata whenua as kaitiaki (guardians) of their own data and fostering oranga (health and well-being) through equitable tax processes. •Inclusivity & Diversity: Ensuring our AI strategy at Inland Revenue prioritises accessibility and inclusiveness for all our customers and workforce is key in delivering a diverse, equitable, and representative service that aligns with the principle of manaakitanga in Te Pou o Te Tangata. Value Drivers Te Ao Māori Inclusivity & Diversity Value Drivers S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Value drivers are the s trategic cons iderations that impact us delivering the maximum effectivenes s and efficiency from AI . V alue drivers are essential in s haping our approac h to A I bec ause they align tec hnological advancements with our as pirations and outc omes, ens uring AI initiatives c ontribute to broader organis ational impac t. T his alignment is c ruc ial in harnes sing AI's potential to enhance effic iency, decision-making, and s ervice delivery in the tax domain. By leveraging AI for automating routine tasks and dec ision s upport, res ources are redirec ted towards higher-value activities, fos tering a c ulture of innovation and ens uring the tec hnology's meaningful and meas urable contribution to the broader government and tax ec os ystem. •Foc using on us e c ases with high potential for return on inves tment c an c reate momentum for further A I adoption and drive internal c hanges, es sential for maximizing the impac t of A I in government s ectors \[4 \] •AI’s valuable decision support capabilities include using predic tive algorithms to turn data flows into prac tical ins ights, virtual experiences (with V R or digital twins ) as a low-ris k testing environment, or even a G enA I assistant to provide dec ision-making advice \[2 \]. For example, the U S I RS are us ing advanced analytics to monitor taxpayer behaviour and make real-time decisions to “nudge” them toward greater tax c ompliance \[7 \]. •A I 's c apability in real-time tracking and data analysis c an s ignificantly improve public services, enhancing s ervice delivery to c itizens \[8 \]. •A I applications in government can address resource c ons traints, reduc e backlogs, and free workers from mundane tas ks. T his not only optimizes res ources but also attrac ts younger, tec h-savvy workers , addressing pers onnel c hallenges \[8 \] . •A s c ompliance tasks are automated, A I enables tax profes s ionals to foc us on navigating c omplex regulatory environments, thereby adding more value within the organization and ens uring effec tive tax ris k management \[6 \]. K E Y I N S I G H T S AI Impact Assessment | Funding Use Case Proposal and Prioritisation Framework Benefits Tracking Framework (KPIs) for AI R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K We are prioritising customer-centric approaches, focusing on opportunities to quickly make a difference and effectively managing risks. Advancements in efficiency and corresponding value for given business opportunities are essential, while also acknowledging the importance of having the necessary roles and skills aligned with value drivers. The strategic balancing of protection and opportunities, emphasis on enhancing decision support for staff, and partnering with intermediaries all form key aspects of the AI strategic considerations. Interviewees: Mary, Cate, Mike, Malcolm, Tina, James, Dan. •AI can automate routine processes, notably in back-office operations, enabling staff to focus on complex issues, thereby increasing efficiency and enhancing decision-making capabilities \[1\]. Notably, AI can provide decision support through real-time prediction and simulation \[2\]. •The integration of AI necessitates significant organisational changes, including reimagining work practices and developing new talent strategies. This presents both an opportunity to drive transformation and a challenge in managing the change journey within the organisation \[3\]\[4\]. •Successfully scaling AI technologies within the organization can bring about transformative benefits, impacting not just internal operations but also improving citizen services. This requires a strategic focus on use cases that yield high return on investment and foster internal cultural changes \[5\]. Shifting focus from improving isolated processes to a systemic approach that aims to create better outcomes as a whole is part of this. •Establishing the necessary data and technical infrastructure is critical for deploying AI. Any inadequacies in this area pose significant risks to the success and effectiveness of AI initiatives \[1\] •The need for upskilling or hiring key staff, along with refining approaches toward AI governance, presents risks related to talent acquisition and management. Ensuring that staff are adequately prepared and have developed the fluency to work with AI is vital for mitigating these risks, as well as putting robust governance processes in place \[1\]\[6\]. •Reliance on rapidly evolving technologies like big data analytics, RPA, AI, and machine learning introduces risks associated with keeping pace with technological advancements and ensuring that these are effectively integrated into tax processes \[6\]. 1.DI\_AI-readiness-for-government.pdf (deloitte.com) 2.How AI Can Help Leaders Make Better Decisions Under Pressure (hbr.org) 3.DI\_CIR\_State-of-AI-4th-edition.pdf (deloitte.com) 4.us-ai-institute-state-of-ai-fifth-edition.pdf (deloitte.com) 5.The Impact of Generative AI in Finance | Deloitte US 6.working-and-thriving-in-a-digital-tax-world (deloitte.com) 7.Digital Revenue Agency of the Future | Deloitte Luxembourg | Public Sector 8.DUP\_AI-augmented-government.pdf (deloitte.com) Te Ao Māori S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Adopting a Māori lens when considering how we use AI to better serve Aotearoa. In order to foster oranga in all areas, it will be beneficial for us to think holistically when considering how to create enhanced outcomes for tangata whenua through the adoption of AI. He rei ngā niho, he paraoa ngā kauae – One must have the right principles for large undertakings. •Principles of Māori Data Sovereignty are designed to comprehensively cover all aspects of the collection, storage and use of Māori data. Notably, Te Mana Raraunga’s Māori Data Governance model can be used to support IR efforts to foster oranga for current and future generations \[2\]. C ritically, data is considered to be taonga and should be collected respectfully in ways that prioritise Māori needs, fostering kotahitanga (collective benefit). •Data storage considerations include ensuring Māori control as well as sufficient privacy and security measures, ensuring that tangata whenua are kaitiaki over their own data. Finally, the use of Māori data should benefit the Māori community, with the aim of reducing inequities over time and putting protection in place to prevent future harm. •Work in this space should be done in conjunction with Te Kāhui Tūhono within IR. K E Y I N S I G H T S Partnership & Engagement with Māori R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.Indigenous groups in NZ, US fear AI colonisation | Reuters 2.Te Kāhui Raraunga AI has potential to counteract unconscious bias, and its implementation at IR will require careful consideration of data storage locations. Collaborative opportunities with Te Kāhui Tūhono need to be explored and any decisions must be viewed through a risk lens. Interviewees: Anil, Mike, Brijesh, Mary, Cate. •T he adoption of A I tools presents a unique opportunity to build more trus t with Māori communities, providing principles of Māori data sovereignty are incorporated. Notably, there is a need to ensure Māori are kaitiaki of their own data and prioritise benefits bac k to the c ommunity. •We have a key opportunity to think at the level of the broader tax s ys tem, and set out to reduce inequitable outcomes for Māori communities through AI implementation. We c ould explore opportunities to inc orporate mātauranga Māori in AI systems through sustained community engagement. •Many AI applications require data to be stored in overseas data centers, which may conflict with principles of indigenous data sovereignty whereby Māori have the intrinsic right to control over their own data. Similarly, many Māori communities have expressed concern over the use of their language data to train Large Language Models for generative tasks without their consent, when they should be active decision-makers in the process \[1\]. •Potential for AI initiatives to perpetuate further harm, if insufficient consideration is given to te ao Māori. Particularly, care is needed to ensure that further bias is not encoded in AI models through the use of imbalanced datasets, and that generative AI tools do not misrepresent reo and tikanga in its outputs. Preventative steps should be communicated to the public. Inclusivity & Diversity S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Ensuring accessibility of our AI tools for the organisation and customers, and increasing inclusive outcomes. This consideration will be of utmost importance when incorporating AI into Te Pou o Te Tangata, or how our enterprise strategy is delivered. It aims to ensure that the entirety of our diverse customer base and workforce is included on the journey of AI implementation, and that accessibility is prioritised. •P eople living with dis abilities have expressed a great deal of interes t in how the us e of A I is pois ed to make their lives eas ier. I ndeed, there are many potential benefits of us e c as es s uch as a G enerative AI as sistant, for example, to help c us tomers more eas ily navigate through and interpret material when interac ting with our organis ation \[1 \]. •I nc lusivity by des ign c an be implemented in A I tools through a c ollaborative engagement proc ess. N otably, c ons ulting a divers e range of end-users will be c ritical to drive innovation and development, including hearing about their previous experiences of us ing A I applications and taking s uggestions for improvement on board. Spec ifically engaging with members of the neurodivergent c ommunity c an, for example, help our des igners s implify c ontent in ways that may s eem s mall but make the world of differenc e when it c omes to ac cessibility \[4 \]. •I nc lusive design c an also be enabled through tec hnical meas ures that target ac cessibility, s uch as s peech-to-text c apability or keyboard navigation. T hese are mos t effective when built in early on in the proc ess, s o that they are c entral to the des ign of a partic ular s olution rather than worked in jus t before produc tion \[1 \]. K E Y I N S I G H T S Use C ase Proposal & Prioritisation Framework Partnership & Engagement with Māori R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K A s technology becomes more integrated, efforts mus t be made to prevent exclusion of individuals who lac k ac cess, s kills, motivation, or trus t in digital c apabilities. I nterviewee: A nil. •AI, and specifically GenAI, is poised to help users more easily access relevant information, providing a key opportunity to improve the inclusivity of our channels \[1\]. To activate the full gains of AI tools, we should ensure that services are fully accessible, and carefully considered to all internal and external end-users, considering the diversity of the taxpayer base, providing multilingual options and support for those with disabilities. •Seeking diverse perspectives (manaakitanga) to inform the work we do, a key pillar of Te Pou o Te Tangata, will ensure our AI initiatives benefit all of our people. Internal workshops, with a team of staff from all backgrounds and levels of the organisation, will notably help to eliminate possible biases in AI algorithms from early in the design process, as any potential blind spots will quickly be identified by such a team \[2\]. •Without s uffic ient engagement and c o-design, there is a ris k that A I s olutions will only be benefic ial for c ertain s egments of our workforc e and c us tomers. T his c onnects to the broader is sue of digital exclusion, whereby c ertain groups may be les s able to us e digital tools (including those built with A I) due to a lac k of experience with tec hnology, among other fac tors \[3 \]. T his ris k is particularly pronounc ed in our organis ation's c ase, as tax administration s ervices need to be fully ac c essible to the wider population. •Particular consideration should be given to upskilling and engaging Māori, as is further dis c ussed in the foundations segment of this s trategic framework. O therwise, there is a ris k that A I tools will perpetuate harm for thes e c ommunities rather than being part of the s olution. 1.Designing GenAI for People with Disabilities (hbr.org) 2.us-ai-institute-state-of-ai-fifth-edition.pdf (deloitte.com) 3.OECD State of the art | (oecd-ilibrary.org) 4.Inclusive Design (deloittedigital.com.au) Related Resource 1: DI\_CDO-Playbook-2023 (deloitte.com) Related Resource 2: Entering the world of tax (deloitte.com) Related Resource 3: Scaling AI in government (deloitte.com) Our People What is the capabilitiy framework for AI Strategy? Change & Culture Te Tiriti Training & Fluency •Change & Culture: We understand the pivotal role that workplace culture and change management play in successful AI integration, and how it addresses our strategic consideration of ensuring effectiveness and efficiency within Inland Revenue. •Te Tiriti: We recognise the importance of upholding our commitments to Māori under Te Tiriti o Waitangi within our AI strategy, acknowledging the potential of AI to enhance our contributions to oranga tāngata, oranga whānau and oranga whenua. This is achieved through a continued engagement and partnership with Māori, ensuring the fair and transparent use of AI tools in tax services that respect and incorporate mātauranga Māori. •Training & Fluency: Cementing AI fluency within our organisation is vital to prepare us for the future of work, leverage the full potential of AI, and ensure our workforce is equipped to engage with AI initiatives and responsibly use AI tools in their tax-specific tasks. Change & Culture S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Fos tering a pos itive culture of AI adoption and innovation within our organis ation, through carefully planned change management and communications . For us to ac hieve the key outcome of staying ‘effective and efficient’ far into the future, a foc us on workforc e c ulture will be es s ential. T his builds into having a fit-for- purpos e c hange delivery model, with c hange management planning already ac tioned by the A I Working G roup. A rec ent s tudy s howed that nearly half of all organis ations experience diffic ulties in integrating A I into their daily workflows , highlighting the importance of fos tering a rec eptive workplac e c ulture where A I adoption is wides pread, new ways of working are fos tered and job s atisfaction is enhanc ed. •When s eeking to grow their internal A I c apability, organis ations tend to hire experienced professionals with exis ting A I knowledge when early on in their A I trans formation. H owever, developing a c hange management plan to s upport internal res ources to thrive through the organisation’s AI journey appears key to deriving s ustained benefits from A I initiatives, particularly due to s hortages in A I talent in the public s ector \[1 \]. •From a future of work pers pec tive, A I-enabled workflows will inc lude more time for foc us ed work, c ollaboration and pers onal time as AI takes up dec ision s upport, as sistant and admin tas ks. T his may lead to a s hift in employee res ponsibilities, whic h will be important to c ons ider integrating c hange management into our people s trategy. •T he c hange required to s hift towards new ways of working with A I c an potentially alarm employees and c ause c lashes with worker unions . T hese commonly occur when work c hanges rapidly without s ufficient training, adding additional workload and leading to a perc eived ris k to job s ec urity (particularly for thos e with entry-level roles). Suc h c onc erns can be addressed through a c areful investment in employee training, a c lear c ommunication plan whic h emphas ises the reality of the future of work, and updated role des c riptions where nec essary \[2 \]. K E Y I N S I G H T S Change Management & Communications Plan Organisational Design R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.OECD State of the art | (oecd-ilibrary.org) 2.Unions: AI and Automation (hbr.org) Related Resource 1: us-ai-institute-state-of-ai-fifth-edition.pdf (deloitte.com) The strategic implementation of AI in Inland Revenue will require a people-first approach, fostering a culture shift towards embracing AI while emphasising it is not a threat to job security but a tool in service of people. The application of AI should be designed with a mindset of being AI-first but not a one-size-fits-all solution, and efforts must align with Te Kāhui Tūhono's vision. A notable challenge includes seamlessly integrating AI into people's workflows. Interviewees: James, Mary, Cate, Anil, Tina, Brijesh, David. •We have the opportunity to underpin the next s tage of our A I journey with a c omprehensive change management plan. I n c onsolidating our exis ting internal teams that foc us on A I, we will be able to identify A I champions at all levels of the organis ation to drive wider adoption and fluenc y. •T hrough a c arefully c urated c ommunication plan, we c an enc ourage an attitude of c urious enthusiasm in s taff ac ross the organisation by c onveying key mes s ages and c ritical information about AI initiatives to relevant stakeholders as well as all employees, ens uring everyone is brought along on the journey. •In order to limit cultural misalignment, it will be important to assess workforce readiness to move towards AI usage and identify gaps and possible roadblocks early on. This will avoid any adoption pains and optimise the efficiency gains of implementing AI within IR. •If organisational culture is neglected as we pivot towards higher use of AI, staff may become disillusioned with the power of AI to enhance their day-to-day work, or we may not see sufficient adoption in the first place. This risk of employee dissatisfaction can be mitigated by a well-thought-out change management plan. •The adoption of AI may cause concern for our staff and associated unions, as role descriptions have the potential to change. Entry level roles are poised to change the most, with internal training pathways also shifting in focus. We will need to carefully consider this risk as the organisation continues on its journey with AI. Te Tiriti S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Ensuring we support the Crown to deliver on our commitments to Māori under te Tiriti o Waitangi. In the context of AI, this aligns with commitments made as a signatory to the Algorithm Charter. We aim to move c los er to our as pirations of improving oranga by bec oming te T iriti- bas ed, es tablishing this c ons ideration as a c ruc ial foundation for our approac h to A I . •The key principles of te tiriti are highly relevant when implementing AI initiatives. The protection of Māori interests and prevention of future harm should be front of mind, alongside the incorporation of mātauranga Māori in all initiatives. This is supported by strong partnership with Māori, and a willingness to prioritise participation and engagement with tangata whenua. Many Māori researchers are already involved in determining how AI can be made mana- enhancing and beneficial for Māori, and several academic workshops have been held across the country \[1\]. These efforts have been supported by Te Hiku Media, among others. These organisations are partnering to implement AI-enabled linguistic resources for te reo Māori, in collaboration with local iwi \[2\]. This ongoing initiative has received government funding \[3\] and provides a practical example of how effective partnership, underpinned by te Tiriti, can provide beneficial outcomes for Māori. •When planning an AI initiative, the three voices framework can help with the synthesis of information from different knowledge sources across complex systems. Specifically, the voice of intent (legislation), voice of expertise (research) and voice of experience (community perspective) all come together to form a holistic view of how collective benefit can be derived for all involved \[4\]. K E Y I N S I G H T S Te Tiriti Alignment R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.Māori Speech Hui 2021 | Speech research @ UoA (auckland.ac.nz), Wānanga for Māori Artificial Intelligence: University of Waikato 2.Papa Reo (tehiku.nz) 3.Te Hiku Media Awarded $13M 4. Three Voices Infographic (Deloitte.com) Related Resource 1: Ngā mātāpono o te Tiriti o Waitangi (teara.govt.nz) We should formulate our AI strategy with particular emphasis on working in alignment with Te Kāhui Tūhono, as this would promote the values embedded in Te Tiriti. Interviewee: Brijesh. •The contribution to oranga tāngata, oranga whānau and oranga whenua we have made has the potential to be greatly enhanced by AI initiatives that build on a meaningful, mutually beneficial partnership with Māori. There is an opportunity to engage with iwi Māori to raise awareness on the potential benefits of using AI for tax purposes, as well as to foster collaborative co-design, agreeing on system parameters of relevant AI tools and creating space in which mātauranga Māori can be shared. •Potential for tangata whenua to have a low appetite to engage with customer-facing AI solutions, due to a perception that AI will impact their right to control how services are delivered to them and how their information is utilised. This highlights the importance of transparency of AI tools and accountability, ensuring the AI tools are seen as trustworthy by both the organisation and the community. •There is a risk that, if partnership with Māori is seen as a one-time engagement process, the full benefit of our AI initiatives may not be derived for Māori communities. Instead, collaboration with tangata whenua should be seen as a foundational element of our AI framework that will enable its broader success. As AI tools continue to evolve, the connections to Te Tiriti will also change and need to be considered on an ongoing basis. Specifically, fairness and transparency should be prioritised to foster equitable outcomes and align with the associated equity principle of te Tiriti. Training & Fluency S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Cement AI fluency within our organisation to prepare for the future of work. We are committed to ensuring that the organisation has access to the right capabilities and personnel as work in the tax sector evolves. The AI Working Group already has several relevant initiatives in its backlog, including a Learning and Development plan and a Review of C apabilities. Tackling this consideration will be essential to foster ongoing learning in our workforce and keep pace with AI trends. •H alf of government agencies consider a lac k of internal c apability to be one of their bigges t barriers to taking advantage of A I \[4 \]. T his c an translate to low A I fluency and, c ommonly in the tax s ec tor, a s hortage of s killed profes s ionals with enough experience and available time to provide feedbac k on propos ed AI us e c ases. N otably, enabling tax profes sionals to effec tively work alongside data s c ientists c an lead to more ins ightful data analysis and dec ision-making \[5 \]. For example, we c ould inc lude non-technical workers as testers on pilot projects in s andbox environments, s oliciting their feedback regularly. •Res earch s uggests that employees who embrac e the power of working with A I tend to thrive \[6 \]. A s AI is implemented for the mos t tedious tasks, many tax profes sionals will be freed up from adminis trative tasks such as reporting and analys is to foc us on higher value ac tivities like executive management and c omplex problem s olving. E ducating our workforc e on how to apply new A I tools to domain-specific tas ks with appropriate oversight will bec ome of utmos t importanc e, as well as emphas ising the human as pect in AI integration and the c ontinued importance of c uriosity, c reativity and c ritical thinking \[2 \]. L earning pathways s hould additionally foc us on res ponsible use of A I , inc luding unders tanding the limitations of A I and ac counting for loc al regulations and trus tworthy A I best prac tice \[7 \]. K E Y I N S I G H T S Capability Assessment Lea rning & Development Plan Senior Leadership Fluency Programme R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K Training and fluency in AI are deemed essential, with a current low maturity level acknowledged. Importance is placed on people, highlighting capabilities and subject matter expertise. There is a strong presence already within the Data and Analytics space and a suggested reliance on partners for specialist tasks. A Shared Responsibility Model is suggested regarding training. Interviewees: James, Mike, Tina, Mary, David. •I nves ting in workforc e development to enhance AI fluency is essential for us to adapt to the evolving digital landscape and harness the full potential of A I \[1 \]\[2 \]\[3 \]. P rioritising A I notably c reates an opportunity to attract new, highly s killed talent to the organisation. P articularly, internships and immigration pathways will play an important role here. •We have an opportunity to develop a c entral knowledge management repository that c an s upport employees to engage with A I initiatives and ups kill in this regard. A ny developed training materials s hould be c omprehensive and engaging, and ongoing s upport s hould be provided to fos ter employee uptake. •T he c hallenge in attracting and retaining s killed personnel poses a s ignificant ris k, potentially hindering the effec tive implementation and growth of A I c apabilities within I R \[1 \]\[2 \]. T his c ould in turn impac t our ability to s afely adopt A I , as ins ufficient knowledge of how to work well with A I c reates a ris k of mis use and s uboptimal outcomes. •A s kills gap in A I and data s cience within the public s ector may limit the ability to develop and deploy effec tive A I s olutions, nec essitating foc ussed efforts in workforc e training and development \[3 \]. I t will be us eful for us to undertake a c apability assessment to identify where our workforc e s tands in its knowledge of A I tools and tec hniques, inc luding the s kills needed to work with A I , and align on an ac tion plan to develop internal capability or s eek available talent externally in applic able areas. 1.Building the digital revenue agency of the future 2.Artificial intelligence entering the world of tax 3.Crafting an AI strategy for government leaders 4.state-of-ai-fifth-edition.pdf (deloitte.com) 5.Us tax working and thriving in a digital tax world 6.thriving-in-a-digital-tax-world (deloitte.com) 7.Training next-gen AI talent How We Work Whatisthe capabilitiyframework for AI Strategy? Innovation & Partnerships Policy Functional Capability •Functional Capability:Ensuring we have a consolidated functional capabilityis vital to enhance our technical preparedness to adopt AI solutions, balancethe automation of routine tasks, and empower our employees for higher-valuework, thereby enhancing Inland Revenue's operational effectiveness andadaptability in the digital era. •Policy:Given the crucial role of AI policies in seamlessly integrating AI withinour operations,we must focus on framing internal policies for AI tobalance complianceneeds, ensure data integrity, and manage risks associated with data privacyand protection. This focus supports the broader theme of how we work,shaping it for an increasingly digital and AI driven context. •Innovation & Partnerships:Focusing on how we apply AI to enhanceouroperational efficiency, we need to foster diverse partnerships and utilisenoveltechnologies, balancing the innovation drive with ethical standards,privacy anddata integrity considerations. Functional Capability S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Ensure we are prepared to thrive in the next stage of its journey with AI from a technical standpoint. Our organisational functional capability is a crucial consideration in formulating an approach to AI, in order to ensure our technical preparedness to adopt AI solutions and support cross-functional capability across government. The focus is on how the appropriate technology can made available and leveraged to augment human capabilities across the business groups, thereby impacting our operational effectiveness and adaptability in the digital era. •T he importance of a s c alable and adaptable approach to A I is c lear. M oving beyond initial pilots to full s cale A I deployment requires a s trategic foc us on data management and tec hnological infrastructure \[3 \]. •E nhanc ed func tional c apability enables high quality A I- enabled s olutions, whic h c an in turn c an fos ter greater produc tivity and enhanced s taff experience. A rec ent s tudy looked at the impac t of G enerative A I on c ustomer s ervice c entres, finding that produc tivity improvements were high, partic ularly for les s-experienced workers . With an A I as s istant to pinpoint the relevant parts of the doc umentation and draft res ponses for a given query, agents were able to res olve 1 3.8% more c hats per hour \[5 \]. T his us e c ase has also been s hown to fos ter better c ons istency in s taff outputs and decisions made \[6 \]. I n our c ontext, A I has the potential to inc rease accessibility for tas ks in the tax func tion that were previously only able to be c ompleted by s enior s taff. H owever, these benefits will only be realis ed if func tional c apability is s ufficient to s upport P oCs, pilots and eventually productionised s olutions in this area. K E Y I N S I G H T S AI Environment Scan R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.AI augmented government 2.DI CGO state of AI for gov 3.DI CGO state of ai for gov 4.Us tax working and thriving in a digital tax world 5.Workers gain the most from generative AI | MIT 6.Generative AI (forbes.com) Stakeholder feedback suggested a need for coordinated and efficient utilisation of resources with a specific focus on timely and context-driven application. This is set against the background of system stewardship, with emphasis on mitigating risks in case of system errors. Furthermore, there's a strong indication towards streamlining customer communication, engaging advanced digital technologies, and fostering processing efficiencies. A notable use case for AI is in the complex fraud area. Manual efforts for tasks such as annual tax risk reviews should be reduced with AI facilitating both data input and decision-making processes. Interviewees: Mary, Cate, Anil, James, Dan, Mike, Lisa. •Consolidating functional capability will help us to optimise resource allocation and operational efficiency across the business groups by implementing a variety of AI solutions in order to balance the automation of routine tasks with the empowerment of employees for higher-value work \[1\]\[2\]. •We have the opportunity to engage with a range of third party vendors to bring in the technical services required for service delivery. However, we may like to maintain a level of technical capability internally in order to support the development of any high-risk use cases which involve highly sensitive data or require custom features. As such, this strategic consideration can help to inform discussions as we decide whether to build certain solutions in-house or buy them from external providers. •T here is a key ris k as sociated with not leveraging A I c apability. We already fac e AI-enabled c ybersecurity threats, and thes e are only s et to inc rease. C ons olidating our ac cess to the tec hnology needed to drive res ponsible AI implementation will ac t as a layer of protec tion from thes e threats. T his as pect is als o worth bearing in mind as we c hoos e how we will play in the A I s pace, s uc h as whether the organisation ac ts as a leader in adopting A I us e cases or a follower who waits to s ee A I s olutions tried and tes ted by others first. •The risk of stagnation in ‘pilot purgatory’ highlights the need for a strategic approac h to s c ale AI solutions from pilot to full implementation, ens uring ongoing advanc ement and adaptation \[3 \]\[4 \]. Policy S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Confirming how we will use policy to support the seamless integration of AI capabilities into its workflows. Our AI policies will play a crucial role in framing how the organisation works. It ensures that AI applications are integrated seamlessly into existing frameworks, aligning with both internal governance and external regulator requirements. This integration is vital for maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of our operations in an increasingly digital and AI driven landscape. •Effective governance structures are essential to instill trust and confidence in AI systems, especially in addressing issues of bias and discrimination \[2\]. •Establishing a centre of excellence or similar structures can help in developing best practices, sharing knowledge, and ensuring the quality of AI deployments \[2\] •Documenting and enforcing machine learning operations (MLOps) is crucial for the ethical and effective deployment of AI, as it facilitates addressing any issues with AI models. \[5\] •Embracing new operational models and processes is vital for leveraging AI in a way that drives sustained quality, innovation and value creation\[5\]. K E Y I N S I G H T S AI Policies & Guidelines R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.Building the digital revenue agency of the future 2.DI crafting an AI strategy for govt leaders 3.Ddtl tax artificial intelligence in tax 4.Us Deloitte the implications of generative 5.State of ai for government T he polic y consideration s tresses the s ignificance of defining what c ons titutes A I vers us G enAI and the varied works treams, ris ks, and prac tical results associated with eac h. I t als o emphasises the governance of the implementation proc ess, ens uring appropriate c onversations with well-informed individuals to leverage their expert knowledge. I nterviewees: C ate, T ina. •By leveraging AI, we can enhance compliance and encourage voluntary participation in the tax system, much like the Danish model, which successfully integrated sharing economy transactions into the tax framework \[1\]. However balancing the compliance costs and burdens for stakeholders is a key challenge in this approach. •The operational policy must address the quality and management of data, as AI’s effectiveness hinges on high quality, consistent and accurate data. Ensuring data integrity is vital and introducing new operational policies presents the opportunity to reset and create better organisational practices for data collection and storage\[2\]. •Policy and guidelines must be put in place to determinewho is responsible for thedecisions madeor derived using AI. •Policies need to account for the risks associated with data privacy and protection, especially considering regulations which place restriction on automated decision making and profiling. \[3\] •Operational policy must include mechanisms to continuously evaluate and mitigate biases in AI algorithms and secure sensitive financial data against unauthorised access or breaches. \[4\] •There is a need for clear documentation and enforceable processes to address ethical risks, such as bias or misuse of AI, underlining the importance of robust governance structures.\[2\] Innovation & Partnerships S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Leveraging our relationships to enhance our AI capability while using our maturity to lead and support the wider public sector. It’s key for us to focus our strategic considerations for innovation and partnerships in AI on leveraging diverse ecosystems and integrating digital solutions. This approach is pivotal in maintaining a competitive position and enhancing operational efficiency within the tax system. •C ollaboration with diverse partners, inc luding industry and ac ademia, c an s pur innovative s olutions, as s een in examples from government agencies us ing A I for public benefit \[4 \]\[6 \]. •While partners hips are valuable, developing differentiating in-hous e c apabilities ensures s ustained c ompetitive advantage and s trategic autonomy \[1 \]. •E thic al frameworks and toolkits are essential in A I implementation, promoting privacy, reduc ing bias, and ens uring diverse and inc lusive design teams \[4 \]. •E ffec tive c ollaboration aligns with the organis ation's broader bus iness goals, enhancing overall performance and driving digital transformation \[5 \] •T o exc el we c ould dec ide to be agile and reac tive to innovations led by other organisations or we c ould c hoose to lead and innovate new tec hnologies with partners . T he initial option risks failure to adopt quickly enough and the latter option ris ks introducing technology unfit for purpos e res pectively, however each approach has high possible reward. K E Y I N S I G H T S C ross-agency Initiatives Natural Systems Guidance R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.DI\_CIR\_State-of-AI-4th-edition.pdf (deloitte.com) 2.Scaling AI in government How to reach the heights of enterprise wide adoption of AI (deloitte.com) 3.us-tax-working-and-thriving-in-a-digital-tax-world.pdf (deloitte.com) 4.Crafting an AI strategy for government leaders | Deloitte Insights 5.DI\_building-the digital-revenue-agency.pdf (deloitte.com) 6.DUP\_AI-augmented-government.pdf (deloitte.com) A common theme to emerge was the potential of cross-government guidance and alignment with OECD Tax Admin 3.0 policies. The utility of Shared Responsibility Model is highlighted, with an underlying need to maintain the integrity of the tax system. Interviewees: Mike, Mary, Cate, James, Tina. •High-achieving organisations, including government agencies, benefit from a diverse ecosystem of partnerships, leading to better AI implementation and improved organisational outcomes \[1\]\[2\]. We have the opportunity to work with other government agencies through the AoG AI Programme of Work, as well as in collaboration with ecosystem partners to better deliver AI-enabled services to New Zealanders. •Effective communication and collaboration, often through formal training programs, enable tax departments to evolve into more competent advisers, enhancing both risk management and department performance. Learning and sharing with partners offers significant opportunity to accelerate maturity progression\[3\]. •Deciding how to leverage each strategic partnership is as critical as the choice of partners. This involves balancing a streamlined approach with the need for diverse perspectives and capabilities \[1\]. •While collaboration is key, there's a risk in over-relying on external partners, potentially compromising our ability to maintain any competitive advantage and independence \[1\]. •Collaborations, especially those involving data sharing and AI implementation, must navigate ethical frameworks and privacy concerns, ensuring adherence to standards and mitigating bias \[4\]\[5\]. •The integration of AI technologies from various partners can pose challenges in terms of compatibility with existing systems, maintaining data integrity and security, and legal implications \[5\]. Our Approach Whatisthe capabilitiyframework for AI Strategy? Responsible, Fair & Transparent International Best Practice Secure & Confidential •Responsible, Fair & Transparent: We are committed to designing and operating our AI systems in a socially responsible way, providing fair and equal treatment for all and maintaining a level of transparency that all users can understand and trust. •Secure & Confidential:As the custodians of New Zealand's tax data, wemustprioritise implementing Trustworthy AI principles to ensure robustsecurity andconfidentiality measures, which are intrinsic to maintaining trustandconfidence. •International Best Practice: Leveraging insights from international standards and collaborating with international bodies will enable us to design AI-related frameworks well-tailored to New Zealand's context, while facilitating efficient learning transfer and enhancing organisational transparency at Inland Revenue. Responsible, Fair & Transparent S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T A s ocio-technical ecos ys tem enabling AI that is ethical, lawful and technically robus t. I t is achieved through governance of AI ris ks acros s people, proces s es and technology – in a s ys tematic fas hion, leveraging an impact- bas ed tiering approach. A s the adoption of A I grows , s o too does the need for fos tering trus t and ac c ountability. C ompared to private s ectororganisations, governmentagencies fac e additional legaland ris k c ons traints when itc omes toA I adoption.I t is imperative toens ure everyone c an understand and s c rutinise how their data is being us ed by us , how A I dec isions are being made, and who is res pons ible for them. T his is c onsistent with our Stewards hip role – as s et out in the E nterprise Strategy, we have a res ponsibility to ens ure that any A I s olutions implemented are trus tworthy to be fit for purpos e today and tomorrow. •N ew Zealand government agencies have es tablished a foundation for res pons ible AI through initiatives like the A lgorithm C harter and the A I G overnance website from A I Forum N Z \[1 \]. Whils t these res ources are helpful, they need to be tailored to ens ure there is a s uffic ient level of detail and relevance to our unique c ontext. T his is es pecially important when thinking about who s hould be res ponsible from an organis ational pers pective and s triking the right balanc e between enhancing and protec ting tax and s oc ial policy s ystems.T o ens ure good s tewardship, we s hould take an I R s pecific approach to as pects s uch as an A I Risk Assessment (tailored to our needs ), and M L Ops (tailored to the development s ystems in play at I R). •A dditionally, global frameworks may be leveraged. M os tnotably, the N I ST A I Risk M anagement Framework whic h hasbeen adopted by other agenc ies in the N ew Zealand publics ector. \[2 \] T he rec ently published I SO 42001:2023 AIMS c an be leveraged alongside N IST to develop a robus t A I ris k and c ontrols library in the near term, and work towards c ompliance in the longer term \[3 \]. •I t is important that an A I Risk M anagement Framework be es tablished. O ur ris k team mus t be aware of how to manage this framework and potential ris ks, but awarenes s and c ompliance mus t also extend across all of I R \[4 \]. K E Y I N S I G H T S AI Risk Framework | AI Risk Assessment AI Governance Framework |AI Governance Pilot R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S 1.AI ForumNZ -AI Governance 2.AI Risk Management Framework | NIST 3.ISO 42001:2023 AIMS Standard 4.AI in GovernmentServices O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K We must be responsible, fair and transparent in our application of AI. This involves effective risk management against malicious actors and bias, maintaining the integrity of the tax system, and ensuring rigorous testing and explainability of AI models. The credibility and trustworthiness of the AI system is crucial, hence, security, anonymity regarding Personal Identifiable Information (PII), and an absence of bias in practice are paramount. Also, engaging experts and improving knowledge, especially among decision-makers, on ethics and data governance is essential to avoid potential public relations issues related to AI use. Interviewees: James, Cate, Anil, Tina, Lisa. •We have the opportunity to introduce guardrails embedding Trustworthy AI principles early in AI journey, ensuring AI systems are responsible, reliable, fair and transparent. •Responsible: Create and operate the technology in a socially responsible manner, with clear accountability of who is responsible for decisions made using AI systems. •Robust & Reliable: Confirm that AI functions properly beyond pilot stage, producing consistently accurate, relevant outputs. •Fair: Guard against illegal and unethical discrimination, ensuring equitable treatment of all. •Transparent: Help users (IR employees / the public) understand how their data can be used and how AI systems make decisions. Most organisations are still grappling with the risks associated with traditional AI, and Generative AI brings renewed attention to these. We should seek a balanced view of value creation opportunities with risks involved. Examples include: ▪Generation of misleading or false content, potentially causing confusion or harm to users who blindly rely on the generated output – e.g. our employees using Generative AI knowledge tools without proper training. ▪Users may not be aware that specific IR content was machine-generated. We must communicate how the system works and build transparency and trust. ▪Bias in the underlying data is a risk that can be amplified when AI models are trained on them – e.g. public-facing AI assistant less able to answer questions from certain socio-economic groups due to lack of past examples, perpetuating barriers to use. Secure & Confidential S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T To maintain trust and confidence, it is paramount in today's data-driven landscape to ensure the security and confidentiality of AI. It is important to implement robust measures to safeguard sensitive information and protect against risks, including data breaches, that may cause physical and/or digital harm. Privacy must also be respected, and consumer and employee data should not be used beyond its intended and stated use. This is also consistent with our Effective and Efficient role – as set out in the Enterprise Strategy, we have a responsibility to use our knowledge, resources and capabilities wisely. •There is increased guidance from the Privacy C ommissioner on Artificial Intelligence and the Information Privacy Principles \[1\]. These may provide a useful starting place in understanding our security and confidentiality needs. •Additionally, global frameworks may be leveraged. Most notably, the NIST AI Risk Management Framework which has been adopted by other agencies in the New Zealand public sector \[2\].The recently published ISO42001:2023 AIMS can be leveraged alongside NIST to develop a robust AI risk and controls library in the near term, and work towards compliance in the longer term \[3\]. •To ensure effective and efficient leadership, an IR specific approach should be taken to ensure confidentiality and integrity is maintained. This could be achieved through tools such as the AI Impact Assessment (tailored to our needs), and MLOps (tailored to the development systems in play at IR). K E Y I N S I G H T S AI Risk Framework | AI Risk Assessment AI Governance Framework |AI Governance Pilot R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K We should prioritise risk management, information security and elimination of bias, to preserve the integrity of the tax system. Ensuring model explainability, stringent testing and maintaining the anonymity and security of Personally Identifiable Information (PII) is crucial. Developing deep expertise and building capability relating to ethics and data governance are important points. It is vital to accommodate the evolving advances yet ensuring sensitive data is securely held for the credibility of both the tax system and the organisation. Interviewees: James, Anil, Tina, Lisa. •We have the opportunity to introduce guardrails embedding Trustworthy AI principles early in our AI journey, ensuring AI systems are secure and confidential. •Preserving Privacy: Train AI models on representative data without compromising sensitive sources of training data. •Safe & Secure: Ensure that the technology, and the data that feeds into it, is protected from risks that may cause individual and/or collective physical, emotional environmental, and/or digital harm. Most organisations are still grappling with the risks associated with traditional AI, and Generative AI brings renewed attention to these. We should seek a balanced view of value creation opportunities with risks involved. Examples include: •The risk of individual and / or collective physical, emotional and/or digital harm – e.g. prompt injection attack leading to data leakage and/or inaccurate tax advice (due to prompt/data poisoning). •Where employing cloud architecture to host or run AI systems, this is subject to the same security risks as all cloud technology. Most notably, the risk of data breach, which results in a loss of customer trust, reputational impact, as well as regulatory fines & penalties. •The risk of re-identification of data subjects in an anonymised dataset, using AI technology, by external players or employees (insider threat). •AI technology is data hungry, and it can be tempting to use data for purposes beyond its initial intended use – resulting in data being used in ways notunderstood by customers and employees, or not permitted by agreements with them. 1.AI-and-the-Information-Privacy-Principles.pdf 2.AI Risk Management Framework | NIST 3.ISO 42001:2023 AIMS Standard International Best Practice S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Using global context to inform our navigation of AI-related risks as New Zealand’s tax authority. International standards will set a benchmark that we may aim to meet or surpass when defining our approach to AI. This consideration feeds into Te Pou o te Tangata, in that it involves seeking diverse perspectives to inform the work we do. •We c an draw upon ins ights from existing ris k s tandards from overs eas, s uch as the N IST AI Risk M anagement Framework. T his framework targets the des ign and implementation of trus tworthy AI in prac tice, and is already being us ed by other N ew Zealand public sector agencies inc luding ACC. Specifically, the c ore of the framework introduc es four elements that s hould be s us tained to ens ure adequate risk management. N amely, thes e inc lude mapping ris ks to relevant real-world c ontext, meas uring ris k impac t along multiple dimensions and managing ris k mitigation through prioritisation, all underpinned by a governing c ulture of ris k management \[3 \]. •A I princ iples defined by the O ECD c an als o provide a helpful bas eline, as s everal mirror our own as pirations, inc luding enhancing wellbeing for people and planet and res ponsibly navigating the ris ks as s tewards of the tax s ys tem and as s ociated s ocial policies. T hese guidelines also outline how A I c an be bes t implemented in the public s ec tor s etting to s upport digital government, inc luding frameworks to maintain trans parency of public sector data- driven dec ision-making \[4 \]. T his may build into our thinking around T ax A dministration 3 .0 , whic h prioritises digital trans formation to integrate with the natural s ystems that taxpayers interact with daily \[5 \], targeting tax rule management through A I. K E Y I N S I G H T S AI Risk Framework |AI Governance Framework R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.WEF\_Reimagining\_Regulation\_Age\_AI\_2020.pdf (weforum.org) 2.White House AI Executive Order | Brookings 3.nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ai/NIST.AI.100-1.pdf 4.AI-Report-Online.pdf (oecd-opsi.org) 5.Tax Administration 3.0 (oecd-ilibrary.org) Tax Admin 3.0 is a key area of focus •There may be an opportunity to partner with an international body to co-design AI-related frameworks, building on existing standards and ensuring relevance to the specific New Zealand context. In 2020, the New Zealand government partnered with experts from the World Economic Forum in a pilot project to design a fit-for-purpose governance framework, producing recommendations to be fed into future work \[1\]. Any further collaboration in this space has the potential to be highly beneficial to IR, as international best practices can be directly incorporated into local strategy. •Learning and sharing enables efficient learning transfers as well as improves organisational transparency. We could leverage this to solidify relationships and capability •The current international AI regulation landscape is in a period of great change. The EU currently relies on existing legislation (GDPR, Digital Services and Digital Markets Act) to govern algorithms, but the AI Act with its associated standards of quality and safety is expected to be passed into law over the next few months . The US, on the other hand, does not currently have any legislation on AI usage at the federal level, and instead has guidelines outlined in the AI Bill of Rights and President Biden’s recent Executive Order on the topic \[2\]. These different approaches create a complex environment to navigate when seeking to identify best practices internationally. Data & Digital Whatisthe capabilitiyframework for AI Strategy? Digital Ecosystem Data & Information Foundations Architecture •Architecture:It is imperative that we continue to ensure a robustandadaptable technology infrastructure that can not only handle increasedAIworkloads, but also be flexible enough to leverage multi- cloudtechnologiesand manage potential risks associated with outdated systems, to support IR's journey towards being an AI-empoweredorganisation. •Data/Information Foundations: We recognise that establishing robust data foundations directly underpins our ability to effectively deploy AI, enhancing decision-making, processes and cybersecurity, within the wider context of our Data & Digital segment. These include considerations for not just transactional data but information and knowledge as well. •Digital Ecosystem:To successfully implement our AI strategy, weneedrecognise the importance of establishing a diverse and well- manageddigitalecosystem, harnessing relationships within it for actionable insights,whilemitigating risks of overdependence on specific vendors. Architecture S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Ens uring that we have the architecture and s ys tems in place to s upport the trans ition to an AI empowered organis ation. I n developing an approach to A I implementation, arc hitectural c onsiderations are c ritic al. A n appropriate arc hitecture mus t be es tablished to manage the projec ted A I workload, fac toring in high bandwidth, low latenc y, and flexible arc hitectures. T his extends to the multi c loud s trategy, examining the s uitability of trans itioning c omputational s ys tems to the c loud, with an eye to data analys is enhanc ements. Furthermore, realis ing a metadata- informed analytics techniques nec essitates c areful preparation of exis ting and future data through rigorous c leansing proc esses. •Before implementing AI systems, we must comprehensively assess our current technology architecture. This not only includes technical compatibility but also whether the existing setup can handle expected AI workloads, especially when transitioning from a pilot phase to a production solution. These preparatory measures are crucial to avoid overburdening the system and ensure seamless integration of AI applications. •Prior to deploying AI solutions, we must test and adapt our technology architecture. This ensures it can handle the demands of such advanced technologies. Testing and modifying the architecture prior to rolling out solutions are crucial steps to guarantee a successful implementation of AI across IR \[2\]. •Successful AI integration heavily depends on high bandwidth, low- latency, and flexible technical architecture such as multi cloud. Beyond merely scaling up a proof of concept, this includes implementing robust systems capable of handling increased AI workloads and assuring data quality \[3\]. •Tax systems are forever evolving due to changing policy mandates. It is key that we adopt a modular and flexible approach to system architecture, allowing for rapid adaptations and improvements as and when necessary. This can help future-proof our AI capabilities and ensure they can harness emerging technologies as they evolve. K E Y I N S I G H T S Architecture Review | Platform & Automation (MLOps) R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.DI\_building-the digital-revenue-agency.pdf (deloitte.com) 2.DI\_Crafting-an-AI-strategy-for-govt-leaders.pdf (deloitte.com) 3.Scaling AI in government | Deloitte Insights The architecture should be enabled to consume data and provide insightful information, leveraging the power of existing cloud infrastructure like AWS Sydney. Furthermore, the preference from some team members is towards AI solutions as a service, with an expectation for vendors to add significant value. Interviewees: James, Mary, Cate, Mike, Malcolm. •The use of outdated or poorly documented systems within the technical architecture of IR can be a hindrance, as these constraints could limit our ability to manage risks and adapt to the required capabilities for successful AI implementation.\[1\] •The effective deployment of AI may require a heavy redesign or improvement of technical architecture, this could be an opportunity to consider high bandwidth, low-latency, and flexible architectures to allow for efficient AI application deployment.\[3\] •The implementation of AI at scale requires a different array of organisational capabilities compared to smaller scale projects or proofs of concept. It would therefore be challenging to translate the success of small pilots to a larger scale without also evolving the supporting architecture. •If current architecture is significantly based on outdated machine languages, it may pose challenges as these systems could potentially be incompatible with emerging technologies like artificial intelligence. If not addressed, these technical impediments could potentially lead to financial burdens and create unfavourable outcomes for citizen services in the long-term. •Scaling from pilot projects to production level AI applications is a major shift that would require us to have infrastructure capable of handling the increased workload. If existing capacities cannot meet the required infrastructure demands, both in terms of processing power and bandwidth, we may face significant performance issues. •Dependence on a single vendor for AI technologies can lead to limitations in flexibility and adaptability. This could inhibit the ability to incorporate new advancements in technology or switch to better solutions, thereby posing a risk to the long-term success of our AI initiatives. Data (& Information)Foundations S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T High performance AI requires high quality, accurate and accessible data, information and knowledge. Data and information foundations are a critical strategic consideration as they support the accessibility, quality and security of the vast amounts of data necessary for AI solutions to function optimally. This directly ties into the larger Data & Digital pillar, as effective data foundations work in harmony with our architecture and digital ecosystem, underpinning our ability to harness AI’s potential to enhance key processes, enable insightful decision-making and guard against cyber threats. •We must approach data/information as both our most significant advantage and challenge \[1\]. It's vital to deploy resources to convert these vast data inflows into actionable insights. We must understand how to unlock the potential of new types of data while ensuring citizens' privacy and serving the public good. •A concrete data/information strategy and governance model are imperative \[2\]. It involves outlining clear roles and accountabilities for business and system owners and stewards. This model also provides guidelines for dealing with security, privacy and compliance issues, ensuring the data’s integrity, consistency and reliability. •Data/Information is a crucial ingredient for successful AI implementation \[3\]. Agencies need to distinguish and gain access to the crucial datasets for their operations. It is particularly important to develop platforms to access the identified data effectively. These platforms can improve the readiness and success rates of deploying AI in tax duties \[3\]. K E Y I N S I G H T S Roll-out Plan for Pilots & PoCs Technical Maturity Assessment R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.Building the Digital Revenue Agency of the Future | Deloitte Luxembourg | Public Sector 2.DI\_Crafting-an-AI-strategy-for-govt-leaders.pdf (deloitte.com) 3.Scaling AI in government | Deloitte Insights We demonstrate sound data and information maturity, having made significant investments into modernisation, which positions us favourably compared to other government agencies. The extensive renewal of systems ensures processes efficiently convert raw data into a format suitable for analytics. However, the need for strengthened data governance and quality management processes is crucial, with an emphasis on maintaining accuracy and relevance. Furthermore, channel content data consistency is highlighted to support corresponding use cases. Interviewees: Mary, Cate, Mike, Tina, James, Dan. •With the right data and information strategy, there exists a significant opportunity to unlock the hidden power of data. By identifying relevant datasets and creating platforms for data accessibility, the quality and effectiveness of AI can be vastly improved \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]. •Revenue agencies have a unique opportunity to treat data and information as an asset. By investing in data quality and governance, agencies can ensure AI enhanced taxation and compliance processes, thereby facilitating better decision making and more accurate tax collection \[1\]\[2\]. •The sheer volume and variety of data/information can pose a serious challenge to revenue agencies. Overcoming this challenge requires an investment in processes that validate and enhance data quality. Inaccurate or poor-quality data can undermine AI effectiveness and lead to incorrect tax outcomes. \[1\] •There's an inherent risk of being overloaded by the vast volume of data generated by digital transactions. By not being equipped to handle these data flows, the effectiveness of AI outcomes could be compromised \[1\] •Inadequate data/info governance and unclear roles or accountability could lead to security vulnerabilities or compliance issues. Mismanagement of data can lead to unauthorised access or data misuse, posing significant risks to the operation and reputation of the agency \[2\] •Failing to identify relevant datasets or provide platforms for their access poses a risk for AI implementation at IR. Inadequate access to vital data could limit the potential of AI initiatives or lead to subpar results. Moreover, if data is used to answer basic questions rather than develop deep insights, there is a risk of under-utilising the sources present \[3\] Digital Ecosystem S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T We will need to utilise wider digital partners and technologies to ensure successful implementation of AI. For a robust approach to AI implementation, considering the digital ecosystem is essential as it not only provides the necessary breadth and diversity but also safeguards the organisation against overdependence and limits on innovation. Under the Data & Digital pillar, this aspect recognises the significance of having a healthy mix of partners, technologies, and data sources for continuous growth and competitiveness in the evolving AI landscape. •A well-orchestrated data ecosystem can offer the opportunity to unlock the next level of actionable insights. Interoperability, enabled by a well-thought-out ecosystem, can provide richer insights and more effective service to citizens. Our approach to AI should therefore focus on harnessing the potential of the relationships within this ecosystem to leverage data for faster, better decision- making \[1\]. •Trust forms a key ingredient for a sustainable digital ecosystem, especially when it revolves around data. All participants need to assure that data is protected as if it were their own. Our culture could also play a vital role in its willingness to adopt new technologies and adapt to changes in its operating system \[1\]. •To harness the full potential of AI, it's paramount to establish a diverse digital ecosystem. This ecosystem could range from existing technical solutions to partners across various sectors, including academia, industry, and governmental bodies. Such diversity provides technological agility to access a broad spectrum of AI-based solutions and helps avoid the risks associated with vendor lock or overdependence on a single entity. This, in turn, can expedite progress towards AI implementation at scale and enhance organisational readiness to adapt to any changes in the operating ecosystem \[2\]\[3\]. •The implementation of Tax Admin 3.0, through integration with taxpayers' natural systems using AI, promises a revolutionary shift towards real-time taxation. This approach enhances compliance, reduces administrative burdens, and addresses current structural limitations in tax governance, ultimately creating a more efficient, inclusive, and streamlined tax administration. K E Y I N S I G H T S Procurement & Vendor Management Roll-out Plan for Pilots & PoCs | AI Sandbox Ecosystem Partner Collaboration R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.DI\_CDO-Playbook-2023 (deloitte.com)2.Scaling AI in government | Deloitte Insights3.DI\_CIR\_State-of-AI-4th-edition.pdf (deloitte.com) We recognise the crucial role of a robust digital ecosystem in our AI strategic considerations. A key consensus is the necessity for clean, useful data as a primary foundation before layering any AI applications on top. Both the use of external partners for technology development and managing applications handling Personally Identifiable Information (PII) internally were emphasised. The potential role of third parties is acknowledged, with the understanding that these partners could help consolidate data from different sources as well as assist in employing AI technology. Interviewees: Dan, James, Anil, Tina, Lisa. •Leveraging data ecosystems can offer the opportunity to unlock the next level of actionable insights, serving citizens more effectively and enabling richer decision making. This calls for an emphasis on not only developing internal capabilities, but also on building robust technology, ecosystems that capitalise on diverse external entities with distinct strengths \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]. •Balancing the risk and reward of data sharing is a common challenge in the public sector and requires considerable trust amongstall participants to ensure sustained data sharing. The continuous advancement and adoption of new technologies, standards and ethics for data use can help ease these challenges and accelerate sharing, but maintaining trust will be a persisting consideration \[1\]. •When interacting with the broader digital ecosystem during procurement, we should aim to clearly articulate business needs to vendors and establish suitable frameworks so that desired outcomes can be met while ensuring integrity and control. •By embedding compliance into business transactions with Tax Admin 3.0 and integrating tax processes with Natural Systems, efficiency is amplified, and tax gaps are minimised. These improvements encourage timely tax fulfilment, directly curbing uncollected debts and revolutionising the taxation framework. •Trust is key to the health of the digital ecosystem, however it can also be a risk if not properly managed. Trust can be established through good governance models and clear rule agreement among all ecosystem members \[1\]. •Relying heavily on a few vendors or partners can lead to overdependence or ‘vendor lock’, stifling innovation and causing difficulties in transition to new vendors in the future, which could trigger substantial disruption. A diverse ecosystem and integrating with a variety of vendors, including those emerging or niche, could mitigate this risk \[3\]. •The management of the relationships within the digital ecosystem is an essential element, posing a risk if not executed effectively. Deciding how to leverage each relationship is just as important as deciding who and how many to have within the ecosystem. Properly managed, these relationships can enhance operation \[3\]. Landscape Whatisthe capabilitiyframework for AI Strategy? Authorising Environment Regulatory Landscape Political & Public Sector Landscape •Wider Regulatory Landscape:We recognise the importance of monitoring andadapting to global AI regulation trends and changes,in order toensure future-focused regulatory compliance and uphold the stewardship of New Zealand'stax system. •Political & Public Sector Landscape:Navigating the mutable political landscapeand public sector expectations is crucial in our AI strategy, as it informs ourinitiative's flexibility, public acceptability, and alignment with government andtaxpayer expectations. •Authorising Environment:We hold a unique legislative authority thatenables us to pioneer AI applications in the public sector, making ourunderstanding and navigation of the authorising environment crucial to thesuccessful and ethical implementation of our AI strategy. Wider Regulatory Landscape S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Planning for the implications of New Zealand’s evolving compliance environment on AI activities at IR. We are dedicated to creating a wellbeing legacy for those to come, as well as demonstrating integrity of process as well as outcome (mahi tika). To achieve this, it will be essential to align with applicable AI standards and ensure the use of AI does not jeopardise compliance with various legislation and legal frameworks including tax, intellectual property, copyright law, and content/ data ownership across various jurisdictions. The AI Working Group has already drafted internal guidelines along these lines. •Regulatory c ompliance s hould be future-focussed - not only appreciating today’s legislation but also proactively antic ipating policies to follow. We s hould monitor for c hanges in regulatory policy that c ould impact our A I initiatives, and particularly for the introduc tion of any A I- related legislation. T hus far, pathways to A I regulation have been s imilar internationally, with c ountries moving from inves tigating A I c apabilities to ac tively growing the indus try \[4 \]. A s many governments begin looking at how to s hape and regulate A I development, policies may diverge bas ed on loc al fac tors. We s hould watc h this regulatory lands cape c arefully, to pre-emptively ensure c ompliance. •We s hould develop particularly robust proc edures around the us e of G enerative A I. I n addition to the privac y protec tions outlined in the P rivacy Act 2 020, s pecific G enerative AI guidelines the P rivacy C ommissioner earlier this year foc us on the importance of human overs ight, inc luding validation to ens ure accuracy and c onfidentiality, as well as feedbac k mec hanisms to enable improvement \[5 \]. K E Y I N S I G H T S AI Standards AI Governance Standard Operating Procedures R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.Algorithm-Charter-2020\_Final-English-1.pdf (data.govt.nz) 2.Tax Administration Act 1994 Public Act 6 – New Zealand Legislation 3.Interim Generative AI guidance | NZ Digital government 4.AI regulation | Deloitte Insights 5.Privacy Commissioner outlines expectations around AI use Related Resources 1: Privacy Act 2020 No 31 (as at 01 November 2023) Feedback revolved around juris diction and data s torage location, with a need for inc reased transparency in A I use within proc urement and vendor management proc esses. Stewardship and the right to audit providers if nec essary are paramount, leveraging on the mature existing governance processes. I nterviewees: M ary, C ate, A nil, and M ike. •I n line with our target outc omes, the A lgorithm Charter rec ognises the power of AI to help public sector organisations “deliver services that are more effective and efficient” \[1\]. Due to our broad ranging public role, any AI use cases have the potential to s ignificantly impact wellbeing, whether intentionally or not. Applying the charter’s recommendations around Trustworthy AI and Te T iriti will enable us to mitigate any ris ks as they arise. •A s per the T ax A dministration Act 1 994, our offic ers are res ponsible for the integrity of the tax s ys tem \[2 \]. A I fraud detec tion c apabilities, with options for real-time analysis, provide us with the opportunity to proactively monitor taxpayer c ompliance and thus better maintain the integrity of the s ys tem. •Extra care is required when using third-party services that integrate AI. These might be subject to international regulations surrounding AI and privacy, particularly if their service uses international data sharing. As such, procurement processes should be strengthened to ensure provider use of AI is compliant with all applicable standards \[3\]. We should seek transparency and control over how providers are implementing AI, to ensure that any exposure of personal information or associated harm is prevented. •Any deviation from applicable standards for AI use could result in severe reputational damage for our organisation due to its wide-ranging role as steward of New Zealand’s tax system. Strong transparency and human oversight are especially critical for us, as inaccurate AI output could jeopardise public trust. Political & Public Sector Landscape S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T Ensuring our approach to AI will align with expectations placed on ourorganisation by the government and taxpayer base alike. As a public sector organisation, we are accountable to both the current government and the people of Aotearoa New Zealand, hence our strategic foundation to build and maintain strong and trustful relationships (Whanaungatanga). C onsidering how this context ties in with our AI aspirations will be essential to ensuring theircontinued success. AI can also support efficiency by automating routine tasks, streamlining processes, and enhancing data- driven decision-making. •The fact that an AI solution is legally and financially feasible doesn’t necessary translate into moral and ethical acceptance from the target population, even if they stand to personally benefit. To provide a tax case study, the Australian government faced backlash after implementing Robodebt, an automated system that used income averaging to identify those in welfare debt and demand recovery of funds. The tool was highly inaccurate and lacked transparency, and many individuals experienced negative impacts to their finances and mental health because of the scheme. It incurred nearly $2B in lawsuit fees, with taxpayers footing the bill \[1\]. Although Robodebt didn’t directly use AI methods, it was perceived to have done so and thus caused public trust to be undermined \[2\]. Similarly, a Michigan government agency lacked the social license to implement MiDAS, an AI tool used to detect unemployment fraud and automatically require repayment from offenders. A retrospective study identified that 93% of the charges were incorrect, leading to the agency facing class-action lawsuits and losing its customers’ trust \[3\]. In both cases, stronger ethical design principles and public engagement could have ensured these organisations had the social license to operate the AI tool responsibly and derive associated efficiency gains. Ideally, the level of public acceptance will be re- assessed periodically throughout the lifecycle of the AI solution in question. •As we move through the current period of uncertainty, we may find it helpful to prioritise agile decision-making, informed by diverse voices \[4\]. Implementing AI in a trustworthy manner that balances the opportunities with the risks will be a crucial part of weathering this change. K E Y I N S I G H T S Public Engagement R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K 1.Robo-debt (afr.com) 2.AI not to blame for Robodebt failures (govtechreview.com.au) 3.Government Serves Up False Fraud Charges (undark.org) 4.State of the State 2023 | Deloitte New Zealand Related Resources 1: Artificial intelligence impact on society | Deloitte Insights The strategic considerations for AI implementation within our organisation lie in carefully balancing opportunity with the obligation to guard data security and risk management. The key is to transition gradually while ensuring informed customer consent and a build-up of public trust, thus earning a 'social license'. However, despite an internal push towards being 'more brave', navigating between the increasing expectations of efficient data usage and the absolute adherence to security and risk profiles is a challenging task. Interviewees: Mary, Cate, Anil, Phil, Lisa. •We have the opportunity to run targeted public engagement to gauge appetite for the incorporation of AI in tax processes. In doing so, we will aim to establish a social license, or ongoing public acceptance, for the initiatives we have planned. This process will differentiate initiatives that could be delivered from those that should be delivered based on public appetite and opinions. •Due to political shifts, and particularly the current period of government transition, the authorising environment in which we carry out our work may change. Therefore, flexibility of AI initiatives in adapting to changing government priorities will be a key factor in their ability to come to fruition in the current climate. We may need to be prepared to pause certain initiatives pending more certainty around thegovernment's demands of the public sector. Authorising Environment S T R A T E G I C C O N T E X T The s et of regulations , guidelines , and approval mechanis ms within our organis ation and the wider government that dictate the parameters for our AI s trategy implementation and development. I nternally, this involves the applic ation of existing frameworks , proc edures, and princ iples to A I operations, ens uring that A I is us ed res ponsibly and ethically, c omplying with the organis ation's data, information and knowledge governanc e framework. T he authoris ing environment externally refers toour unique legis lative pos ition under the T ax A dministration A c t, whic h authorises us to utilis e technology to make dec isions on the c ommis sioner's behalf, differentiating us from the wider regulatory landscape and political/public s ector c ontext. •A robus t authorising environment is fundamental to res ponsibly implementing AI in our operations. I t operates at multiple levels – we mus t ens ure our internal authorising environment aligns strategically with legislative permissions and s ec urity considerations, while als o attempting to influenc e a c learer, unified authorising environment within the wider public s ector. •D eveloping a c omprehensive understanding of A I and its ris ks is now a s trategic imperative. C urrently, lower perc eived ris ks as sociated with A I c ould be due to inadequate understanding. T o s uccessfully implement AI in our s trategic operations, we need to s trengthen our knowledge to c omprehend its implications, ris k fac tors, and rec ognise the potential for inc orrect results. •T he legis lative func tion of the T ax A dministration Act, allowing us to us e A I for dec ision-making, puts us in a unique advantageous pos ition in defining and navigating the authoris ing environment c ompared to other organis ations. H owever, this also implies an elevated role in s etting robust guidelines and frameworks aligning to ethic al and res ponsible AI utilisation. •Stewards hip is integral to our operation in the authoris ing environment. We mus t ens ure future hallmarks of good s tewards hip, inc luding s ignificant legislation, is fit for purpos e. T hus, ens uring preparedness for c hallenges as s ociated with A I , and s afeguarding ourselves against potential legal and ethical implications. K E Y I N S I G H T S AI Standards AI Governance Standard Operating Procedures R O A D M A P C O N S I D E R A T I O N S O P P O R T U N I T I E S & C H A L L E N G E S R I S K S S T A K E H O L D E R F E E D B A C K The authorising environment is slightly different than political and public sector context: making decisions around what our role is, how we how we look after our data, the role we play in terms of our regulatory responsibilities. Interviewee: Cathy •T he authorisation by the T ax A dministration A ct for us to us e mac hines for dec ision-making provides a s olid legislative footing to pioneer A I applications in the public s ector. T his unique position c an advance us as a role model in regulating A I adoption, enhancing its c apabilities while inspiring wides pread trus t. •By s howc asing responsible AI s tewardship with trans parent and ac countable prac tices, we c an fortify our leadership in the public sector. T his c an inform legis lative fitness, s timulate understanding of A I implications, and es tablish robus t s tandards for A I utilisation in the public s ector. •T he c urrent fragmented and dis jointed external authorising environment ac ross thepublic s ector c ould present ris k. While government has the authority to s et the environment, c urrently this has not been c onsolidated and c lear directives. D ifferent s ectors have varying frameworks, c asting doubts on the s olidity of the authoris ing environment and c ausing a range of approac hes. T his fragmentation and lac k of defined parameters inc reases the ris k of dis jointed AI methodologies. •O ur c urrent legislative framework s anctions technology to make c ommissioner dec isions. While beneficial, further as sessment is required for its s uitability towards A I progression. T he absence of c omprehensive A I understanding and c ontrol proc esses could hinder dec ision ac curacy and ac countability. We need to evaluate our existing privacy, ethics and data governance frameworks against evolving AI scenarios. A ny misalignment risks erroneous res ults and potential key ris ks going forward. \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Thank you