Consultative Document on International Tax Reform DECEMBER 1987 PREFACE BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE Introduction In my Budget of 18 June 1987, I announced that the Government would be introducing an ti-tax haven measures. This move is necessary to strengthen the tax system and fa c ilita te further tax reform. The resulting measures are set out in th is consultative document. Reasons for the Measures New Zealand residents are subject to tax on th e ir worldwide income. However, some residents, notably larger companies and wealthy individuals, are avoiding tax on th e ir foreign income, some of which is income that is diverted from New Zealand. This places an unfair tax burden on others and undermines the in te g rity of the tax system. The Government is determined to prevent the erosion of the income tax base by cross-border transactions which enable the deferral or complete avoidance of tax properly payable in New Zealand. The use of tax havens in particular has become widespread and has been a drain on government revenue. This concern to protect the tax base and to preserve the in teg rity of the tax system underpins the measures. Another objective is to remove a r tif ic ia l incentives for taxpayers to invest offshore. Offshore investment is generally to be welcomed, but i t should not be subsidised by ordinary taxpayers. Existing tax provisions are encouraging greater offshore investment than is economically and socially desirable. Hence, the measures attempt to ensure th at investment and other decisions are based on commercial merit rather than tax avoidance. Evolution of the Measures An overview of the proposed reforms was sketched in Annex 4 of the 1987 Budget. I t was stated then that the outline of the proposed regime was not d efin itiv e or complete. There were good reasons for th is. 11 F i r s t , a n t i - t a x haven p ro v is io n s a re among th e most complex in i n t e r n a t i o n a l ta x law and a re t y p i c a l l y s u b je c t to c o n tin u a l l e g i s l a t i v e and a d m in is tr a tiv e re fin e m e n t. The m easures o u tlin e d in Annex 4 o f th e Budget have been m o d ified to b e t t e r m eet th e G overnm ent's reform o b je c tiv e s and to en su re t h a t , a s f a r a s p o s s ib le , th e m easures th em selv es w i l l n o t be v u ln e ra b le to ab u se. Secondly, I in d ic a te d in th e Budget t h a t th e a n t i - t a x haven m easures would be th e f i r s t s te p tow ards a com prehensive ta x regime d e sig n e d to combat i n t e r n a t i o n a l ta x av o id an ce. Given th e p ro g re s s which has been made in d e v e lo p in g f u r th e r a s p e c ts o f t h a t regim e, t h i s f i r s t s te p w i l l now be la r g e r th a n e a r l i e r e n v isa g e d . Thus, th e com plexion o f th e o r ig i n a l p ro p o s a ls has been a l t e r e d s i g n i f i c a n t l y . Main Elements o f the Regime In b r i e f , th e m easures w i l l ta x New Z ealand r e s id e n ts on income d e riv e d from an i n t e r e s t in a n o n -r e s id e n t company o r t r u s t . R e sid e n ts have been a b le to d i v e r t income and accum ulate i t in such e n t i t i e s and th e re b y av o id o r d e fe r New Z ealand ta x . Income which i s a lre a d y ta x ed in New Z ealand a s i t i s d e riv e d w i l l n o t be s u b je c t to th e s e m easures. The main elem en ts o f th e p roposed regim e, in c lu d in g changes to th e o r ig i n a l p ro p o s a ls , a re h ig h lig h te d below . B asis o f Taxation Under th e o r i g i n a l p ro p o s a ls , a l l ta x p a y e rs re q u ire d to r e p o r t income e arn ed th ro u g h a n o n -r e s id e n t company o r t r u s t would have been s u b je c t to New Zealand ta x on a ' b r a n c h -e q u iv a le n t' b a s is . An a l t e r n a t i v e b a s is has now been in tro d u c e d . Where r e s id e n ts a re u n ab le to o b ta in s u f f i c i e n t in fo rm a tio n to r e p o r t on a b ra n c h -e q u iv a le n t b a s is , ta x w i l l be le v ie d on th e an n u al change in v a lu e o f t h e i r i n t e r e s t s . T his ' c o m p a ra tiv e -v a lu e ' b a s is i s a proxy fo r ta x in g th e u n d e rly in g income. i i i Control There are now no detailed rules relating to the control of a company. However, control can affect the amount of information a taxpayer can provide about the income of a company and may therefore affect whether a taxpayer w ill be able to report income on a branch-equivalent or a comparative-value basis. Nature of Income The d istin ctio n between tainted and non-tainted income has been eliminated. There are three related reasons for th is: f i r s t , the Government has decided th at i t wishes to prevent as much tax avoidance and tax d eferral as i t reasonably can, not ju st the worst and most v isib le forms; secondly, the d istin ctio n would produce uncertainty, and possibly unintended consequences, as a resu lt of inevitably arb itrary definitions; and th ird ly , a fte r further detailed consideration, the Government has decided that such a d istin ctio n , which has no economic basis, would be extremely d iffic u lt, i f not impossible, to enforce adequately. Sources of Income The d istin ctio n between low-tax and high-tax countries has been eliminated. The new measures w ill apply to foreign income earned through any non-resident en tity . Statutory rates of tax are an unreliable indicator of the real i mpact of taxes given the myriad of possible tax rules and the degree of enforcement in other countries. This new approach removes the need to make piecemeal and often inaccurate d istin ctio n s between high-tax and low-tax countries. Exemption from Measures A de minimis rule has been introduced. This rule w ill exempt from the measures natural persons with small shareholdings in non-resident companies. Such a rule balances the need for reducing the avoidance and d eferral of tax against the need for effective compliance and administration. Inset 2 i v The m easures t h a t a p p ly to t r u s t s a re e s s e n t i a l l y o f an a n ti-a v o id a n c e n a tu r e . As w ith com panies, th e r e w i l l be no d i s t i n c t i o n betw een t a i n t e d and n o n - ta in te d income. The ta x a tio n o f fo r e ig n income e arn ed th ro u g h n o n - r e s id e n t t r u s t s w i l l be c o n s is te n t w ith t h a t o f income e arn ed th ro u g h n o n - r e s id e n t com panies. Foreign P o rtfo lio Dividends R e sid e n t com panies w i l l be s u b je c t to ta x on fo r e ig n p o r t f o l i o d iv id e n d s (d iv id e n d s from n o n -r e s id e n t companies in which th e r e s id e n t has l e s s th a n a 10 p e rc e n t i n t e r e s t ) . T his tre a tm e n t i s in l i n e w ith i n t e r n a t i o n a l norms. R e sid e n t in d iv id u a ls w i l l c o n tin u e to be s u b je c t to ta x on a l l fo r e ig n d iv id e n d s re c e iv e d . A p p ro p ria te d o u b le -ta x r e l i e f w i l l be p ro v id e d . E ffectiv e Dates The scope f o r ta x av oidance d u rin g th e p e rio d o f p u b lic c o n s u lta tio n , p r i o r to th e a p p lic a tio n o f th e new ta x law , means t h a t th e e f f e c t i v e im p lem en tatio n o f th e m easures must n e c e s s a r ily e n t a i l an elem ent o f r e t r o s p e c t i v i t y . I announced in th e Budget t h a t th e m easures to be e n a c te d would a p p ly from th e a c c o u n tin g y e a rs o f th e e n t i t i e s concerned commencing a f t e r 18 June 1987. However, g iv e n th e changes to th e o r ig i n a l p ro p o s a ls and th e tim e re q u ire d f o r c o n s u lta tio n and to e n a c t l e g i s l a t i o n , a s w e ll a s th e need f o r a d m in is tr a tiv e p r e p a r a tio n , th e e f f e c t i v e d a te w i l l be a l t e r e d . T h is d e c is io n i s n e c e s s a ry in th e c irc u m sta n c e s . I t sh o u ld n o t be reg ard ed a s a p re c e d e n t. As d e s c rib e d in c h a p te r 2, th e m easures w i l l ta k e e f f e c t from 17 December 1987 in r e s p e c t o f d i s t r i b u t e d income and from 1 A p ril 1988 in r e s p e c t o f u n d is tr ib u te d income. Trusts V Role of the Measures in the Government's Tax Reform Programme In proposing these measures, I would stress that the purpose is not to increase the to ta l tax burden on the community. I t is to spread the tax burden more evenly and more fa irly . To the extent that the tax base is broadened and more people pay th eir fa ir share of tax, rates of taxation can be lowered. The changes are an integral part of the Government's continuing programme to improve the efficiency and equity of the tax system. I t is overwhelmingly clear th at the New Zealand tax base must be protected from international tax avoidance; without a broader base, further tax reform w ill be prejudiced i f not precluded. I am confident that the proposed changes to New Zealand's international tax regime w ill provide a solid platform for further tax reform. In p articu lar, the expected gains from the new international tax regime have helped make possible the further major reform of the tax and benefit system which I have recently announced. Reductions in tax avoidance and lower rates of tax go hand in hand. Consultative Process This is the fourth time the Government has in itia te d a consultative process on a major taxation change. With the assistance of the business sector and members of the public, the previous consultations resulted in sig n ifican t improvements to the reform proposals. The Government has appreciated th is participation and hopes that i t w ill again be forthcoming in the current consultative process. In p articu lar, the Government is grateful to those who have agreed to serve on the Consultative Committee. I t can be expected to complete i t s task in a thorough and professional manner. The timetable for implementation is tig h t. The period allowed for consultation and review reflects the need to give adequate time for in terested p arties to make submissions and the need for timely decisions in order to v i reduce u n c e r ta in t y . The Government i n v i t e s p u b lic c o n s id e ra tio n o f th e p ro p o s a ls and welcomes comment on ways t h a t may improve th e im p lem en tatio n , o p e ra tio n and a d m in is tr a tio n o f th e new m easures. C onclusion The p ro p o s a ls o u tlin e d in t h i s c o n s u lta tiv e document p ro v id e th e b a s is f o r a s u b s t a n t i a l s tre n g th e n in g o f New Z e a la n d 's in t e r n a t i o n a l ta x p r o v is io n s . The need f o r such u p g rad in g i s ov erd u e. The m easures w i l l reduce th e problem o f ta x av o id an ce by r e s id e n ts d iv e r tin g New Zealand income, and e a rn in g ta x -fa v o u re d r e tu r n s , th ro u g h th e use o f o ffs h o re e n t i t i e s . R esources w ill flo w to a re a s where th e y w i l l g e n e ra te th e h ig h e s t r e tu r n f o r th e n a tio n a s a w hole. There w i l l be a g r e a te r c o m p a tib ility betw een p r iv a te and n a tio n a l i n t e r e s t s in in v e stm en t d e c is io n s . Such reform w i l l th e r e f o r e c o n tr ib u te d i r e c t l y to c r e a tin g a f a i r e r and more p ro sp e ro u s s o c ie ty . I b e lie v e t h a t th e developm ent o f a sound and s e c u re do m estic ta x b ase i s a p r e r e q u i s i t e to f u r th e r s i g n i f i c a n t dom estic ta x refo rm . I commend a c lo s e s c r u tin y o f t h i s c o n s u lta tiv e document to th o se a f f e c te d by th e m easu res, a s w e ll a s to th o s e i n t e r e s t e d in th e f u r th e r reform o f New Z e a la n d 's ta x system . Roger D ouglas M in is te r o f Finance v i i P a g e PREFACE i TABLE OF CONTENTS v ii CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION 1.1 Purpose of the Consultative Document 1 1.2 Reasons for the Measures 1 1.3 Consultative Committee 2 1.4 Terms of Reference 2 1.5 Submissions 3 1.6 Outline of the Document 4 1.7 Meaning of Terms Used 5 CHAPTER 2 - SUMMARY 2.1 Income Subject to the Measures 6 2.2 Branch-Equivalent Basis 7 2.3 Comparative-Value Basis 7 2.4 D istributions from Non-Resident Companies and Trusts 8 2.5 Effective Dates 9 2.6 Disclosure and Administration 10 CHAPTER 3 - OBJECTIVES OF THE REFORM MEASURES 3.1 Introduction 11 3.2 The Issues a t a Glance 11 3.3 Deficiencies in Existing Law 12 3.4 Objectives of Reform 13 3.5 Context of Reform 15 3.6 Impact of the Measures 17 3.7 Conclusion 19 T A B L E O F C O N T E N T S viii CHAPTER 4 - INCOME SUBJECT TO THE REFORM PROPOSALS 4.1 Scope of Reform 20 4.2 Non-Resident Companies 21 4.3 Non-Resident Trusts 25 4.4 Bases for Reporting Income 27 CHAPTER 5 - REPORTING INCOME ON A BRANCH-EQUIVALENT BASIS 5.1 Overview 28 5.2 Non-Resident Companies 29 5.3 Non-Resident Trusts 33 5.4 Election to Report Income on Branch-Equivalent Basis 35 5.5 Changing from Branch-Equivalent to Comparative-Value Basis 36 APPENDIX 5.1 Schematic Outline of Income A ttribution Rules 38 APPENDIX 5.2 Example of A ttribution Rules in Operation 39 CHAPTER 6 - REPORTING INCOME ON A COMPARATIVE-VALUE BASIS 6.1 Non-Resident Companies 40 6.2 Non-Resident Trusts 55 6.3 Beneficial Interests in Discretionary Non-Resident Trusts 59 6.4 Changing from Comparative-Value to Branch-Equivalent Basis 59 CHAPTER 7 - THE TAXATION OF DISTRIBUTIONS 7.1 Introduction 60 7.2 Foreign Dividends 60 7.3 Assessable Distributions from Trusts 61 7.4 Relief for Branch-Equivalent Taxes 62 7.5 Foreign Tax Credits 63 7.6 Disguised D istributions 64 CHAPTER 8 - DISCLOSURE AND ADMINISTRATION 8.1 Introduction 65 8.2 Disclosure 65 8.3 Administration 67 GLOSSARY OF TERMS 68 1 CHAPTER 1 – INTRODUCTION 1.1 Purpose of the Consultative Document The Minister of Finance, the Hon R O Douglas, announced in the Budget of 18 June 1987 th at the Government would introduce measures to broaden the New Zealand tax base and to lim it international tax avoidance. The purpose of th is consultative document is to se t out the d e ta ils of the structure and operation of the proposed new measures so th at in terested p a rtie s have an opportunity to consider them and to submit th e ir views and suggestions before fin al decisions are made. The document focuses on the taxation of income earned by New Zealand residents through offshore e n titie s . The taxation of income earned in New Zealand by non-residents is not addressed. 1.2 Reasons for the Measures The measures are part of a major upgrading of New Zealand's international tax regime. They reinforce the Government's drive to create a fa ire r and more e ffic ie n t tax system. They seek to ensure th a t a ll residents of New Zealand pay th e ir proper share of tax. Moreover, the measures w ill make possible other desirable reforms. In p artic u lar, they w ill fa c ilita te a reduction in income tax rates. They w ill also stimulate e ffic ie n t investment in New Zealand. In th is way, the measures w ill contribute to a b etter use of resources and have a positive influence on savings, investment and the creation of more productive and permanent jobs for New Zealanders. In summary, the measures are designed to: a protect the domestic tax base from arrangements which seek to avoid or defer New Zealand tax by the accumulation of income in offshore e n titie s ; and 2 b reduce the extent to which the tax system encourages offshore investment relativ e to investment in New Zealand and biases the form in which offshore investment is made. 1.3 Consultative Committee The Government in v ites the public to make submissions on the matters se t out in th is document. A Consultative Committee has been appointed to receive and consider submissions and to advise the Government on implementation. The Committee comprises: Mr Arthur Valabh (Chairman), a tax partner and partner in charge of D eloitte, Haskins and S ells, Auckland; Dr Robin Congreve, a tax consultant with Russell, McVeagh, McKenzie, B artleet and Company, Auckland; Mr Stuart Hutchinson, a tax partner with Simpson Grierson Butler White, Auckland; Dr Susan Lojkine, a tax partner with McLeod Lojkine Associates, Auckland; Professor John Prebble, a Wellington tax b arrister and Dean of the Law Faculty a t the Victoria University of Wellington; and Mr Tim Robinson, an economist with Jarden and Company Limited, Wellington. 1.4 Terms of Reference The Committee's terms of reference are: a to receive and hear public submissions on matters concerning the implementation and operation of the measures proposed in th is consultative document; 3 b to report to the Minister of Finance on: i matters covered in th is document, or raised in submissions, on the introduction of measures to protect the New Zealand tax base, and i i such amendment to the d eta il of the proposed measures as the Committee may consider necessary for th e ir effective implementation and operation having regard to the Government's firm objective of eliminating the avoidance and deferral of New Zealand tax on foreign income as a means of broadening the tax base and fa c ilita tin g a reduction in income tax rate s; c to prepare d raft leg islatio n to give effect to the proposed measures referred to in th is document. The Committee is to report to the Minister of Finance by 31 March 1988. 1.5 Submissions Submissions should contain a b rief summary of th eir main points and recommendations. They should be typed in double space and be lodged by 12 February 1988 with: The Chairman Consultative Committee on Full Imputation and International Tax Reform c /– The Treasury PO Box 3724 WELLINGTON Submissions received by the due date w ill be acknowledged. 4 1.6 Outline of the Document This Consultative Document comprises eight chapters, as follows: Chapter 1: This introductory chapter describes b riefly the purpose of the document and the reasons for the proposed reforms. Members of the Consultative Committee, i t s terms of reference and submission procedures are detailed. Chapter 2: This chapter summarises the main elements of the measures set out in th is document for the reform of New Zealand's international tax provisions. Chapter 3: This chapter discusses the importance of preventing international tax avoidance and strengthening international tax provisions. Existing problems and the consequences are highlighted. The objectives of tax reform, which have guided the measures proposed in th is document, are presented. Chapter 4: This chapter outlines the scope of the proposed measures. I t indicates that taxpayers resident in New Zealand must include in th e ir assessable income foreign income earned through non-resident companies or tru sts on either a branch-equivalent or a comparative-value basis. Chapter 5: This chapter discusses the branch-equivalent basis for the taxation of income subject to the measures. The determination of assessable income and how i t w ill be attrib u ted to resident taxpayers are described. Chapter 6: This chapter discusses the comparative-value basis for the taxation of income subject to the measures. The annual change in value of a taxpayer's in te re st in a non-resident e n tity w ill be taxed as a proxy for tax on the underlying income. 5 Chapter 7: This chapter addresses the taxation of dividends from non-resident companies and distrib u tio n s from non-resident tru s ts . Provisions for double-tax re lie f are described. Chapter 8: This fin al chapter discusses disclosure and adm inistrative issues. 1.7 Meaning of Terms Used A glossary of the technical terms used is provided a t the end of th is document. 6 CHAPTER 2 – SUMMARY 2.1 Income Subject to the Measures The reform s d e s c rib e d in t h i s c o n s u lta tiv e document a p p ly to fo r e ig n income d e riv e d by r e s id e n ts o f New Zealand from i n t e r e s t s in n o n -r e s id e n t companies and t r u s t s . An i n t e r e s t in a n o n -re s id e n t company w i l l be d e fin e d in term s o f a r e s i d e n t 's e x p e c te d r e tu r n o f d iv id e n d s from a n o n -r e s id e n t company, and w i l l a ls o in c lu d e such i n t e r e s t s h e ld i n d i r e c t l y th ro u g h one o r more n o n -r e s id e n t e n t i t i e s . A ta x p a y e r 's p e rc e n ta g e i n t e r e s t in th e income o f a n o n -r e s id e n t company w i l l be th e g r e a te r o f th e ta x p a y e r 's p e rc e n ta g e e n title m e n t t o , o r e n title m e n t to a c q u ire r ig h t s t o , d iv id e n d s o r v o tin g r i g h t s in r e l a t i o n to d i s t r i b u t i o n s o r changes to th e com pany's c o n s t i t u t i o n a l r u le s . A ta x p a y e r 's p e rc e n ta g e i n t e r e s t in th e income o f a n o n -r e s id e n t t r u s t i s th e m arket v a lu e o f th e p ro p e rty c o n trib u te d by th e ta x p a y e r to th e t r u s t , d i r e c t l y o r i n d i r e c t l y , a s a p e rc e n ta g e o f th e m arket v a lu e o f th e n e t a s s e t s o f th e t r u s t . A New Z ealand ta x p ay e r w ill be re q u ire d to in c lu d e in a s s e s s a b le income h is o r h e r p e rc e n ta g e i n t e r e s t in th e income o f a n o n - r e s id e n t company o r t r u s t . I n d iv id u a ls who have i n t e r e s t s in n o n -r e s id e n t com panies, where th o se i n t e r e s t s have a t o t a l m arket v a lu e o f n o t more th a n $10,000 a t a l l tim es in a y e a r , w i l l n o t be s u b je c t to ta x under t h i s regim e. S im ila r ly exempt w i l l be in d iv id u a ls who have c o n trib u te d p ro p e rty w ith a m arket v a lu e o f l e s s th a n $500 to n o n -r e s id e n t t r u s t s . The amount o f fo r e ig n income d e riv e d by a r e s id e n t o f New Zealand from an i n t e r e s t in a n o n -r e s id e n t company o r t r u s t w i l l be d eterm in ed on e i t h e r a b ra n c h -e q u iv a le n t b a s is o r a co m p arativ e-v a lu e b a s is . 7 Any lo s s e s from i n t e r e s t s in n o n -r e s id e n t companies may be used to o f f s e t b ra n c h -e q u iv a le n t o r co m p arativ e-v a lu e income in re s p e c t o f i n t e r e s t s in o th e r n o n -r e s id e n t companies in th e c u r r e n t y e a r o r may be c a r r ie d forw ard to o f f s e t such income in fu tu r e y e a r s . Any lo s s from an i n t e r e s t in a n o n -r e s id e n t t r u s t may o n ly be c a r r ie d forw ard to o f f s e t fu tu r e income from t h a t t r u s t . L osses may n o t be used to o f f s e t o th e r a s s e s s a b le income. 2.2 Branch-Equivalent Basis The b ra n c h -e q u iv a le n t b a s is fo r re p o rtin g income may be used i f th e ta x p a y e r has s u f f i c i e n t in fo rm a tio n about th e income o f th e n o n -r e s id e n t e n t i t y and e l e c t s to ad o p t t h i s b a s is . New Zealand r e s id e n ts who e l e c t to re p o rt income on a b ra n c h -e q u iv a le n t b a s is w i l l in c lu d e in a s s e s s a b le income t h e i r p e rc e n ta g e i n t e r e s t in th e income o f any n o n -r e s id e n t company o r t r u s t in which th e y have a d i r e c t o r i n d i r e c t i n t e r e s t . For t h i s p u rp o se, th e income o f a n o n -r e s id e n t company o r t r u s t must be computed in accordance w ith New Zealand ta x law . In a d d itio n , d iv id e n d s re c e iv e d by a n o n -r e s id e n t company from a n o th e r n o n -r e s id e n t company whose income i s re p o rte d on a co m p arativ e-v a lu e b a s is must a ls o be in c lu d e d in th e r e c i p i e n t com pany's income. D is tr ib u tio n s o f income re c e iv e d by a r e s id e n t may be d e d u cte d , s u b je c t to c e r t a i n l i m i t a t i o n s , in c a lc u la tin g b ra n c h -e q u iv a le n t income. A ta x p a y e r 's p e rc e n ta g e i n t e r e s t in th e income o f a n o n -r e s id e n t t r u s t w i l l n o t in c lu d e any amount which has become in d e f e a s ib ly v e s te d in a b e n e f ic ia r y . New Z ealand r e s id e n ts who in c lu d e in a s s e s s a b le income f o r any y e a r t h e i r p e rc e n ta g e i n t e r e s t in th e income o f a n o n -r e s id e n t company o r t r u s t computed on a b ra n c h -e q u iv a le n t b a s is w i l l be e n t i t l e d to a c r e d i t fo r t h e i r p e rc e n ta g e i n t e r e s t in th e fo r e ig n ta x e s p a id by th e n o n -r e s id e n t company o r t r u s t in t h a t y e a r . 2.3 Comparative-Value Basis Under th e c o m p arativ e-v a lu e b a s is , a New Zealand ta x p ay e r must in c lu d e in h is o r h e r a s s e s s a b le income each y e a r any change in th e m arket v a lu e o f a d i r e c t o r i n d i r e c t i n t e r e s t in a n o n -r e s id e n t company o r t r u s t . The m arket v a lu e o f Inset 3 8 an in te re st in a non-resident company must be determined by reference to the trading price of the in te re st i f the price is available and reliab le. I f not, the market value must be determined in accordance with appropriate valuation methods based on shareholders' funds or net (after-tax) earnings. In certain circumstances, taxpayers w ill be required to compute the change in value of an in te re st by reference to an imputed rate of return of five percent in excess of the rate on five-year Government stock. Where the proceeds of disposition or the market value of an in te re st in a non-resident company exceed the la s t reported value of the in te re st by more than 30 percent and the in te re st has not been valued by reference to trading prices, a post facto adjustment w ill be made to the taxpayer's tax lia b ili ty for the preceding years to recoup any tax-deferral benefits resulting from the undervaluation, unless the taxpayer can demonstrate that e a rlie r market values were accurate. The market value of an in te re st in a non-resident tru s t w ill be the portion of the market value of the net assets of the tru s t represented by the s e ttlo r 's percentage in te re st in the tr u s t. I f , however, the market value of the assets of the tru s t cannot be determined, the imputed return method must be used to value the in te re st. 2.4 Distributions from Non-Resident Companies and Trusts Foreign portfolio dividends received by resident companies (ie dividends from a non-resident company in which a resident has less than 10 percent of the paid-up share capital) w ill be included in assessable income. A cre d it w ill be allowed for any foreign withholding taxes. Other dividends received by resident companies from non-resident companies w ill continue to be exempt from company tax. However, recipient companies w ill be required to c o lle c t a withholding payment on behalf of th eir shareholders. The withholding payment w ill be creditable to th e ir resident shareholders (and refundable to 9 tax-exempt and non-resident shareholders) when dividends are paid by the resident company. Similarly, any New Zealand tax paid by resident companies under the branch-equivalent basis w ill be creditable to resident shareholders under the imputation scheme outlined in the accompanying consultative document. Dividends received by individuals resident in New Zealand w ill remain assessable, with a cred it allowed for any foreign withholding tax. D istributions received by resident beneficiaries from non-resident tru s ts w ill be included in assessable income except to the extent that the d istrib u tio n is made out of the corpus of the tru s t. A cred it w ill be allowed for any foreign withholding taxes on the d istrib u tio n s. 2.5 Effective Dates The various aspects of the reform proposals set out in th is consultative document w ill come into effect as follows: - for taxpayers electing to use the branch-equivalent basis, from 1 April 1988. Where a non-resident e n tity 's accounting year straddles 1 April 1988, only the proportion of i t s income for the year attrib u tab le to the period a fte r 1 April 1988 w ill be subject to tax under these measures; - for taxpayers using the comparative-value basis, from 1 April 1988. Such taxpayers w ill be required to establish the market value on 1 April 1988 of th eir in te re st in non-resident companies and tru s ts . Thus, only increases and decreases in market value occurring afte r 1 April 1988 w ill be taken into account under these measures; - for portfolio dividends received from non-resident companies, such dividends declared afte r the time of the Minister of Finance's statement on 17 December 1987. A dividend w ill be deemed to be received when i t is declared by the payer company; and 10 - for d istrib u tio n s by non-resident tru sts to resident beneficiaries, such d istrib u tio n s th at become indefeasibly vested in a resident beneficiary a fte r the time of the Minister of Finance's statement on 17 December 1987. 2.6 Disclosure and Administration Taxpayers w ill be required to disclose th eir in te re sts in non-resident companies and tru sts and to provide a ll information necessary to compute foreign income in accordance with these measures. Taxpayers with in te re sts in non-resident companies or tru sts w ill be required to f ile a separate schedule for each such company or tru st with th eir annual return. Schedules w ill deal with the calculation of the income from such in te re sts. Penalties w ill apply for failu re to disclose the necessary information. A special u n it of the Inland Revenue Department w ill be established to ensure the e ffic ie n t and fa ir administration of the measures proposed in th is document. 11 CHAPTER 3 – OBJECTIVES OF THE REFORM MEASURES 3.1 Introduction The purpose of th is chapter is to b riefly outline the deficiencies in New Zealand's existing international tax provisions and th eir consequences; the objectives for the reform of those provisions; why the reform proposals set out in th is consultative document have been adopted and why they are more comprehensive than those proposed in the June 1987 Budget; and to address issues relatin g to the lik e ly impact of the reforms. 3.2 The Issues at a Glance The taxation of income earned by residents through offshore e n titie s is manifestly in need of reform. New Zealand's existing international tax provisions are unable to counter the deferral or outright avoidance of New Zealand tax. The following observations sum up the problems. There is blatant erosion of the tax base. Many large companies and wealthy individuals resident in New Zealand are avoiding and deferring New Zealand tax through a variety of offshore transactions. Such practices have become easy and routine. The cost to New Zealand of tax abuse is high and growing. As the level of deferral and avoidance has become more widespread and the techniques more sophisticated, the New Zealand tax base has been seriously eroded. Such erosion amounts annually to hundreds of millions of dollars in forgone tax revenue - which must be raised from other sources. Offshore investment is taxed more favourably than domestic investment. The exploitation of opportunities to defer or avoid New Zealand tax has resulted in investment being directed offshore rather than to more productive uses in New Zealand. Tax considerations are driving investment decisions. Consequently, the best use is not being made of New Zealand's scarce resources. 12 The cost is pervasive and ultimately borne by other New Zealanders. The fisc a l and economic cost of the deferral and avoidance of New Zealand tax reduces the economic and social well-being of the nation. In th is sense, the tax system i mposes a greater burden on the community than is necessary. The i mpact is adverse for jobs, growth and living standards. International tax avoidance is unfair. The a b ility of some taxpayers to defer or avoid New Zealand tax undermines perceptions about fairness and puts a t risk the voluntary compliance of taxpayers on which the in teg rity of the tax system re sts. Desirable domestic reform is obstructed. A tax system that is vulnerable to international tax deferral and avoidance reduces the prospects for domestic tax reform. In p articu lar, lower and more uniform rates of income tax a r e possible only i f a ll taxpayers bear th eir fa ir share of tax. 3.3 Deficiencies in Existing Law The fundamental deficiency in the tax system, which is a t the heart of the issues identified above, is the lack of n eu tra lity . In principle, residents are subject to New Zealand tax on th eir income derived from a ll sources - th a t is , th eir worldwide income. In practice, however, foreign income derived by residents is often not subject to New Zealand tax. Whether i t is depends on whether the income is realised d irectly or realised indirectly through the use of interposed e n titie s such as companies or tru sts, and on whether i t is earned in a country that levies high or low income taxes. For example, residents of New Zealand may conduct business outside New Zealand through branches or separately incorporated subsidiaries. Branches are not considered to be separate e n titie s and income derived by a foreign branch is included in the resident taxpayer's assessable income as i t is realised by the branch. However, because a company is considered to be a legal and taxable en tity separate from i t s shareholders, income derived by a non-resident company does not constitute income of the New Zealand shareholders u n til they receive dividends. Thus, New Zealand resident individuals and companies can 13 defer New Zealand tax on foreign income simply by earning such income through a non-resident company. Moreover, resident companies may avoid New Zealand tax en tirely because the dividends they receive from non-resident companies are exempt. I f the foreign taxes are lower than those in New Zealand, taxpayers can enjoy tax deferral advantages by realising income through a non-resident company or tru s t instead of d irectly . The income w ill not be taxed in New Zealand u n til repatriated and w ill not be taxed even then in the case of dividends received by a resident company. The deferral or avoidance of New Zealand tax on foreign income earned through non-resident companies and tru sts is unacceptable. I t constitutes an incentive for foreign investment by New Zealand residents in countries with tax rates lower than those of New Zealand. I t encourages the diversion of New Zealand income to non-resident companies and tru sts. I t benefits mainly large companies and wealthy individuals. More generally, i t undermines the in te g rity of the tax system by permitting the New Zealand tax base to be easily eroded. 3.4 Objectives of Reform The two major objectives guiding the Government's reform of the tax system are efficiency and equity. The best way to improve the efficiency and equity of New Zealand's tax system is to broaden the tax base and lower income tax rates. A comprehensive base with lower and more uniform rates w ill encourage investment decisions to be based on commercial rather than tax considerations. I t w ill remove a r tif ic ia l incentives for taxpayers to invest offshore. Lower rates w ill serve to encourage a ll types of investment, business and income-earning ac tiv ity . Lower tax rates are possible only i f the tax base is broadened and avoidance is curtailed. 14 New Zealand's international tax regime should generally re fle c t the same principles of efficiency and equity embodied in the domestic tax system. In p artic u lar, the taxation of foreign income should reinforce the taxation of domestic-source income and prevent the erosion of the domestic tax base by international tax avoidance. Reform of New Zealand's international tax regime therefore requires measures which w ill ensure th at a ll New Zealand residents are subject to tax on th e ir worldwide income as i t is earned. More p articu larly , the objectives of the reform proposals contained in th is consultative document are to ensure, as far as possible, that: a foreign income derived by New Zealand residents is subject to New Zealand tax as i t is earned, whether earned d irec tly or indirectly through a non-resident company or tru s t; b the bias in the existing tax system, which encourages foreign investment by New Zealand residents in countries with lower tax rates than those of New Zealand, is removed; c opportunities for international tax avoidance, which erode the New Zealand tax base and undermine the New Zealand tax system, are eliminated; d appropriate re lie f is provided for foreign taxes on foreign income earned by New Zealand residents; e the complexity of the tax law and the attendant compliance and adm inistrative costs are kept to the minimum necessary to ensure the effectiveness of the measures; and f the reform proposals are compatible with the existing domestic tax system and with the th ru st of future domestic reforms. 15 3.5 Context of Reform The th ru st of the reform proposals in th is consultative document is the elimination of the avoidance and deferral of New Zealand tax on a ll foreign income derived by residents of New Zealand through non-resident companies and tru sts. Consequently, these reforms d iffe r in some important respects from those orig in ally proposed. The proposals outlined in the 18 June 1987 Budget were essen tially anti-avoidance rules. They were directed primarily a t the use of tru sts and companies established in tax havens to earn passive investment income and lim ited types of business income. They applied only to non-resident companies controlled by, and tru sts settled by, residents of New Zealand. The proposals were modelled on an ti-tax haven measures currently in effect in several capital-exporting countries. Such measures may be effective in lim iting the use of tax haven companies and tru sts to defer and avoid domestic tax, but they are narrow in scope, arb itrary and complex. They deal only with the worst forms of tax avoidance. They do not deal with the fundamental problem of the deferral of domestic tax on foreign income earned through non-resident companies and tru sts. The Government has decided a broadening of the tax base with respect to foreign income is required to permit cuts in the rates of income tax applicable to both individuals and companies. Accordingly, the task is to eliminate the avoidance and deferral of New Zealand tax on foreign income earned by residents of New Zealand through non-resident companies or tr u s ts . Where a New Zealand resident has an in te re st in a non-resident company and can provide su fficien t information about the company, the resid en t's share of the foreign income w ill be taxed as if i t were derived from a foreign branch. Where the resident is unable to provide su fficien t information, New Zealand tax w ill be levied annually on the change in value of the in te re st. A sim ilar approach w ill be adopted with respect to non-resident tru sts to which New 16 Zealand residents contribute property. Further, there w ill be several consequential changes to the tax treatment of dividends received by New Zealand residents from non-resident companies and distributions received by New Zealand resident beneficiaries from non-resident tru sts. This approach has several advantages over the more lim ited anti-avoidance approach adopted by some countries. For example, under the measures proposed in th is document i t w ill be unnecessary to determine when a non-resident company is controlled by New Zealand residents; to distinguish between tainted and other income; or to determine whether a non-resident company is resident in a tax haven. The new approach w ill significantly lim it opportunities for international tax avoidance and protect the domestic tax base. Since the foreign income of non-resident companies w ill be subject to New Zealand tax currently, there w ill be l i t t l e reason for New Zealand residents to div ert income (whether in the form of transfer pricing, fees for services, royalties or in te re st) from New Zealand to a non-resident company. Under the reform proposals, if a New Zealand resident has an in te re st in a non-resident company or tru s t, in many cases that in te re st w ill be trea ted , in effect, as i f i t were a foreign branch. Since the tax treatment of foreign branches is relativ ely straightforward, the reform proposals are simple in concept and should not involve undue leg islativ e complexity. The a ltern ativ e basis for taxing foreign income, the comparative-value basis, w ill require such in te re sts to be valued each year. The Government recognises that no other country has to date eliminated the deferral of domestic tax on foreign income earned through non-resident companies and tru sts as completely as these measures propose. Nevertheless, they are fu lly ju stifia b le as part of the Government's broad tax reform in itia tiv e s to expand the tax base and lower income tax rates. 17 3.6 Impact of the Measures In developing the proposed reforms, the Government has considered th e ir effect on new investment, on New Zealand firms operating offshore, on foreign countries, and on the existing investment of residents. 3.6.1 New Investment The key impact of the proposed measures on new investment w ill be to remove a r tif ic ia l incentives for taxpayers to invest in low-tax ju risd ictio n s, and to restore incentives for investment to flow to areas where i t w ill provide the greatest returns for the nation as a whole. This is consistent with directing New Zealand's resources to th eir most profitable uses. At present, however, some offshore investment by residents has a lower pre-tax return than alternative investment in New Zealand. Such investment is made because i t has a higher post-tax return as a resu lt of the avoidance or deferral of New Zealand tax. This is clearly an undesirable effect of the current law which the proposed measures w ill remedy. A lik ely consequence is more productive investment by New Zealand residents, both domestically and offshore, and a relative increase in domestic investment by residents. 3.6.2 New Zealand Business Offshore I t is sometimes contended th at New Zealand businesses offshore should not be required to pay as much tax as they would in New Zealand to enable them to compete more readily in foreign markets. This contention carries l i t t l e weight. A resident taxpayer should not pay less New Zealand tax simply as a resu lt of investing offshore in a particular legal form (ie a non-resident company or t r u s t ). The im plicit subsidy in the existing tax system for foreign investment in countries with tax rates lower than those of New Zealand is in e ffic ie n t and inequitable. The proposed reforms w ill eliminate th is aspect of our tax system. 18 Much offshore investment is not primarily tax-motivated. New Zealand companies are attracted to invest offshore for such reasons as proximity to markets, av a ila b ility of natural resources, access to p articular goods and services, and the lik e . The proposed measures w ill have l i t t l e i mpact on these investments where they yield high pre-tax returns. The measures w ill, however, adversely affect offshore investments th at have been made prim arily for tax reasons. 3.6.3 Other Countries Some countries may be adversely affected by New Zealand's moves to counter the avoidance and deferral of domestic tax by i t s residents. For example, i f a foreign country provides significant corporate tax concessions in order to a ttra c t investment, those concessions may be less effective in e lic itin g investment from New Zealand as a resu lt of the proposed reforms. Where foreign taxes are very low, reductions in the foreign tax of a company owned by New Zealand residents w ill simply be replaced by the domestic tax payable on such income according to the rules proposed in th is document. However, there w ill be some benefits for foreign countries arisin g from New Zealand's tax reforms. For example, the lowering of the New Zealand company tax rate w ill mean that the return which non-residents can obtain from investment in New Zealand w ill increase. The anti-avoidance measures w ill also make i t more d iffic u lt for non-residents to enter into tax avoidance arrangements via New Zealand to exploit the tax systems of th eir own or other foreign countries. 3.6.4 Existing Investment The effective date of the reform proposals for undistributed income is 1 April 1988, which provides taxpayers with a reasonable opportunity to reorganise th e ir a ffa irs i f necessary. Although there may be costs for some investors who have entered into arrangements which cannot be altered, the Government has decided that no special re lie f can be ju s tifie d . All tax policy changes 19 create winners and losers, as do economic policy changes in general. New Zealand is currently undergoing a period of substantial and necessary economic adjustment. The long-term benefits of economic reform w ill be shared by a ll New Zealanders. 3 .7 C o n clu sio n Significant reform of New Zealand's international tax provisions is urgently required. Such reform is a key element in the Government's overall programme of tax reform. In p articu lar, the a b ility of the tax system to afford lower rates of income tax depends in large measure on a comprehensive tax base, and international tax reform is essential to ensure that a ll New Zealand residents pay tax on th eir worldwide income. The measures proposed in th is consultative document w ill strengthen New Zealand's international tax regime against widespread tax avoidance techniques and a rre st the erosion of the domestic tax base. At the same time, the new measures w ill reduce the bias in the tax system in favour of foreign investment by New Zealand residents. The nature of the problems involved suggests, however, that results w ill not be achieved through any single se t of in itia tiv e s . Rather, results w ill depend on a continuing reform of tax provisions on a broad front. The overriding concern must be to ensure th at New Zealand's tax system adjusts as necessary, so that the nation secures the maximum benefit possible from international investment and income flows. The measures proposed in th is document are compatible with th is longer-term direction. Inset 4 2 0 CHAPTER 4 – INCOME SUBJECT TO THE REFORM MEASURES 4.1 Scope of Reform The purpose of these reforms is to tax New Zealand residents on income as i t accrues to th eir benefit through th eir d irect in terest in a non-resident company or tru s t and through th eir in te re st held indirectly through th at non-resident e n tity in other non-resident e n titie s . Two requirements must therefore be met before income w ill be subject to the rules: a the income must be earned through a company or tru s t resident outside New Zealand; and b a New Zealand resident must have an in te re st in the company or tr u s t. Once these requirements have been met, a New Zealand resident w ill be required to include in assessable income his or her percentage in te re st in the income of the non-resident company or tru s t. Whether a person is a New Zealand resident for the purposes of these measures w ill be determined according to the normal tax residence provisions in section 241 of the Income Tax Act. However, there w ill be one special rule. An individual who has been resident in New Zealand for a cumulative period of less than 24 months in the immediately preceding 15 years w ill not be a resident for the purposes of these measures. Thus, individuals who work in New Zealand on a temporary basis w ill not be taxed on th e ir in terest in non-resident companies or tru s ts . The new regime w ill apply only to income earned through non-resident companies or tru s ts . These are separate taxable e n titie s under New Zealand law and may be used to avoid or defer New Zealand tax. Income derived by New Zealand 21 residents through foreign branches or partnerships, which are not separate taxable e n titie s under New Zealand tax law, w ill not be affected since such income is already subject to current taxation in New Zealand. Income derived d irec tly by New Zealand residents from foreign property, whether tangible (such as land) or intangible (such as debt instruments), is also excluded since i t is already subject to taxation in New Zealand as i t is earned. This chapter elaborates on the types of non-resident e n titie s that w ill be subject to the rules. I t deals f i r s t with companies and then with tru s ts . 4.2 Non-Resident Companies The forthcoming leg islatio n w ill apply to income earned through the following "non-resident companies": a a non-resident en tity which is comparable to a company under New Zealand law or to an en tity which is deemed to be a company under New Zealand tax law (eg a u n it tru s t); and b a company or deemed company which is a resident of New Zealand and any other country and which is not subject to tax in New Zealand on i t s foreign income. The existing residence rules in the Income Tax Act w ill apply to determine the residence of companies. For the guidance of taxpayers, a l i s t of common non-resident e n titie s that w ill be treated as companies for the purpose of th is leg islatio n w ill be issued by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue. 4.2.1 Percentage Interest in a Non-Resident Company This regime w ill require the measurement of a New Zealand resid en t's true economic stake in a non-resident company. This is best measured by the a b ility of a resident to extract income from the company. As proposed in the consultative document on fu ll imputation, the definition of dividends for 2 2 income tax purposes is to be widened to include a ll types of d istrib u tio n s, with the exception of certain returns of paid-up share cap ital. Thus, a New Zealand resid en t's in te re st in a non-resident company w ill be defined in terms of his or her expected return of dividends from the company. I t is clearly not feasible to give the Commissioner of Inland Revenue a discretion to decide what is a resid en t's a b ility to extract dividends from a non-resident company on a case by case basis. The rule should ideally be clear and objective so th a t taxpayers know in advance the tax consequences of investing in non-resident companies. Furthermore, i t is not su fficien t to define an in te re st in a non-resident company only in terms of current rig h ts, or future entitlem ents, to dividends. In order to prevent avoidance, i t is also necessary to measure a resid en t's current and future entitlement to voting rights in relation to the d istrib u tio n policy of the non-resident company. Therefore, a taxpayer's "percentage in terest" in a non-resident company w ill be defined as the greatest of: a the proportion of rights to dividends to which the resident is e n title d ; b the proportion of rights to dividends which the resident is e n title d to acquire; c the proportion of voting rights, in relation to distributions and changes to the company's constitutional rules, to which the resident is e n title d ; d the proportion of voting rights, in relation to distributions and changes to the company's constitutional rules, which the resident is e n title d to acquire. A taxpayer's percentage in terest w ill be determined a t the end of the non-resident company's accounting year. 23 An interest in a non-resident co m p an y w ill include an in te re st held in d irectly through interests in other non-resident companies or tru sts. A taxpayer's percentage interest in a lower-tier non-resident company w ill be determined by multiplying the taxpayer's in te re st in the f i r s t - t i e r non-resident company by that company's percentage in te re st in the low er-tier company. This determination must be made for a ll levels in a chain of ownership of non-resident companies (see sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 and Appendices 5.1 and 5.2 for further d etails). Many capital structures are designed to take advantage of tax provisions. I t is not unreasonable to expect that these structures w ill be altered to re fle c t the new tax provisions. However, the adoption of the rule outlined above may cause difficulties for some taxpayers who currently hold certain classes of shares in non-resident companies. A period of adjustment w ill therefore be provided before the regime comes into effect. In th is period, taxpayers may wish to reconsider their in terests in companies with complicated cap ital structures or, if they control the non-resident company, to adjust the way in which they invest in the company so that they obtain the desired level of risk, return and control, taking into account the definition of "percentage interest" in this regime. The following are examples of instruments to which the rights taken into account in determining a taxpayer's percentage in te re st in a non-resident company may attach: a shares in a non-resident company; b units in a non-resident unit tru s t; c debentures of a non-resident company without a fixed in te re st rate and debentures issued in substitution for shares of a non-resident company as defined in sections 192 and 195 of the Income Tax Act; 24 d options, or other rights to acquire, in te re sts in a non-resident company or a non-resident unit tru s t that can be exercised directly or indirectly by the holder of the option, and put options which are in substance callable options; e convertible debt of a non-resident company, including instruments similar in nature to convertible notes defined in section 196 of the Income Tax Act; and f any in te re st in non-resident companies owned by a non-resident company or tru s t in which the taxpayer has an in te re st as described in (a) to (e) above, including any in te re st in non-resident companies and trusts held through a chain of ownership. Convertible debt in a non-resident company is debt which converts automatically, or a t the option of the holder or issuer of the debt, into equity in the company. Convertible debt instruments have the characteristics of both equity and debt. Any change in the market value of convertible debt reflec ts changes in market yields on debt and changes in the market value of the potential equity rights represented by the instrument. The debt portion of such instruments is currently taxable under the provisions of section 64B to 64M of the Income Tax Act. The forthcoming leg islatio n w ill ensure that a taxpayer is not taxed twice on income derived from convertible debt instruments. Where a nominee of a resident holds an in te re st in a non-resident company, the in te re st shall be deemed to be held by the resident. The existing definitions of "nominee" in the Income Tax Act w ill be reviewed to ensure that they are satisfacto ry for the purposes of th is regime. 25 4.2.2 De Minimis Rule Where the market value of an individual's aggregate d irect in te re sts in non-resident companies, a t a ll times in the individual's income year, does not exceed $10,000, the individual w ill be exempt from reporting his or her income from those non-resident companies under the branch-equivalent or comparative-value basis. Market value w ill be determined according to the valuation rules set out in section 6.1.2. 4.3 Non-Resident Trusts The measures w ill also apply to non-resident tru s ts . To eliminate any possible ambiguity in the present law, a tru st w ill be deemed to be resident in New Zealand for tax purposes i f any trustee of the tru s t is resident in New Zealand a t the end of the accounting year of the tru st. The existing residence rules in section 241 of the Income Tax Act w ill apply to determine the residence of a tru stee. A non-resident tru s t w ill thus be a tr u s t th at does not have any trustee resident in New Zealand a t the end of the accounting year of the tru s t. The measures w ill apply to in ter vivos and testamentary tru sts, irrespective of whether they are specified or non-specified tru s ts pursuant to the Income Tax Act. 4.3.1 Interest in a Non-Resident Trust Non-resident tru sts may be used to avoid New Zealand tax where the non-resident tru stee or trustees accumulate trustee income and i t is not also derived by New Zealand resident beneficiaries e n title d , or deemed to be entitled, in possession to the receipt of i t (th is is the d efin itio n of beneficiaries' income in section 227 of the Income Tax Act). In many cases i t will not be possible to ascertain, a t the end of a tr u s t's accounting year, whether there are any resident beneficiaries, or, i f there are, th e ir respective shares of the tru s t income. Consequently, i t is often not feasible to tax resident beneficiaries on th eir share of the tru st income of non-resident tru s ts . 26 In order to achieve the objectives of these reform measures with regard to non-resident tru s ts , any person resident in New Zealand (referred to as a "resident se ttlo r" ) who has contributed property by way of g if t, including a transfer of property for inadequate consideration, to a non-resident tru s t w ill be considered to have an in te re st in the non-resident tru s t u n til such time as: a a resident s e ttlo r who is a natural person dies and his or her e state is wound up; or b a resident s e ttlo r which is a company or another tru st is wound up. The value of a contribution to a non-resident tru s t w ill be the difference between the market value of the property transferred to the tru s t and the market value of any consideration given by the tru s t. Special rules w ill be necessary in relation to any financial assistance given to non-resident tru s ts , whether given d irectly or indirectly, and whether by means of a loan, guarantee, the provision of security or otherwise. The d efin itio n of a "resident se ttlo r" w ill include residents who make indirect contributions to non-resident tru s ts through resident or non-resident interposed e n titie s such as tru s ts , companies or financial in stitu tio n s, or through non-resident individuals. A resident w ill also be considered to have an in te re st in any non-resident tr u s t to which a non-resident tru s t or a non-resident company in which the taxpayer has an in te re st contributes property. This determination must be made for a l l levels of e n titie s in a chain of ownership irrespective of whether the income of the h ig h er-tier e n tity is being reported on a branch-equivalent or comparative-value basis. A resident s e ttlo r with an in te re st in a non-resident tru st w ill also be deemed to have an in te re st in any non-resident company in which th at tru s t has an in te re st. 4 .3 .2 Percentage In te r e st in a Non-Resident Trust The rules for determining a resident s e ttlo r 's percentage in te re st in a non-resident tr u s t are set out in section 5.3.2. 27 4 .3 .3 De Minimis Rule An individual w ill be exempt from the proposed resident s e ttlo r rules i f the market value of a ll contributions made by him or her to non-resident tru s ts a t any time is less than $500. For th is purpose, the market value of each contribution must be determined a t the time of the contribution. 4 .3 .4 B e n e fic ia r ie s New Zealand-resident beneficiaries of non-resident tru s ts must include in th eir assessable income tru s t income distributed to them or which becomes vested indefeasibly in them in accordance with the rules set out in section 7.3.1. New Zealand residents who purchase a beneficial in te re st in a discretionary non-resident tru s t w ill be taxed on such an in te re st on the comparative-value basis (see section 6.3). 4.4 Bases for Reporting Income Once i t is determined that a New Zealand resident has an in te re st in a non-resident company or tru s t, then the amount of the e n tity 's income th a t has accrued to the benefit of the New Zealand resident must be calculated in accordance with the "branch-equivalent" basis or the "comparative-value" basis. The next two chapters explain in more d etail the branch-equivalent and the comparative-value bases of determining income to which the reform measures outlined in th is document apply. 28 CHAPTER 5 – REPORTING INCOME ON A BRANCH-EQUIVALENT BASIS 5 .1 O verview New Zealand residents who elect to have the income they derive through a non-resident company or tru s t taxed on a branch-equivalent basis w ill be taxed on th e ir percentage in te re st in the e n tity a t the end of the e n tity 's accounting year m ultiplied by the income of the e n tity . The branch-equivalent basis operates in almost the same manner as the present treatment of foreign branches. I t commences with a calculation of the non-resident e n tity 's income as measured by New Zealand tax rules. The New Zealand resid en t's percentage in te re st in such income is then included in the resid en t's assessable income. A non-resident company's losses attrib u ted to a New Zealand taxpayer may be o ffse t only against the taxpayer's branch-equivalent or comparative-value income from other non-resident companies. Losses attrib u tab le to a s e ttlo r 's in te re st in a non-resident tru s t must be carried forward to be o ffse t against future income from the s e ttlo r 's in te re st in th at tru s t. The tax lia b ility resulting from the taxation of branch-equivalent basis income is reduced by the taxpayer's percentage in te re st in foreign taxes paid by the non-resident en tity deriving the income. Where d istrib u tio n s to New Zealand residents from the non-resident en tity are taxable in New Zealand, re lie f for previous New Zealand taxes paid is provided by permitting such d istrib u tio n s to be deducted from branch-equivalent income to the extent of the branch-equivalent income reported in the year of d istrib u tio n . The New Zealand tax lia b ility w ill be reduced by any foreign withholding taxes levied on the distributed income. Branch-equivalent income w ill be reported in New Zealand dollars using a close-of-trading spot exchange rate on the la s t day of the relevant accounting year of the non-resident en tity . 29 5 .2 Non-Resident Companies 5 .2 .1 Measurement o f Branch-Equivalent B asis Income New Zealand taxpayers reporting income from a non-resident company on a branch-equivalent basis w ill include in assessable income th eir percentage in the company's income a t the end of the company's accounting year. This applies to non-resident companies in which a New Zealand taxpayer has a d ire c t or an indirect in te re st. The income of each such company w ill be calculated according to New Zealand tax rules with one exception. Where dividends are paid by a non-resident company whose income is being reported by the taxpayer on a comparative-value basis to another non-resident company, they sh all be included in the assessable income of the recipient company. I t is necessary to include the la tte r dividends in the net income of the recipient company because th e ir payment w ill reduce the market value of the taxpayer's in te re st in the dividend-paying company (for an illu s tra tio n of th is point, see Appendix 5.2 where the income of Company E is reported on a comparative-value b asis). When computing his or her share of branch-equivalent income, a taxpayer may deduct dividends received (gross of foreign withholding taxes) from the non-resident company. Such dividends are deductible against the income of the non-resident company in the accounting year in which they are paid, to the extent of the branch-equivalent income earned in th a t year. This ensures th a t income from which dividends are paid is not subject to New Zealand tax twice. Should the deduction of dividends resu lt in a branch-equivalent loss being computed, such a loss may be o ffset against branch-equivalent or comparative-value income earned through other non-resident companies, whether in a current or future income year of a taxpayer. 30 5.2.2 Calculating a Taxpayer's Percentage Interest in the Income of a Non-Resident Company The portion of a non-resident company's income included in the income of a resident New Zealand taxpayer w ill be the amount of such income m ultiplied by the taxpayer's percentage in terest in the non-resident company a t the end of company's accounting year (see section 4.2.1 for a description of how to calculate a percentage in terest in a company). Similarly, where a taxpayer elects to report on a branch-equivalent basis the income of a non-resident company in which he or she has an indirect in te re st, the portion of th at company's income to be included in the taxpayer's income is the company's income multiplied by the taxpayer's percentage in te re st in the company. In th is situ atio n , the taxpayer's percentage in te re st w ill be determined by multiplying the taxpayer's percentage in te re st in the f i r s t - t i e r non-resident company by that company's percentage in te re st in the low er-tier non-resident en tity , and so on. There is an exception to the income allocation rules, however, where a taxpayer can establish that 100 percent of the income of a non-resident company is included in the income of New Zealand taxpayers. ( I t should be noted that tax-exempt e n titie s are not taxpayers.) The purpose of th is exception is to prevent more than 100 percent of the branch-equivalent basis income of a non-resident company being taxed where there is no prospect of avoidance or d eferral. I t is possible for more than 100 percent of the income of a non-resident company to be taxable under these rules because the determination of a taxpayer's percentage in te re st is based on the g reatest of the taxpayer's entitlem ent, or entitlement to acquire, rights to dividends and voting rights in relation to distributions and changes to the company's constitutional rules. To qualify for the exception, any one New Zealand resident with an in te re st in the non-resident company must provide the Inland Revenue Department (IRD) with the following information: the branch-equivalent basis income of the non-resident company, the names and IRD tax numbers of a l l of the resident taxpayers with in te re sts in the company, and the allocation of 31 100 percent of the branch-equivalent income. I f th is exception applies, the resident shareholders may allocate the branch-equivalent income among themselves on any reasonable basis. Taxpayers who acquire an in te re st in a non-resident company during the company's accounting year w ill be required to include in th eir assessable income th e ir percentage in te re st in the pro-rata portion of the company's income attrib u tab le to the period a fte r acquisition. Taxpayers who dispose of th e ir in te re sts during the company's accounting year w ill be required to include in th eir assessable income the pro-rata portion of the company's income attrib u tab le to the period before disposition. If the taxpayer lacks su fficien t information to pro-rate the company's income in th is way, tax w ill be levied on a comparative-value basis for the part-year from the beginning of the company's accounting year to the time of disposition. The valuation rules set out in chapter 6 w ill be used to determine the comparative-value income to be taxed. A New Zealand resid en t's share of the income of a non-resident company for a p articu lar year w ill be included in the resid en t's assessable income for his or her income year in which the non-resident company's accounting year ends. For example, i f a company has a balance date of 30 September and a New Zealand resident a balance date of 31 March, the New Zealand resident w ill report his or her share of the non-resident company's income for the year ended 30 September on his or her return for the year ended 31 March of the following year. A non-resident company's losses attributed to a New Zealand taxpayer may be used to o ffset the taxpayer's branch-equivalent or comparative-value income from other non-resident companies. Where the taxpayer is a company within a group of companies (as defined in section 191 of the Income Tax Act), these losses may be transferred to other companies in the group for o ffse t against comparative-value or branch-equivalent income. 32 5.2.3 Credit for Foreign Taxes A taxpayer's tax lia b ility arising from income reported on a branch-equivalent basis w ill be reduced by his or her percentage in te re st in the foreign taxes paid by the non-resident company deriving the income. A taxpayer's percentage in te re st in foreign taxes paid by a non-resident company w ill be the foreign taxes paid by the company multiplied by the taxpayer's percentage in te re st in the company. This calculation is subject to the exception described in section 5.2.2 where 100 percent of the income of a non-resident company is included in the income of New Zealand taxpayers. If a taxpayer's percentage in te re st in the branch-equivalent income of a non-resident company is reduced pursuant to th at exception, then the taxpayer's percentage in te re st of the foreign taxes paid by the company must be reduced correspondingly. The conditions and lim itations that apply to foreign tax credits in Part VIII of the Income Tax Act w ill be amended to ensure that they are appropriate for these measures. Foreign tax credits w ill be limited to the amount of New Zealand tax payable on the income of each non-resident en tity . Foreign tax credits w ill also be lim ited to the amount of New Zealand tax which would have been payable on the income sourced in each ju risd ictio n . Carry-back and carry-forward for foreign taxes th at cannot be used in the current year w ill be allowed to the extent permitted under current law to deal with timing differences between foreign and New Zealand tax law. Foreign taxes which w ill qualify for the foreign tax cred it regime are income and company taxes which are of substantially the same nature as New Zealand income tax whether levied by the federal, sta te or provincial government in any foreign ju risd ic tio n on the income of the non-resident e n tity . A cred it w ill also be permitted for New Zealand taxes paid by a non-resident company on New Zealand-source income. Foreign withholding taxes levied on distributed income w ill also be cred itab le. Taxes paid by non-resident companies in which a New Zealand resident has an in d irect in te re st w ill also be creditable. The same formula used to determine a taxpayer's percentage in te re st in an e n tity 's income w ill be used to calculate the taxpayer's percentage in te re st in the foreign taxes paid by the en tity . 33 The operation of the rules for calculating a taxpayer's entitlement to foreign taxes paid by non-resident companies is illu stra te d in Appendix 5.2. 5 .3 Non-Resident T rusts As explained in section 4.3, a resident se ttlo r w ill be assessed on income attrib u tab le to his or her in te re st in a non-resident tr u s t. The branch-equivalent reporting system applies to se ttlo rs with in te re sts in non-resident tru sts in much the same manner as i t applies to resident shareholders with in terests in non-resident companies. 5 .3 .1 Measurement o f Branch-Equivalent B asis Income On the branch-equivalent basis, the income of a non-resident tru s t must be measured in accordance with New Zealand tax rules, in the same way as the income of a non-resident company (see section 5.2.1). Where, however, a non-resident tru st receives dividends from a non-resident company whose income is reported on a branch-equivalent basis by the resident se ttlo r of the tr u s t, such dividends w ill be excluded from the tr u s t's income. Where a non-resident tru s t receives dividends from a non-resident company whose income is reported on a comparative-value basis by the resident se ttlo r of the tr u s t, the dividends w ill be included in the tr u s t's income in accordance with New Zealand law. Trustee income of a non-resident tru st w ill be defined as the net assessable income of the tru s t, computed in accordance with New Zealand tax law as modified above, less distributions to the extent of the branch-equivalent income reported in the year of distrib u tio n , and less amounts that have vested indefeasibly in beneficiaries (except beneficiaries which are non-resident tru sts and companies). Under current law, trustee income excludes only income th at is also derived by a beneficiary en titled , or deemed to be 34 e n title d , in possession to the receipt thereof. That defin itio n w ill be amended in relatio n to non-resident tru sts to make i t clear th at income in which a beneficiary has an indefeasibly vested in te re st w ill be deducted from the net assessable trustee income, whether or not the beneficiary is e n title d to enforce immediate payment of the income. Whether trustee income vests indefeasibly in a beneficiary w ill be determined in accordance with New Zealand law. For example, i f , under foreign law, income is deemed to vest in the reg istra r of tru sts or some other government o ffic ia l u n til i t is d istributed by tru stees, the income w ill nevertheless be considered tru stee income for New Zealand income tax purposes. 5.3.2 Calculating a Taxpayer's Percentage Interest in the Income of a Non-Resident Trust Resident se ttlo rs w ill include in th eir assessable income the portion of the trustee income of a non-resident tru st equal to the trustee income m ultiplied by th e ir percentage in te re st in the tru s t. The percentage in te re st of a resident s e ttlo r in a non-resident tru st w ill be calculated as the percentage th at the market value of the property contributed to the tru s t by the s e ttlo r, determined a t the time of the contribution, is of the market value of the t r u s t's net assets, also determined a t the time of the s e ttlo r 's contribution. Once the in te re st is established, i t w ill remain constant u n til another contribution is made to the tru s t. Thus, for example, i f A and B each contribute $100 to a tru s t each w ill have a 50 percent in te re st in the tr u s t. I f the tru s t assets double in value from $200 to $400, a t which time C contributes $400 to the tru s t, A and B w ill each have a 25 percent in te re s t in the tru s t while C w ill have a 50 percent in te re st in the tr u s t. The recalculation of s e ttlo r s ' respective in terests in a tru s t w ill be made only a t the end of a tr u s t's accounting year and w ill apply to a ttrib u te income to se ttlo rs for the next tru st accounting year. Where a non-resident tru s t in which a New Zealand taxpayer has an in te re st contributes property to another non-resident tru s t, the taxpayer's percentage in te re st in the second tru st w ill be determined by multiplying his or her 35 percentage in te re st in the f i r s t tru st by that tr u s t's percentage in te re st in the other non-resident tru s t, and so on. Resident se ttlo rs w ill be taxed on th e ir share of the income of each non-resident tru s t separately from th e ir other New Zealand income. This is consistent with the way tru stee income is taxed in the hands of New Zealand resident trustees. Trust losses attrib u tab le to a s e ttlo r 's in te re st in a non-resident tr u s t must be carried forward to be o ffset against future income from the s e ttlo r 's in te re st in that tru s t. Since beneficiaries w ill never have an in te re st in tru s t losses, the entire amount of a loss w ill, in effect, be treated as a trustee loss. Without a carry-forward rule, the attrib u tio n system would be open to abuse, since trustees could ensure that beneficiaries had indefeasibly vested in te re sts in any tru s t income while passing losses on to the s e ttlo r for tax purposes. 5 .3 .3 C redit for Foreign and New Zealand Taxes If a non-resident trustee provides a resident s e ttlo r with information about foreign taxes paid on trustee income (or New Zealand taxes on New Zealand-source income), the se ttlo r w ill be e n title d to claim a tax cred it equal to the taxes paid on trustee income multiplied by the s e ttlo r 's percentage in te re st in the tru s t. The calculation and attrib u tio n of tax credits available to resident se ttlo rs who report income attrib u ted to th e ir in te re sts in non-resident tru sts on a branch-equivalent basis is made by reference to the same rules applicable to shareholders in non-resident companies who report income on a branch-equivalent basis. 5.4 E lectio n to Report on Branch-Equivalent B asis Taxpayers who qualify to report income from a non-resident e n tity on a branch-equivalent basis must f ile an election with the IRD office to which they send th eir annual tax returns. A copy w ill be sent by IRD to the special IRD tax u n it. A separate election must be made in respect of each 36 non-resident e n tity which the taxpayer wishes to report on a branch-equivalent basis. Thus, the taxpayer may choose to report the income of one non-resident e n tity on a branch-equivalent basis and another on a comparative-value basis. The taxpayer w ill be required to inform the Commissioner of Inland Revenue of the accounting year used by the non-resident en tity . Any subsequent change in the e n tity 's balance date must be communicated to the Commissioner and approved by him as a basis for continuing to use the branch-equivalent method. I f the Commissioner does not give his consent, the taxpayer w ill be required to report income from the e n tity using the comparative-value basis. The mechanics of changing the basis of reporting income are described in section 5.5. Elections to use the branch-equivalent basis reporting system file d before 1 April 1988 w ill be effective from 1 April 1988. Elections file d a fte r 1 April 1988 w ill be effective from the f i r s t accounting year of the non-resident en tity commencing a fte r the date on which the election is file d . Branch-equivalent taxpayers must be able to provide the Commissioner with information sim ilar to th at which taxpayers reporting on an actual branch basis are required to provide. The Inland Revenue Department w ill make available d e ta ils of the information required for filin g and auditing purposes. A special requirement for taxpayers reporting income on a branch-equivalent basis w ill be th at they must be able to provide the Commissioner, on request, with a copy of the financial accounts of the non-resident company or tru st and a copy of it s foreign tax returns. Any information in a foreign language must be accompanied by an English tran slatio n (see the discussion of the disclosure requirements in chapter 8). 5 .5 C hanging fro m B ra n c h -E q u iv a le n t t o C o m p a rativ e -V alu e B a s is Taxpayers may change the basis of reporting income from a non-resident e n tity if they notify the Commissioner of Inland Revenue a t le a st one month before the beginning of the next accounting year of the e n tity . The change in the 37 basis of reporting w ill become effective from the beginning of the next accounting year of the en tity . A taxpayer changing from branch-equivalent to comparative-value reporting w ill be required to compute the value of his or her in te re st in the e n tity on the date the change becomes effective (referred to as the "effective date"). The value of an in te re st w ill be computed on th is date in accordance with the rules set out in chapter 6. The value of the in te re st computed on the effective date w ill be deemed as the opening value of the in te re st a t the beginning of the taxpayer's income year. This value w ill be compared with the value of the in te re st a t the end of the taxpayer's income year for the purposes of computing income using the comparative-value basis. The taxpayer w ill be required to report income from the e n tity for the accounting year up to the effective date on a branch-equivalent basis. Where a taxpayer has elected to report income on a branch-equivalent basis and i t is not possible for whatever reason to compute branch-equivalent income up to the effective date, income from the beginning to the end of the e n tity 's accounting year must be calculated using an imputed return method. For the purposes of applying an imputed return method, the value of the in te re st on the f i r s t day of the non-resident e n tity 's accounting year w ill be computed as the market value of the taxpayer's in te re st on the la s t day of the e n tity 's accounting year discounted by the annual imputed return rate on a straig h t-lin e basis. This rule w ill apply where taxpayers cannot compute branch-equivalent income in any accounting year of a non-resident company and where they have not given prior notice of th eir intention to compute income on a comparative-value basis. 38 APPENDIX 5.1 SCHEMATIC OUTLINE OF THE INCOME ATTRIBUTION ROLES 39 APPENDIX 5.2 EXAMPLE OF ATTRIBUTION RULES IN OPERATION Resident Non-Resident Companies Company Income (1) Foreign Taxes NZCo' s In terest (2) Attributed to NZCo Income (3) Tax Credit (4) ($) ($)(%)($) ($) A300 50 80240 40 B−400 NIL 56 −224 (5) NIL C 500 (6)100 34170 34 D60020017 102 31 (7) E700 (8) 1501391 N/A (9) F N/A (10)N/AN/AN/A N/A (Figures rounded; amounts in New Zealand dollars) Notes 1 A, B, C and D's income, measured according to New Zealand tax rules, is reported on a branch-equivalent basis. 2 Each in te re st is m ultiplicative, eg NZCo's in te re st in C = .8 x .7 x .6. 3 Income attrib u ted to NZCo is i t s in te re st in each company's income. 4 Tax cred it attrib u ted to NZCo is i t s in te re st in foreign taxes paid. 5 Loss may be o ffset (or carried forward for offset) only against other branch-equivalent of comparative-value income. 6 Includes dividend received from E since E's income is reported on a comparative-value basis. 7 Foreign taxes paid by D exceed the New Zealand tax (say, 30%) on such income. Thus, the credit is limited to NZCo's in terest in 30% of D's income. 8 Reported on a comparative-value basis. 9 No cred it available as comparative-value income is net of foreign taxes. 10 As E's income has been reported on a comparative-value basis, F 's income is ignored. 40 CHAPTER 6 – REPORTING INCOME ON A COMPARATIVE-VALUE BASIS 6.1 Non-Resident Companies 6.1.1 Overview Under the comparative-value basis, a taxpayers includes in his or her income for a year any change in the market value of an in te re st in a non-resident company. The change in value w ill be calculated by comparing the market value of the taxpayer's in te re st in a company a t the end of the taxpayer's income year and the value of that in te re st a t the beginning of the year. Where market values cannot be determined by reference to the traded price of an in te re st, the market value of a taxpayer's in te re st in a non-resident company w ill be determined a t the end of the company's accounting year. Subject to provisions to prevent avoidance, where an in te re st in a non-resident company is acquired during a year, the amount included in assessable income w ill be the difference between the cost of the in te re st and it s market value a t the end of the year. Similarly, where an in te re s t is disposed of during a year, the amount included in assessable income w ill be the difference between the market value a t the beginning of the year and the proceeds of disposition. In general, taxpayers w ill be required to value in terests in non-resident companies by reference to the traded prices of the in te re sts, i f such prices are available and provide a reliab le indication of market value. Otherwise, taxpayers w ill be required to compute the market value of th eir in te re sts in accordance with appropriate valuation techniques. Where the traded price of an in te re st is unavailable or unreliable and the compliance costs of establishing market values by any other methods are excessive, the taxpayer 41 may use an imputed rate of return method of valuation to determine the value of the in te re st. Where the Commissioner of Inland Revenue is not sa tisfie d that the values reported by a taxpayer accurately re fle c t market values, he may use the imputed-return method to determine the market value of the taxpayer's in te re st. Where the market value of an in te re st has not been determined by reference to the traded price of the in te re st, and the market value of an in te re st a t the end of a taxpayer's income year or the proceeds of disposition exceed the last-reported value by more than 30 percent, a post facto adjustment w ill be made to recoup any tax-deferral benefits which the taxpayer has enjoyed, unless the taxpayer is able to demonstrate the accuracy of the previously reported market value. The method for computing foreign income under the comparative-value basis is summarised in the following formula: Y = (E + S) − (B + P) where: Y = annual accrued gain or loss in respect of an in te re st in a non-resident company. E = market value of the in terest a t the end of the taxpayer's income year. S = proceeds from the disposition of a ll or part of the in te re st in the non-resident company during the taxpayer's income year. B = market value of the in terest a t the beginning of the taxpayer's income year (th is w ill be the market value of the in te re st a t the end of the immediately preceding year). P = the cost of any in terest acquired by the taxpayer in the non-resident company during the income year. 42 All amounts must be calculated in New Zealand dollars in accordance with the rules for converting foreign currency denominated values contained in section 6.1.2. The annual accrued gain or loss from in terests in non-resident companies must be calculated separately for each non-resident company in which a taxpayer has an in te re st. Any losses so calculated may be used to o ffse t branch-equivalent or comparative-value income in respect of in te re sts in other non-resident companies in the current year or may be carried forward to o ffse t such income in future years. Such losses may not be used to o ffse t a taxpayer's other assessable income. However, where the taxpayer is a company within a group of companies (as defined in section 191 of the Income Tax Act), these losses may be transferred to other companies in the group for o ffse t against branch-equivalent or comparative-value income. 6.1.2 Market Value of an Interest in a Non-Resident Company The market value of an in te re st in a non-resident company is the highest price obtainable for the in te re st in a transaction between non-associated persons who are under no compulsion to buy or se ll and who have fu ll knowledge of a ll the relevant facts. Methods that may be used to determine the market value of an in te re st in a non-resident company are outlined below. a Valuation by Reference to Traded Price The best indication of the market value of an in te re st in a non-resident company w ill be the observable traded price of the in te re st. Where an in te re st is traded on a public exchange, it s market value w ill be determined by reference to the reported traded price of the in terest computed on the following basis: 43 - where buy and se ll offers are recorded on the exchange for the five working days prior to the end of the taxpayer's income year (referred to as the taxpayer's balance date), market value is the average of the close-of-trading prices recorded during that period; - where for any day within the five day period no transactions in the in te re st are recorded, the market value shall be the mid-point of the close-of-trading buy and se ll offers reported; and - where neither buy nor se ll offers are recorded during the la s t five trading days prior to the taxpayer's balance date, market value is the average of the mid-point of buy and se ll offers reported in the most recent three days of the 30 working days immediately preceding the taxpayer's balance date. In terests in unit tru sts that are not traded but are redeemable a t c a ll or upon notice by the unit holder a t prices set by the tru s t fund managers may be valued by reference to the most recently quoted redemption price in the 30 days immediately preceding a taxpayer's balance date. The redemption price may be a daily, weekly, or monthly price quoted in accordance with procedures adopted by the managers of the unit tru s t. The market value of an in te re st in a non-resident company determined on the basis of i t s traded price or redemption price must be computed in New Zealand dollars using the close-of-trading spot exchange rate on the balance date of the taxpayer. Taxpayers w ill be required to disclose the name of the public exchange and the dates of the traded prices used to establish the market value of th eir in te re st (disclosure requirements are discussed further in Chapter 8). b Other Valuation Methods Where traded prices are not available, or do not provide a reliable indication of the market value of a taxpayer's in terest in a non-resident company, the market value of the in te re st must be determined in accordance with other valuation methods provided that they conform to commercially acceptable valuation methods. 44 Under these valuation methods, the market value of an in te re s t in a non-resident company w ill reflec t: i the shareholders' funds of the non-resident company, provided th a t a ll assets and lia b ilitie s of the company are included in the company's balance sheet a t th eir market values; and/or i i the net (after-tax) earnings of the non-resident company. One common method used to determine market value is based on the present value of future cash flows of a company. A lternatively, a value may be obtained by multiplying current or projected annual earnings by a price/earnings ra tio . The discount rate or the price/earnings ratio should take account of the risk and returns typical of the industry in which the non-resident company operates. Other valuation methods or variants of the above methods may be employed provided th at they conform with commercially acceptable valuation methods. Where in terests in a non-resident company are not traded on a public exchange, but that company's assets can be valued by reference to traded p rices, the market value of an in te re st in the f i r s t company should be determined by reference to the traded prices of i t s assets. If the market value of an in te re st can be determined by reference to traded prices, i t w ill be valued a t the end of the taxpayer's income year. I f the market value of an in te re st is determined on some basis other than the traded price of the in te re st, i t w ill be computed a t the end of the non-resident company's accounting year. The market value of the in te re st a t the end of the taxpayer's income year w ill be considered to be the value computed on the la s t day of the non-resident company's previous accounting year. However, i f the la s t day of the non-resident company's accounting year is before 1 April 1988, taxpayers w ill be required to value th eir in te re st as a t 1 April 1988. 45 The market value of an in te re st in a non-resident company determined a t the end of the company's accounting year must be converted to New Zealand dollars using the close-of-trading spot exchange rate on the la s t day of the company's accounting year. c Valuation by Reference to an Imputed Return Where the traded price of an in te re st is unavailable or unreliable and the compliance costs of establishing market values by any other methods are excessive, the taxpayer may compute the value of the in terest at the end of an income year by an imputed return method. This w ill be based on a rate of return equal to a yield of 5 percent above the yield on five-year New Zealand Government stock. The annual imputed rate applicable to th is method w ill be published each year by the Inland Revenue Department. A taxpayer w ill compute the value of an end-of-year in te re st on an imputed-return basis by multiplying the opening value of the in te re st by the appropriate imputed rate and adding the resu lt to the opening value. The same calculation is done for in terests acquired during the taxpayer's income year except that the imputed return is pro-rated to reflec t the portion of the taxpayer's income year during which the asset is owned. When a taxpayer uses the imputed return method for calculating comparative-value income, he or she may deduct from the value of the in te re st at the end of the income year any dividend received from the non-resident company during the income year. This provision for dividends paid is only necessary where an end-of-year value is determined using the imputed-return method. The market value of an in te re st computed on any other basis w ill re fle c t any dividends paid by a non-resident company. Once taxpayers have an end-of-year in te re st in a non-resident company computed on an imputed-return basis they w ill not be able to a lte r the basis upon which the in te re st can be valued for a further period of four income years. This 46 provision is necessary so that taxpayers cannot choose the method of valuation each year depending on whether income computed by reference to the actual market value of the in te re st or the imputed-return method resu lts in lower assessable income. At the end of a five-year period, i f the taxpayer wishes to continue to use the imputed return method, he or she w ill be required to compute the market value of his or her in te re st on the basis of the rules set out in section 6.1.2(a) or (b) above. When a taxpayer changes a t the end of a five-year period from the imputed-return method to any other method of valuing an in te re st, the market value of the in te re st a t the beginning of the year must be equal to it s market value under the imputed-return method a t the end of the previous income year. Where a taxpayer changes from another method of valuation to an imputed-return method, the imputed-return method w ill be applied to the market value of the in te re st a t the beginning of the taxpayer's income year. In the case of valuations which are not based on traded p rices, the value of an in te re st a t the beginning of a taxpayer's income year is deemed to be the market value a t the end of the la s t accounting year of the non-resident company. The imputed return w ill be pro-rated to re fle c t the portion of the taxpayer's income year represented by the period between the end of the non-resident company's accounting year and the taxpayer's balance date. d Market Value of an In terest on the Date of Commencement of these Rules The date of the implementation of these rules is 1 April 1988. The market value of an in te re st in a non-resident company a t the beginning of the f i r s t income year th is regime applies w ill be the market value of the in te re s t on that date. This ensures th at only accrued gains and losses derived a fte r 1 April 1988 w ill be included in the assessable income of a taxpayer. 47 6.1.3 Proceeds of Disposition of an Interest in a Non-Resident Company When a taxpayer disposes of an in terest in a non-resident company, the taxpayer must include in his or her assessable income the difference between the market value of the in te re st a t the beginning of the year and the proceeds of disposition. The determination of the time of disposition of an in te re st is dealt with in section 6.1.6. A special rule is necessary where a taxpayer has valued his or her in te re st a t the end of a non-resident company's accounting year pursuant to the rules set out in section 6.1.2(b) and the in te re st is disposed of a fte r the end of the non-resident company's accounting year. The amount included in the taxpayer's income w ill be the difference between the proceeds of disposition and the deemed market value of the in te re st a t the beginning of the taxpayer's income year. a Arm's-Length Dispositions Proceeds of disposition w ill be defined to include a l l amounts received or receivable in consideration for the in te re st. Proceeds w ill be valued in New Zealand dollars using the close-of-trading spot exchange rate applicable on the date of disposition of the in te re st. b Dispositions Not a t Market Value A taxpayer who disposes of an in te re st in a non-resident company by way of testamentary or in ter vivos g if t, or for less than i t s market value, w ill be deemed to have received proceeds of disposition equal to the market value of the in te re st a t the time of the disposition. As a result of th is deemed disposition a t market value, the taxpayer w ill be required to include in assessable income any change in the market value of the in te re st from the la s t time i t was valued for the purposes of these rules. 48 6.1.4 Acquisition of an Interest in a Non-Resident Company When a taxpayer acquires an in te re st in a non-resident company, the market value of the in te re st is added to the market value of the taxpayer's in te re st in th at company, i f any, a t the beginning of the income year for purposes of computing his or her annual accrued gain or loss pursuant to the formula set out in section 6.1.1 above. An in te re st acquired during a taxpayer's income year may be taken into account in th is manner provided i t is acquired on or before the actual date when the value of the in te re st a t the end of the taxpayer's income year is determined. For example, i f the market value of the taxpayer's in terest a t the end of the year is determined by reference to the traded price of the in te re s t, any in te re sts acquired during the taxpayer's income year w ill be taken into account (the value of an in te re st computed by reference to traded prices being determined at the end of the taxpayer's income year). This includes in te re sts acquired during an income year when the taxpayer switches from a method of valuation based on the accounting year of the non-resident company to a method based on the traded price of the in te re st. If the market value is determined a t the end of the non-resident company's accounting year, only those in te re sts acquired by the taxpayer prior to the end of the non-resident company's accounting year (on which date the in terest is valued) may be taken into account. In terests acquired after the end of the non-resident company's accounting year w ill be taken into account in determining the value of the in te re st in the taxpayer's next income year. a Arm's Length Acquisitions The market value of an in te re st acquired by a taxpayer in an arm's length transaction w ill be the cost of the in terest to the taxpayer. b Acquisitions Not at Market Value Taxpayers who acquire an in terest in a non-resident company by way of 49 testamentary or in ter vivos g if t or for more than market value, w ill be deemed to have acquired the in te re st a t a cost equal to i t s market value a t the time of the acquisition. This provision w ill ensure that the value of a g if t is not subject to income tax under these rules. However, any subsequent increase in the market value of the in te re st w ill be taxable. This deeming provision complements a sim ilar provision described in section 6.1.3(b) which deems the donor of an in te re st in a non-resident company to have disposed of the in te re st for i t s market value a t the time of the g if t. The rules for computing the market value of in te re sts in non-resident companies acquired by g if t or for excessive consideration w ill be identical to those set out in section 6.1.2. The determination of the time of acquisition of an in te re st is dealt with in section 6.1.6. The cost of acquisitions in a non-resident company w ill also be defined to include disguised acquisitions. For example, property transferred to , or services performed for a company d irec tly or indirectly by a taxpayer or an associated person of the taxpayer w ill be deemed to be an acquisition of an in terest in the company by the taxpayer. The cost of the in terest acquired would be the difference between the market value of the property transferred or service performed and the market value of the consideration received in respect of the service or property. 6.1.5 The Post Facto Adjustment The post facto adjustment is an adjustment to a taxpayer's tax lia b ility on income computed on a comparative-value basis where the annual accrued gain for the preceding year has been significantly under-estimated. The adjustment is designed to counteract taxpayers gaining an advantage from the deferral of New Zealand tax by under-reporting the market value of an in te re st. By removing the advantage of deferral, th is adjustment w ill also encourage taxpayers to value in te re sts in non-resident companies as accurately as possible. 50 A post facto adjustment w ill be required when the proceeds of disposition of an in te re st in a non-resident company or the market value of the in te re st a t the end of the taxpayer's income year plus any dividends received exceeds the market value of the in te re st a t the end of the immediately-preceding income year by more than 30 percent. However, such an adjustment w ill not be required i f the taxpayer has valued his or her in te re st a t the end of the immediately-preceding income year by reference to traded prices, or can demonstrate the accuracy of the previously reported value, or can demonstrate the accuracy of the previously reported value. The taxpayer (or the Inland Revenue Department where i t has undertaken a revaluation of a taxpayer's in terest) w ill determine an adjusted tax l i a b ili ty in accordance with the following steps: Step 1: compute the amount which determines whether the post facto adjustment is triggered: a + b − c − d where: a = proceeds of disposition and/or on the market value a t the end of the taxpayer's income year; and b = dividends paid by the non-resident company in the income year in respect of which the post facto adjustment applies and received by the taxpayer or by a non-resident company or tr u s t in respect of which the taxpayer reports income on a branch-equivalent basis; c = reported market value a t the end of the immediately preceding income year; and d = the cost of an in te re st acquired by the taxpayer during the income year. 51 Step 2: i f the amount computed in step 1 is greater than 30 percent of the reported market value a t the end of the immediately preceding income year, the post facto adjustment must be undertaken. The amount subject to adjustment is that computed in step 1, less an amount equal to 30 percent of the reported market value a t the end of the immediately preceding income year. This amount is referred to as the post facto adjustment balance (PFAB). Step 3: if the taxpayer is a resident individual or a company p o rtfo lio investor with less than 10 percent of the paid up capital of the non-resident company, the dividends and gains in the value of the in te re st are both assessable. A single post facto adjustment calculation w ill suffice. I f , on the other hand, the taxpayer is a resident company which is not a portfolio investor, the dividends are exempt but the company w ill be required to collect a withholding payment a t a rate equal to the personal tax rate . The taxpayer w ill therefore need to apportion the PFAB between th at part a ttrib u tab le to the gain in the value of the in te re st and th at part a ttrib u tab le to dividends. The portion of the PFAB attrib u tab le to the gain in the value of the in te re st is referred to as the income adjustment balance (IAB) and the remainder is referred to as the dividend adjustment balance (DAB). The PFAB w ill be allocated f i r s t to the IAB with any remainder being allocated to the DAB. A separate post facto adjustment w ill be required for each balance. The adjustment to the IAB w ill be taxed a t the company tax rate. The adjustment to the DAB w ill be subject to a withholding payment at the personal tax rate. Step 4: spread the amount subject to the post facto adjustment computed in step 3 evenly across the lesser of: - the period over which the in te re st was held subsequent to 1 April 1988; or 52 - the period since the market value of the in te re st was la s t valued by reference to traded prices. The sh o rtfall w ill be spread on the basis of each complete month of the relevant period. Step 5: calculate the increased annual tax lia b ility (or the adjusted withholding payment) for each income year the in te re st was held during the relevant period described in step 4; Step 6: determine the to ta l adjusted tax lia b ility or withholding payment amount. This w ill be the cumulative amount of increased tax or withholding payment recomputed for previous income years calculated on a year-on-year compounding basis using in te re st rates for each year published by the Inland Revenue Department applicable to tax in dispute. The in te re st levied to adjust tax payable or withholding payments to current values w ill not be deductible. Step 7: where the post facto adjustment applies to the income adjustment balance (the IAB) compute net tax to pay on to ta l assessable income by adding the tax payable on income th at has been subject to the post facto adjustment to tax payable on other income (th at is , tax on other assessable income excluding the amount subject to the post facto adjustment). Where the post facto adjustment applies to the dividend adjustment balance (DAB), compute the withholding payment due by adding the withholding payment on dividends th a t have been subject to the post facto adjustment to withholding payments due on other dividends received (that is , payments due on dividends received excluding the dividends subject to the post facto adjustment). 53 EXAMPLE: A corporate taxpayer X s e lls a 20 percent in te re st in non-resident company Y for $435,000 on 30 September 1990. The reported value of the in te re st a t the end of the taxpayer's previous income year (31 March 1990) was $360,000. During the income year to 31 March 1991, the taxpayer received $73,000 in dividends from company Y. The taxpayer originally purchased the in te re st in company Y on 1 June 1985. Step 1: Compute the amount which determines whether the post facto adjustment is triggered: = proceeds of disposition + dividends received − reported value a t end of previous year. = $435,000 + $73,000 − $360,000 = $148,000 Step 2: Compare the amount computed in step 1 to the reported market value a t the end of the previous income year: = $148,000 = 41% $360,000 Therefore post facto adjustment is activated. Compute the amount subject to the post facto adjustment: = $148,000 minus an amount equal to 30 percent of reported market value a t end of previous income year. = $148,000 − $108,000 = $40,000 In th is example, the PFAB (ie $40,000) is less than the gain in the value of the in te re st in the company, $75,000 (ie $435,000 minus $360,000). Thus, the PFAB is only allocated to the IAB. The DAB is zero. If, on the other hand, the PFAB were $85,000 which exceeded the gain in the value of the in te re st in the company (viz $75,000), the remainder (ie $10,000) would be allocated to the DAB. Step 4: Spread the IAB subject to the post facto adjustment across the period the in te re st was held from 1 April 1988. 54 Complete Months 2 complete income years 1988–89 to 1989–90 24 6 months in 1990-91 income year 6 Total 30 Shortfall per month = $40,000 30 = $1,333,33 Step 5: Recomputation of tax lia b ility Year End 31/3 Adjusted Annual Income Adjusted Annual Tax @ 30% (say) Annual Tax Int. Rate (say) Adjusted Tax at S tart of year Adjusted by In t. Rate Plus Adjusted Tax for Year Equals Year- End Tax L iab ility $ $ % $ $ $ $ 198916,0004,800 15 00 4,8004,800(1) 1990 16,0004,80013 4,800 5,424(2) 4,800 10,224(3) 19918,0002,4001010,22410,724(4) 2,400 13,124 (6 months) Notes (1) This figure is the underpaid tax for the 1989 income year. (2) This is the underpaid tax for 1989 compounded up by the tax in dispute rate for the 1990 income year. (3) This is equal to $5,424 plus the underpaid tax for the 1990 income year (ie $4,800). (4) For six months @ 10% p.a. Figures rounded to nearest dollar for illu s tra tiv e purposes. Step 6: Adjusted Tax L iability on the income adjustment balance (IAB) subject to post facto adjustment = $13,124 55 6.1.6 Time of Acquisition or Disposition of an Interest in a Non-Resident Company In general , a taxpayer w ill be considered to have acquired an in te re st in a non-resident company when the taxpayer acquires legal t i t l e in the in te re st from the s e lle r. Similarly, a taxpayer w ill be considered to have disposed of an in te re st in a non-resident company when t i t l e in the in terest passes to the purchaser. 6 .2 N on -R esid en t T ru sts 6.2.1 O verview The comparative-value basis of reporting foreign income w ill apply to resident se ttlo rs who are deemed to hold an in te re st in a non-resident tru s t pursuant to the rules set out in section 4.3.1 and who do not qualify for, or choose not to use, the branch-equivalent basis (see section 5.3). The measurement of the annual accrued gain or loss in an in te re st in a non-resident tru st w ill be similar to the measurement of the annual accrued gain or loss in an in te re st in a non-resident company. The annual accrued gain or loss in respect of a taxpayer's in te re st in a non-resident tr u s t is the difference between the market value of the in te re st a t the end of the taxpayer's income year and it s market value a t the beginning of the income year. 56 The method for computing annual accrued gains or losses is summarised in the following formula: Y = E − (B + P) where: Y = annual accrued gain or loss in respect of an in te re st held by a New Zealand resident se ttlo r in a non-resident tru s t. E = market value of a s e ttlo r 's in te re st in a non-resident tr u s t a t the end of the s e ttlo r 's income year. This w ill be deemed to be the market value a t the end of the non-resident tr u s t's accounting year. B = market value of a s e ttlo r 's in te re st in a non-resident tr u s t a t the beginning of the s e ttlo r 's income year. P = market value of contributions to the non-resident tru s t by the s e ttlo r during the tr u s t's accounting year. All amounts must be calculated in New Zealand dollars in accordance with the procedures set out in section 6.2.2(b). Losses from an in te re st in a non-resident tru s t must be carried forward and w ill o ffset only comparative-value or branch-equivalent income from the tr u s t in future years. 6 .2 .2 V aluation o f a S e ttlo r 's In te r e st in a Non-Resident Trust a Market Value of an In terest a t the End of a Taxpayer's Income Year The m a rk e t v a lu e o f a n i n t e r e s t i n a n o n - r e s id e n t t r u s t w i l l be d e te r m in e d a t th e en d o f th e t r u s t ' s a c c o u n tin g y e a r and t h a t am ount w i l l b e t h e m a rk e t 57 value of the in te re st a t the end of the taxpayer's income year (the taxpayer's balance date). The market value of an in te re st at the beginning of any income year w ill be the market value of the in te re st reported on the la s t day of the taxpayer's immediately preceding income year. The market value of an in te re st in a non-resident tru s t w ill be computed by multiplying the market value of the net assets of the tru st (being assets of the tru s t th at are not indefeasibly vested in beneficiaries, less the t r u s t 's lia b ilitie s ) as a t the end of the tr u s t's accounting year by the s e ttlo r 's in te re st in the tru s t, determined in accordance with the rules in section 5.3.2. The market value of an in te re st must be reported in New Zealand dollars converted a t the close-of-trading spot exchange rate on the la s t day of the non-resident tr u s t's accounting year. b Valuing an In terest Using the Imputed Return Method If a resident s e ttlo r has insufficient access to the financial information of a non-resident tru st to compute the market value of an in terest in the tru s t by reference to the net assets of the tru s t, the market value w ill be the market value of the in te re st at the beginning of the s e ttlo r 's income year in New Zealand dollars adjusted by an imputed return. As for valuing in te re sts in non-resident companies, the imputed rate of return w ill be equal to a rate 5 percent above the yield on five-year New Zealand Government stock. The annual imputed rate applicable w ill be the same as that applying to the valuation of in terests in non-resident companies. The same calculation w ill be made for contributions to a non-resident tru s t during the taxpayer's income year except that the imputed return w ill be pro-rated. Once the market value of a s e ttlo r 's in te re st in a non-resident tru s t has been determined on an imputed-return basis, i t must continue to be valued on th at basis for a further period of four income years. When taxpayers move from the imputed-return method to the net assets method of valuing an in te re st, the market value of th eir in te re st a t the beginning of the year must be equal to its market value under the imputed-return method. When taxpayers move from the net assets method of valuation to the imputed return method, the imputed-return method w ill be applied to the market value of the in te re st a t the end of the la s t accounting year of the non-resident tru st. 58 c Market Value of an In terest in a Non-Resident Trust on the Date of Commencement of These Rules S ettlo rs of non-resident tru sts who adopt the comparative-value method of reporting income w ill be required to value th eir in te re sts as a t 1 April 1988, the date of implementation of the regime. Where a taxpayer is unable to compute the market value of an in te re st in a non-resident tru s t by reference to the market value of the net assets of the tru s t, the market value of the in te re st w ill be computed as the market value, a t the time of the contribution, of a ll property contributed to the tr u s t to 31 March 1988 adjusted on a year-on-year compounding basis by the annual in te re st rate published for each income year by the Inland Revenue Department. 6.2.3 Valuation of Property Contributed to a Non-Resident Trust Property contributed to a non-resident tru st by a resident s e ttlo r during an income year must be valued a t market value. Procedures for valuing g if ts and transfers for inadequate consideration w ill be the same as those se t out in section 6.1.4(b). Whenever additional property is contributed to a tr u s t, i t w ill be necessary to recompute the s e ttlo r 's in te re st in the tru s t pursuant to the rules se t out in section 5.3.2. Where the value of a s e ttlo r 's in te re st at the end of his or her income year is computed by reference to the net assets of the non-resident tr u s t, only contributions made prior to the end of the tr u s t's accounting year (on which date the in te re st is valued) may be taken into account. Otherwise, g ifted property contributed during a taxpayer's income year may be taken into account in determining the market value of an in te re st a t the beginning and end of the taxpayer's income year. 59 6 .2 .4 P ost Facto Adjustment A post facto adjustment to a s e ttlo r 's tax lia b ility for prior income years w ill be triggered where the market value of a s e ttlo r 's in te re st in a non-resident tru s t a t the end of any income year exceeds the reported value of the in te re st a t the end of the immediately preceding income year by more than 30 percent. A post facto adjustment may be triggered by the taxpayer or as a result of a revaluation of the s e ttlo r 's in te re st by the Inland Revenue Department. The post facto adjustment w ill be identical to that in respect of in te re st in non-resident companies. The post facto adjustment is described in greater d etail in section 6.1.5. 6.3 B e n e fic ia l In te r e sts in D iscretion ary Non-Resident Trusts Taxpayers who acquire through purchase a beneficial in te re st in a discretionary non-resident tru s t w ill be taxed on such an in te re st on the same basis as any in te re st held by resident se ttlo rs described in section 6.2. The opening value of an in te re st in the non-resident tru s t w ill be the cost of the interest or market value i f th is is greater. 6.4 Changing from Comparative-Value to Branch-Equivalent B asis R eporting. A taxpayer may only change the basis of reporting income earned through a non-resident company or tru s t from the comparative-value basis to the branch-equivalent basis from the beginning of a non-resident e n tity 's accounting year. The taxpayer must notify the Commissioner of Inland Revenue of the change before the beginning of the accounting year in respect of which the change is to be effective. The Commissioner may require taxpayers to continue to use the comparative-value basis where th eir access to the financial information of the foreign en tity is insufficient to permit branch-equivalent basis reporting. 60 CHAPTER 7 – THE TAXATION OF DISTRIBUTIONS 7.1 Introduction To th is point, th is consultative document has outlined the treatment of foreign income earned by residents through non-resident companies and tru s ts th at w ill be taxable on a current basis in New Zealand. This chapter outlines the proposed treatment of distributed income in residents' hands, whether in the form of dividends from non-resident companies or d istrib u tio n s from non-resident tru sts. 7.2 Foreign Dividends 7.2.1 Dividends Received by Companies All foreign dividends received by resident companies w ill continue to be exempt from tax with the exception of portfolio dividends. However, companies receiving non-portfolio dividends w ill be required to collect a withholding payment on behalf of shareholders. Foreign portfolio dividends received by companies resident in New Zealand a fte r the time of the Minister of Finance's Statement on 17 December 1987 w ill be included in assessable income. A cred it w ill be allowed for foreign withholding taxes paid in respect of such dividends. Portfolio dividends w ill be defined as dividends received from a non-resident company in which the recipient company owns less than 10 percent of the paid-up share cap ital a t the time th at the dividends are received. A dividend w ill be deemed to be received when i t is declared by the payer company. 61 7.2.2 Dividends Received by Individuals Foreign dividends received by individuals who are residents of New Zealand will continue to be included in assessable income. Foreign withholding taxes levied on such dividends w ill continue to be creditable against a re sid e n t's New Zealand tax lia b ility . 7.3 Assessable Distributions from Trusts It is necessary to amend existing income tax rules with respect to distributions by non-resident tru sts to beneficiaries who are residents of New Zealand. These amendments w ill make i t clear th a t a ll distrib u tio n s w ill be taxable in the hands of beneficiaries resident in New Zealand with the exception of distributions made from the capital of the tru s t. 7.3.1 Definition of a Distribution In order to minimise opportunities for deferral of New Zealand tax, beneficiaries' income in respect of distrib u tio n s received from non-resident trusts w ill be defined to include any amount which vests indefeasibly in a beneficiary, whether or not the beneficiary is e n title d to enforce immediate payment of the amount. This definition of b eneficiaries' income is consistent with the definition of trustee income of a non-resident tru st set out in section 5.3.2 which excludes any income that vests indefeasibly in beneficiaries of the tru s t. This definition w ill be restric te d to distributions from non-resident tru sts. However, the extension of the definition to distrib u tio n s from resident tru sts w ill be considered in due course. Distributions out of the capital of the tru st w ill not be included in assessable income. For the purpose of these rules, distributions w ill be deemed to be made out of tru s t income unless the beneficiary can show th a t i t represents distrib u tio n s of the capital of the tru st. 62 These rules w ill apply to distrib u tio n s received and amounts th at vest indefeasibly in beneficiaries a fte r the time of the Minister of Finance's Statement on 17 December 1987. 7 .3 .2 Non-Resident T rusts That Became R esident T rusts An opportunity to avoid New Zealand tax on distributions ex ists when a non-resident tru s t with accumulated funds appoints a resident tru ste e , thereby becoming a resident tru s t. D istributions from the accumulated funds of the tr u s t to beneficiaries in New Zealand would not be subject to New Zealand tax. Therefore, when a non-resident tru s t becomes a resident tr u s t, the resident tru stee w ill be assessable on the market value of the tru s t assets reduced by the value of the capital of the tru s t, being the original cap ital and any subsequent contributions, a t h isto ric al cost. 7 .4 R e lie f fo r Branch-Equivalent Taxes As noted in section 5.2.1, re lie f for New Zealand tax is available for dividends or distributions paid from income th at has been reported by a taxpayer on a branch-equivalent basis. This is provided by perm itting a deduction for dividends or distributions to the extent that branch-equivalent income is earned in the year of d istrib u tio n . There w ill be no provision for re lie f from New Zealand tax for dividends or d istrib u tio n s from income that has been reported by a taxpayer on a comparative-value basis. This is because the payment of such dividends or d istrib u tio n s w ill reduce the value of a resid en t's in te re st in the non-resident company, thereby reducing the resid en t's income measured on a comparative-value basis. 63 7.5 Foreign Tax C redit 7 .5 .1 D ividends from Non-Resident Companies Tax cred its w ill be provided for foreign withholding taxes paid on p o rtfo lio dividends received by resident companies and dividends received by resident individuals in accordance with the provisions in Part VIII of the Income Tax Act. Foreign non-portfolio dividends, while exempt in the hands of resident companies, w ill be assessable when distributed to individual shareholders. Certain foreign withholding taxes on dividends received by a resident company will be added to the company's imputation credit account and thereby flow through to individual shareholders. This is explained in greater d e ta il in the consultative document on fu ll imputation. 7 .5 .2 D istrib u tio n s from Non-Resident T rusts Foreign withholding taxes paid on assessable distributions received by resident beneficiaries from non-resident tru sts w ill be creditable against New Zealand tax payable on such distributions. Section 293 of the Income Tax Act currently permits a credit to be claimed against New Zealand tax payable by a beneficiary for foreign income taxes and withholding taxes paid in respect of the beneficiaries' income. This section will be amended to provide a tax credit for foreign withholding taxes only. The credit for foreign withholding taxes paid on distrib u tio n s to resident beneficiaries w ill be subject to conditions and lim itations sim ilar to those under the provisions of Part VIII of the Income Tax Act. Where both exempt and assessable distributions are received, foreign withholding tax must be apportioned between them on a pro-rata basis. 64 7 .6 D isguised D istrib u tio n s Dividends from non-resident companies or distributions from non-resident tru s ts received by a resident w ill be broadly defined to include benefits received d irec tly or in d irectly by the resident. Such benefits must be reported a t market value. Examples of benefits considered to be distrib u tio n s or dividends include those enjoyed pursuant to loans to a resident shareholder or beneficiary a t non-market in te re st rates, or property transferred or services performed for consideration th at d iffe rs from market value. The value of the benefit in such circumstances w ill be the difference between market value of the arrangement and the actual value of any consideration paid or received by the resident shareholder or beneficiary to or from the non-resident e n tity . 65 CHAPTER 8 – DISCLOSURE AND ADMINISTRATION 8.1 Introduction Taxpayers w ill be required to disclose th e ir in te re sts in non-resident companies and tru sts and to provide a ll information necessary to compute foreign income in accordance with these measures. Taxpayers with in te re sts in such e n titie s w ill be required to f ile a separate schedule for each e n tity with th e ir annual income tax return. Penalties w ill apply for fa ilu re to disclose the necessary information. To a s s is t in the e ffic ie n t and f a ir administration of the new measures, a special unit of the Inland Revenue Department w ill be established. 8.2 Disclosure Each income year taxpayers w ill be required to disclose whether they:- had an in te re st, as defined in section 4.2.1 of th is document, in a non-resident company; - had an in te re st, as defined in section 4.3.1 of th is document, in a non-resident tru s t; - received a dividend from a non-resident company; and - received a d istrib u tio n from a non-resident tru st or whether income in such a tru s t became vested indefeasibly in them. A separate schedule for each non-resident company or non-resident tru s t in which the taxpayer has an in terest must be file d with the annual income tax return. Individuals w ill not be required to complete such schedules where the total value of a ll in terests in non-resident companies does not exceed $10,000 at a ll times in the income year or where the to ta l value of a ll contributions to non-resident tru sts does not exceed $500 a t a ll times in the income year. 66 The information to be disclosed on the schedule w ill include: - the name, address and other basic d e ta ils of the en tity ;- the taxpayer's percentage in te re st in the en tity ; - a return of income computed on eith er a branch-equivalent or comparative-value basis; - the computation of New Zealand tax lia b ility on dividends or d istrib u tio n s;- recomputed tax lia b ility where the post facto adjustment is triggered; and - any change in the balance date of the e n tity during the income year. A taxpayer reporting income on a branch-equivalent basis w ill be required to include with the return the annual balance sheet and p ro fit and loss statement for the non-resident tru s t or company. In addition, the taxpayer must have available in New Zealand, for inspection by Inland Revenue Department on request, a copy of the e n tity 's financial accounts (audited i f available) and of i t s tax return filed with the foreign tax au th o rities. A taxpayer reporting income on the comparative-value basis must provide su fficien t information to support the basis of valuation used and the change in value reported. Where relevant, th is w ill include such d e ta ils as the name of the exchange on which the in te re st is traded, the dates on which traded prices have been used to value the in te re st, and the volume of shares traded. All information required to be disclosed by taxpayers under these measures must be in English or be accompanied by an English translation. Substantial penalties w ill apply for non-disclosure or inadequate disclosure. 67 8.3 Administration Taxpayers w ill continue to f ile th eir income tax returns at IRD d is tr ic t offices. The processing of disclosure returns w ill be centralised in a special u n it of the Department. The unit w ill be staffed by personnel specialising in the monitoring of income earned by residents under th is regime. Such cen tralisatio n w ill f a c ilita te investigation and the cross-checking of returns and hence th e ir consistent treatment. Comprehensive auditing w ill also be possible. The Government w ill ensure that the necessary resources are committed to enable the international tax regime to be effectively monitored and enforced. 68 GLOSSARY OF TERMS Accounting year – the 12-month period ending with the taxpayer's balance date. Associated persons – individuals and companies associated within the meaning of section 8 of the Income Tax Act. Branch-equivalent basis – the method for determining a taxpayer's income from an in te re st in a non-resident company or tru s t where the taxpayer has su fficien t information to calculate the income of the company or tr u s t in accordance with New Zealand tax rules. Comparative-value basis – the method for determining the annual increase or decrease in the market value of an in te re st in a non-resident company or tr u s t. Dividend Adjustment Balance (DAB) – the amount of non-portfolio dividends that w ill be subject to the post facto adjustment. Distribution from a non-resident trust – any amount which vests indefeasibly in a beneficiary. Imputation Credit Account – an account to be established by companies to record the amount of imputation credits available for allocation to shareholders. Imputed return method – the determination of the market value of an in te re st in a non-resident company or tru s t assuming that the value grew a t a rate equal to a prescribed in te re st rate. Income Adjustment Balance (IAB) – that part of the accrued gain in the value of an in te re st th at w ill be subject to the post facto adjustment. 69 Income year – the year ending 31 March. For example, the year ending 31 March 1988 is referred to as the 1988 income year. Income year is defined in section 2 of the Income Tax Act 1976. Interest in a non-resident trust – the proportion of the market value of the net assets of the tru st attrib u tab le to a resident s e ttlo r 's contribution. Interest in a non-resident company – an entitlement to, or entitlem ent to acquire, rights to dividends or voting power in relation to d istrib u tio n s and changes to a company's constitutional rules. Market value – the highest price obtainable in a transaction between non-associated persons who are under no compulsion to buy or se ll and who have knowledge of the relevant facts. Non-Resident company – a company th is is not subject to tax in New Zealand on its foreign income. Non-resident entity – a company or tru st resident outside New Zealand. Non-resident trust – a tru st which has no trustees resident in New Zealand at the end of its accounting year. Proceeds of disposition – a ll amounts received or receivable on the disposition of an in terest in a non-resident company or tru s t. Portfolio dividends – dividends received by a company from another company in which the f i r s t company owns less than 10 percent of the paid-up share capital. Post facto adjustment – an adjustment to a taxpayer's tax for previous years during which an in te re st in a non-resident company was owned where the proceeds of disposition of the in te re st or i t s market value sig n ifican tly exceeded the la s t reported value of the in te re st. 70 Post Facto Adjustment Balance (PFAB) – the amount of accrued gain in the value of an in te re st in a non-resident en tity and the amount of non-portfolio dividends that w ill be subject to the post facto adjustment. (The post facto adjustment balance is the sum of the dividend adjustment balance and the income adjustment balance.) Resident settlor – any person resident in New Zealand who has contributed property, d irec tly or indirectly, to a non-resident tru st. Tax avoidance – the minimisation of tax lia b ility by legal means. The term describes practices which are contrary to the intent of, and exploit loopholes in, the tax law. Tax base – the base on which tax is levied, which in New Zealand includes income and expenditure. Tax deferral – the practice of delaying the payment of tax without penalty. For example, where income is taxed as received and not as i t accrues, d eferral is possible. A tax system which allows deferral provides certain taxpayers, in effect, with an in terest-free loan. Tax haven – a country which i mposes l i t t l e or no tax, or is otherwise a ttra ctiv e for tax reasons, relative to another country. V. R. WARD, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WELLINGTON, NEW ZEALAND— 1987 79967G