International Tax Reform Part 1 Report of the Consultative Committee MARCH 1988 Office of the Consultative Committee on Full Imputation and International Tax Reform PO Box 3724 WELLINGTON 23 March 1988 Hon R O Douglas M inister of Finance Parliam ent B uildings W ellington. Dear Mr Douglas, On behalf of the C onsultative Committee on Full Im putation and In tern atio n al Tax Reform, I enclose P art 1 of the Com m ittee's rep o rt on the reform proposals outlined in the C onsultative Document on In tern atio n al Tax Reform. The rep o rt o u tlin es the Com m ittee's recommendations on the main elem ents of the in te rn atio n al tax regim e. We w ill rep o rt sep arately on fu rth er d e ta ils of our recommended regime and on the proposals in the C onsultative Document on Full Im putation. The C onsultative Document proposed th a t the main taxing regim es, the branch equivalent and the com parative value regim es, take e ffe c t from 1 A pril 1988. We have th erefo re concentrated in th is rep o rt on the m atters which need to be decided before 1 A pril 1988 so th a t taxpayers w ill know w ith as much c e rta in ty as possible whether they are to be affected a fte r th a t date. We believe th a t, once you have made your decisions, taxpayers will have a considerable degree of c ertain ty . A period of uncertainty is one of the co sts of the co n su ltativ e process. The trad e o ff is th a t taxpayers have fa r more input into decision making than they had previously. We b elieve th a t the b en efits of the co n su ltativ e process outweigh the co sts and th a t i t would be im possible to implement tax reform s as complex as these w ithout such a process. If you accept our recommendations on tra n sitio n a l provisions, most ex istin g foreign investm ents owned by New Zealand resid en ts w ill not be affected by the branch equivalent regime u n til 1 A pril 1990. The need fo r le g isla tiv e c ertain ty from 1 A pril 1988 would th erefo re be reduced. This rep o rt deals w ith the major building blocks of the in tern atio n al regim e. Because of the su b s titu ta b ility of d iffe re n t leg al e n titie s , the building blocks need to be clo sely in teg rated . In addition, the in tern atio n al reform s are intim ately linked w ith the fu ll im putation proposals, the reform s to the tax atio n of superannuation funds and lif e insurance and also future tax reform s such as the introduction of a c a p ita l gains tax . We have considered our recommendations i i I would add th a t the recommendations in th is rep o rt represent the unanimous views of Committee members . The Committee has benefited from the input of o ffic ia ls of the Treasury and the Inland Revenue Department. In p a rtic u la r, we express our thanks to Messers Alex Duncan, Ken Heaton and David White of Treasury and Anthony Grace and Michael Rigby of the Inland Revenue Department. in th is context. Yours sincerely Arthur Valabh Chairman iii 25 March 1988 PRESS STATEMENT BY M inister of Finance, Hon R O Douglas M inister of Revenue, Hon T A de Cleene This document is the f ir s t p a rt of the rep o rt on the introduction of in tern atio n al tax measures by the C onsultative Committee on Full Im putation and In tern atio n al Tax Reform. The rep o rt se ts out the major building blocks of the regime recommended by the Committee follow ing its review of the regime contained in the C onsultative Document and the many public subm issions received. So as to provide taxpayers w ith as much inform ation as possible as soon as po ssib le, th is f ir s t p art of the rep o rt is being released now. The Committee broadly endorses the Government's objective of reducing the o p portunities fo r the avoidance and d efe rral of New Zealand tax by resid en ts through the use of offshore e n titie s . I t also recommends the introduction of a dom estic c a p ita l gains tax as a m atter of p rio rity . I t is p a rtly in lig h t of such future action on c a p ita l gains th a t the Committee has recommended a number of im portant changes to the in tern atio n al tax regime se t out in the C onsultative Document. iv In b rie f, the major recommendation is th a t the branch-equivalent method of tax atio n should apply only where th ere is co n tro l and, where th ere is not c o n tro l, the com parative-value method of tax atio n should apply but only to a lim ited range of investm ents (foreign investm ent funds). To stream line the operation of the branch-equivalent method and reduce compliance co sts, an exemption is recommended fo r taxpayers having in te re s ts in e n titie s which are in designated countries and which do not b en efit from sig n ific a n t tax preferences. T ran sitio n al arrangem ents are also recommended by the Committee to g eth er w ith more comprehensive disclosure provisions. The regime recommended by the Committee, although less comprehensive than th a t in the C onsultative Document, is one which su b sta n tia lly meets the o bjectives of reform which were se t by the Government. The Committee has developed the regime in accordance w ith clear p rin cip les and a t the same tim e has given due recognition to the real p ra c tic a l c o n strain ts. I t has also had regard to the Government's broader programme of tax atio n reform . A ccordingly, we agree w ith the recommendations in the Com m ittee's rep o rt which co n stitu te the basic framework of the regim e. At th is stage th ere are only th ree main areas in which the Government reserves its p o sitio n . The f ir s t concerns the foreign investm ent fund provisions (recommendation (g ), page 63). T heir e ffe c t is to exclude from the regime a ll resid en ts w ith non-controlling in te re s ts in 'a c tiv e ' tax haven e n titie s . The Committee has suggested th a t coverage of th is area should aw ait the introduction of a dom estic c ap ita l gains tax, or evidence th a t the regime is not catching the m ajority of o p portunities fo r avoidance and d e fe rra l, or evidence th a t taxpayers are abusing the exemption. This is an area the Government intends to m onitor closely in the in itia l stages of the operation of the regim e. If necessary, such provisions w ill be reviewed and strengthened p rio r to the introduction of a c ap ita l gains tax. v The second area in which the Government reserves its p o sitio n is the treatm ent of c a p ita l p ro fits earned by tru s ts su b ject to the s e ttlo r regim e, and by testam entary tru s ts , a fte r 31 March 1989, th a t is a fte r the end of the tra n sitio n a l period. The Committee has recommended th a t, on d istrib u tio n , c a p ita l p ro fits be allowed to pass through to b en eficiaries tax free (recommendation (o ), page 65 and recommendation ( t ) ( i ) , page 66). The Government wishes to consider these recommendations fu rth er in the context of the im putation and superannuation reform s. The th ird area concerns the taxation of resid en t tru s ts as defined under the new regim e, se ttle d on or before 17 December 1987, in the period from 1 A pril 1989. The Committee recommends th a t the s e ttlo r regime apply to any such tru s ts which are newly se ttle d or which have new settlem ents made to them a fte r 17 December 1987, or which have elected w ith the s e ttlo r 's agreem ent to come under th a t regim e; other tru s ts could remain outside the s e ttlo r regim e, but d istrib u tio n s of income (including accumulated income) and c ap ita l p ro fits to New Zealand resid en t b e n eficiarie s would be taxed to the ben eficiary w ith an in te re s t charge calculated from 1 A pril 1988 to recoup deferred tax (recommendations ( r ) , page 65 and (s ), pages 65-66). At th is stage, the Government considers th a t from 1 A pril 1989 re sid en t tru s ts should be taxed according to the s e ttlo r regim e, except where the s e ttlo r can dem onstrate th a t th ere is m anifest good reason fo r such an exception and i t can be shown th a t e ith e r the tru s t is subject to tax in a high tax ju risd ic tio n or the im position of the s e ttlo r regime would cause undue hardship to the s e ttlo r. For these excepted tru s ts , as for testam entary tru s ts , the b eneficiary regime recommended by the Committee would apply (recommendation (s ), pages 65-66 and recommendation (t) ( i i ) , page 66). Subject to these reserv atio n s i t is agreed th a t work on the fu rth er d etailed measures and the d ra ft le g isla tio n , to be developed for the Government's fin a l approval, proceed on the b asis of the Com mittee's rep o rt. vi A summary of the changes and the key elem ents of the new regime are to be se t out in a separate press release. Further inform ation on the d etailed tech n ical issues re la tin g to the operation of the regime w ill follow in the second p a rt of the Com mittee's rep o rt. The Committee is chaired by Mr A rthur Valabh and its members comprise Dr Robin Congreve, Mr S tu art Hutchinson, Dr Susan Lojkine, P rofessor John Prebble and Mr Tim Robinson. The Committee has faced a form idable task . I ts professionalism is refle c te d in the excellence of the rep o rt. We thank Mr Valabh and h is Committee for th e ir sig n ific a n t co ntribution to the reform of tax atio n in th is area. Our appreciation extends also to those who took the tim e to make subm issions and provide constructive comment. This has fa c ilita te d the Committee's work and w ill re s u lt in improvements to the p o lic ie s fin a lly enacted. We look forward to the second p art of the Committee' s rep o rt on the in tern atio n al tax measures and its rep o rt on fu ll im putation; both w ill be accompanied by d ra ft le g isla tio n . A fter the subsequent introduction of the B ill to Parliam ent, i t w ill be referred to a S elect Committee. In terested p a rtie s w ill th erefo re have a fu rth er opportunity to make subm issions. vii TABLE OF CONTENTS Page L etter to the M inister of Finance i Press Statem ent by the M inisters of Finance and Revenue i i i Table of Contents v ii CHAPTER 1 – INTRODUCTION 2 1.1 Purpose of This Report 2 1.2 Submissions 3 1.3 Context of the Reforms 3 1.4 C rite ria fo r Evaluation of Proposals 4 1.5 O bjectives of In tern atio n al Tax Reform 5 1.6 Regimes Proposed in the C onsultative Document 10 1.7 Summary: Main B uilding Blocks 13 CHAPTER 2 – BRANCH EQUIVALENT REGIME FOR CONTROLLED FOREIGN COMPANIES 15 2.1 Control T est 15 2.2 White L ist 18 2.3 Tax Preferences 20 2.4 Submissions 24 2.5 Dividends Received by a C ontrolled Company, Losses and Foreign Tax C redits 27 viii CHAPTER 3 – FOREIGN INVESTMENT FUNDS 31 3.1 Avoidance Problems: Need for an A lternative Regime 31 3.2 Coverage of the Regime 32 3.3 Foreign Investm ent Fund Regime 35 CHAPTER 4 – TREATMENT OF DIVIDENDS 39 4.1 Corporate R ecipient 39 4.2 Non-Corporate R ecipient 42 CHAPTER 5 – TRUSTS 43 5.1 Introduction 43 5.2 T rust Income 43 5.3 D istrib u tio n s From R esident T rusts 46 5.4 D istrib u tio n s From N on-resident T rusts 46 CHAPTER 6 – DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS AND PENALTIES 49 6.1 D isclosure Requirements and P en alties 49 CHAPTER 7 – TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 50 7.1 BE Regime 50 7.2 R esident T rusts 51 7.3 Non-Resident T rusts 54 7.4 Foreign Investm ent Funds 55 7.5 Recommendations 55 ix CHAPTER 8 – FURTHER MEASURES 58 8.1 Role of a C apital Gains Tax 58 8.2 In te rju risd ic tio n a l A llocation Rules 59 8.3 Recommendation 60 CHAPTER 9 – SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 61 9.1 Summary of Recommendations 61 9.2 Conclusion 67 ANNEXES 1 C ontrol I n te r e s ts o f R esid en ts in C on trolled F oreign Companies 69 2 Is su e s R e la tin g to th e D eterm ination and A ttr ib u tio n o f Branch E q u ivalen t Income 80 3 F oreign Investm ent Funds 98 4 T rust regim e 104 5 An I llu s t r a t iv e T r a n sitio n a l L is t o f Low Tax J u r is d ic tio n s 112 Report on International Tax Reform Part 1 Consultative Committee on Full Imputation and International Tax Reform 2 CHAPTER 1 – INTRODUCTION 1 .1 P u rp ose o f T h is R ep ort 1.1.1 This is P art 1 of the Report of the C onsultative Committee on Full Im putation and In tern atio n al Tax Reform. I t deals w ith the Com m ittee's recommendations on the main elem ents of the in te rn atio n al tax reform s. Our aim in presenting th is rep o rt is to enable you to give taxpayers as much c e rta in ty as possible before 1 A pril 1988, the im plem entation date proposed in the C onsultative Document on In tern atio n al Tax Reform (the "CD") for the regimes to apply to un d istrib u ted income. 1.1.2 To th is end, the rep o rt concentrates on the Com m ittee's recommendations on the main building blocks of the in te rn a tio n a l tax reform s and, in p a rtic u la r, the boundaries of the regime and the tra n sitio n a l provisions. In th is way, we hope th a t, once you have considered our recommendations, taxpayers w ill know w ith as much c ertain ty as is p racticab le a t th is stage whether they are affected by the regime and, if so, when i t w ill f ir s t a ffe c t them and broadly how i t w ill do so. Where we have not fin a lise d our views, we say so or re fra in from commenting. 1.1.3 A number of d e ta ils are s t i l l to be considered. We w ill address these in P art 2 of our rep o rt which w ill accompany the d ra ft le g isla tio n . A separate rep o rt w ill also be prepared on fu ll im putation and the corresponding d ra ft le g isla tio n . 3 1.1.4 Given the Com m ittee's reporting deadline of 31 March 1988, we began m eeting on 22 December 1987 in an endeavour to id en tify the major issu es. We have met reg u larly , u sually several tim es a week, since then. Since our b rie f includes the preparation of d ra ft le g isla tio n , we have engaged th ree leg al draftsm en to a s s is t w ith th is task . As a re s u lt, the d ra ft le g isla tio n is w ell advanced, though considerable d e ta il has s t i l l to be decided. 1 .2 Subm issions 1.2.1 A to ta l of 209 subm issions were received by the Committee. Of these, 108 d e alt only w ith the in te rn atio n al tax reform s, 49 d e alt only w ith im putation and 47 commented on both. Given our reporting deadline, we have been able to hear only a sm all number of o ral subm issions. Committee members have, however, discussed the CD proposals widely w ith tax p ra c titio n e rs and business people. In addition, Committee members attended the In s titu te of Policy Studies sem inar on the reform s, which was held in W ellington on 2 February 1988, and the annual conference of the New Zealand branch of the In tern atio n al F iscal A ssociation, held a t W airakei on 26-27 February 1988, which was focussed e n tire ly on the in tern atio n al reform s and im putation. These were helpful in providing feedback on the CD proposals and a lte rn a tiv e s advocated by p ra c titio n e rs. 1 .3 C ontext o f th e Reforms 1.3.1 The in tern atio n al tax reform s are p art of a w ider package of reform s which includes su b sta n tia l reductions in sta tu to ry tax ra te s and removal of tax concessions fo r superannuation and lif e insurance. The Committee recognises th a t 4 the Government regards an e ffe ctiv e in te rn atio n al regime as p a rt of the trad e o ff fo r lower tax ra te s and, indeed, a p re re q u isite for the la tte r . In addition, the reform s should be m utually co n sisten t and should rein fo rce one another as fa r as p o ssib le. For example, the effectiv en ess of the superannuation fund tax reform s depends in p a rt on the in te rn atio n al tax regime covering offshore veh icles which could su b stitu te for dom estic superannuation funds. The Committee has kept these linkages in mind in considering the present proposals. 1.3.2 The reform s must also be seen in the context of future tax reform s, p a rtic u la rly the possible introduction of a c a p ita l gains tax and in te rju risd ic tio n a l allo catio n ru les (such as tra n sfe r p ricin g and expense allo catio n p ro v isio n s). The la tte r are necessary to ensure th a t New Zealand c o lle c ts the appropriate amount of revenue from dom estic investm ents owned by non- resid en ts. This objective is not addressed in the cu rren t in tern atio n al proposals, which are aimed a t taxing New Zealand resid en ts on income diverted from New Zealand and foreign-source income derived through offshore companies and tru s ts . 1 .4 C r ite r ia fo r E valu ation o f P rop osals 1.4.1 There are a number of c rite ria which are conventionally used to evaluate tax reform s. These have formed the b asis of the Com mittee's framework for considering the CD proposals and possible a lte rn a tiv e s. In b rie f, we believe the reform s should be: a e q u itab le. The effectiv en ess of the reform s w ill depend to a large extent on voluntary compliance by taxpayers. This is much more lik e ly to occur if they are perceived to be fair; 5 b e ffic ie n t, in the sense of m inim ising ad d itio n al adm inistrative and compliance costs and the impact of the tax system on business d ecisio n - making; and c as fa r as p ossible, sim ple to implement and c ertain in th e ir im pact. 1.4.2 We would add th a t taxpayer perceptions of the reform s w ill be enhanced if they are co n sisten t w ith ex istin g income tax p rin cip les and give adequate recognition to the need fo r tra n sitio n a l m easures. 1 .5 O b je ctiv es o f In te r n a tio n a l Tax Reform 1.5.1 The CD has two main o bjectives: to "a p ro tect the dom estic tax base from arrangem ents which seek to avoid or defer New Zealand tax by the accum ulation of income in offshore e n titie s ; and b reduce the extent to which the tax system encourages offshore investm ent re la tiv e to investm ent in New Zealand and biases the form in which offshore investm ent is made." (CD, page 1) 6 1.5.2 There is no sharp d istin c tio n between tax avoidance and tax d eferral since the la tte r amounts to a permanent reduction in the present value of the tax co llected by New Zealand. The avoidance problem which the CD id e n tifie s and which was the ta rg e t of the co n tro lled foreign company ("CFC") measures announced in Annex 4 of the 1987 Budget is e sse n tia lly the use of co ntrolled tax haven v eh icles, whether companies or tru s ts , to avoid New Zealand tax by the diversion of New Zealand-source income. There is widespread agreement amongst p a rtie s making subm issions th a t the Government is fu lly ju s tifie d in addressing th is problem. The Committee c e rta in ly endorses th is view. There is also general, though less so lid , support fo r a regime which taxes the accum ulation of foreign-source income in tax haven e n titie s . 1.5.3 The a n ti-d e fe rra l objective is much more contentious and th ere is considerable opposition in subm issions to a comprehensive a n ti-d e fe rra l regim e. The CD regards the d e fe rra l problem broadly as the absence of tax atio n on an accrual b asis of resid en ts on income they earn through non-resident companies and tru s ts . At p resen t, New Zealand tax is co llected on income derived by foreign companies owned by New Zealand resid en ts only when i t is d istrib u te d to non-corporate resid en t taxpayers. In the case of tru s ts , New Zealand tax is co llected , if a t a ll, only when d istrib u tio n s are made to resid en t b e n eficiarie s. 1.5.4 The CD proposals pursue the a n ti-d e fe rra l objectiv e prim arily by aiming to tax resid en ts on the u n d istrib u ted income of non-resident companies and tru s ts in which they have an in te re st or a connection as a s e ttlo r. This objective is also behind the introduction of a w ithholding payment to apply to foreign-source non-portfolio dividends received by resid en t companies, as announced in the Government Economic Statem ent of 17 December 1987. 7 1.5.5 Thus, the th ru st of the reform s is to tax a ll re sid e n ts, including companies, on the income th a t they actu ally receive from foreign e n titie s (i.e . non-resident companies and tru sts) and on c e rta in u n d istrib u ted income. The tax atio n of income on rec eip t is w ell w ithin the current concepts of the income tax system (though other considerations may suggest th a t dividends received by companies should be taxed d iffe re n tly from dividends received by in d iv id u a ls). As commercial tran sactio n s have become more so p h isticated , both the accounting and the income tax concepts of income have of necessity been extended in many areas to include not only income received but income which can be said w ith reasonable c e rta in ty to have accrued. I t is fu lly co n sisten t w ith th is extended d e fin itio n of income to tax resid en ts on the u n d istrib u ted income of non-resident e n titie s th a t can reasonably be assumed to have accrued to them. This does not require th a t they have legal t i t l e to the income. I t is su ffic ie n t th a t they possess the power to give them selves leg al t i t l e . We th erefo re do not regard i t as offensive to income tax p rin cip les th a t resid en ts are taxed on income over which they have power of d isp o sitio n , even if they have not received i t . We would, however, go no fu rth er than th is . I t is not reasonable to tax resid en ts on income th a t they may never receive. 1.5.6 One of the Committee's main reserv atio n s about the CD proposals is th a t they pursue the a n ti-d e fe rra l objectiv e to its extreme lim its w ithout giving enough a tten tio n to conventional income tax p rin cip les or to the adm inistration and com pliance problems which a rise . In some cases, tax atio n would be levied on amounts th a t were w ell beyond the income to which a taxpayer had any reasonable chance of access. Moreover, at some p o in t, the adm inistration and compliance costs would be excessive re la tiv e to the revenue th a t could be expected. 8 1.5.7 The CD supports the a n ti-d e fe rra l objective on the b asis th a t "a broadening of the tax base with respect to foreign income is required to perm it cuts in the ra te s of income tax applicable to both individuals and companies" (CD, page 15). This is seen as the prim ary ju s tific a tio n for the com parative value ("CV") regime (under which resid en ts would be taxed on the annual change in the market value of th e ir in te re sts in foreign com panies), though i t has also been advanced on other grounds which w ill be discussed below. The Committee strongly supports the objective of broadening the tax base and low ering income tax ra te s. We believe th a t th is objective also has widespread support amongst the business community. There is , however, strenuous opposition to pursuing i t through what is in e ffe c t an accrual nominal c a p ita l gains tax, i.e . the CV method. The CV method is not defended in the CD as a c a p ita l gains tax. There is no discussion of the fundamental design issues associated w ith such a tax, such as whether i t should tax only rea l or nominal gains and whether i t should apply on an accrual or re a lisa tio n b a sis. Given the complete novelty of the CV proposal, its lack of any in te rn atio n al precedent, its valuation problem s, its cash-flow consequences and the absence of a convincing ju s tific a tio n fo r i t in the CD, i t is not su rp risin g th a t the proposal found no support amongst those who made subm issions. 1.5.8 This ra ise s the Com mittee's other main concern. The CD gives too l i t t l e weight to the im portance, in a tax system based on voluntary com pliance, of acknowledging taxpayer perceptions of "fairn ess". If the CV regime were implemented as proposed, i t would encourage evasion and stre tc h the lim its of avoidance because taxpayers would regard i t as very u n fair. The objective of retain in g taxpayer goodwill should be kept in mind. 9 1.5.9 The second objective referred to in paragraph 1 .5 .1 , of reducing the extent to which the tax system encourages offshore investm ent, is intim ately linked w ith the f ir s t o b jectiv e. To the extent th a t tax payable on foreign investm ent is avoided or deferred re la tiv e to the tax th a t would be payable in New Zealand, the tax system w ill influence decisions to in v est in New Zealand or overseas. Most decisions to invest offshore are not tax driven though, as an im portant business co st, taxes must obviously be taken in to account and w ill influence decisions to re p a tria te or rein v est income. The CD objective re fe rs to the impact of taxes on the m arginal investm ent decision, th a t is , where other facto rs are in balance, tax considerations m ight tip the scales in favour of investing offshore rath er than in New Zealand. 1.5.10 This objective can be addressed in term s of the c rite ria of "cap ital export n e u tra lity " (which holds when foreign- and dom estic-source income are taxed in the same way so th a t resid en ts are in d iffe re n t on tax considerations between investing offshore or dom estically) and "cap ital im port n e u tra lity " (which holds when the tax treatm ent of foreign investm ents is determ ined so lely by the ru les applying in the country in which the investm ent is lo ca te d ). Many subm issions e x p lic itly or im p licitly advocated the la tte r approach in order th a t New Zealand firm s could compete w ith foreign firm s. I t was pointed out th a t no other country has a regime comparable to th a t proposed in the CD. 1.5.11 To a large ex tent, the in tern atio n al com petitiveness argument advanced in subm issions re fle c ts the immediate and p o te n tia lly adverse impact the CD proposals would have on ex istin g investm ent. The Committee considers th a t these concerns can be addressed by providing adequate tra n sitio n a l arrangem ents. As to the fu tu re, we recognise th a t tax is only one facto r 10 affectin g com petitiveness. In the long run, New Zealand as a whole is b est served by an e ffic ie n t tax system: th a t is , one which is n eu tral between dom estic and foreign investm ent. The Committee th erefo re supports the second objective of the CD, though th ere are major c o n strain ts on the extent to which i t can be achieved. We comment fu rth er on th is issue in sectio n 2.3. 1.5.12 Wherever th ere is cross-border investm ent, th ere are a t le a st two tax ju risd ic tio n s involved: the country in which the investm ent is sourced and the country in which the in v esto rs are resid en t. The in te re sts of the respective revenue a u th o ritie s are to some extent in c o n flic t because the residence country ty p ic a lly allow s a tax c re d it, w ithin lim its, fo r the tax levied by the source country. Tax tre a tie s resolve the c o n flictin g in te re s ts to some extent but u n ila te ra l tax changes can a ffe c t the balance. For example, A ustralian companies have an incentive to m inimise the New Zealand tax they pay, even if th is means increasing th e ir A ustralian tax , since the A ustralian im putation scheme allow s c re d its for A ustralian but not foreign company tax . Thus, another general objective of reform of New Z ealand's in te rn atio n al tax regime should be to ensure th a t New Zealand c o lle c ts its share of tax , esp ecially on income th a t has a New Zealand source. This is the objective of allo catio n ru les which we referred to in section 1.5. 1 .6 Regimes Proposed in th e C o n su lta tiv e Document 1.6.1 The scope and nature of the in tern atio n al tax regime should be determ ined in the lig h t of the above o bjectives and the c rite ria fo r evaluation outlined in section 1.4. The CD proposes two broad options for taxing on an accrual basis income derived by resid en ts through offshore e n titie s . The f ir s t is to tax resid en ts each year on "th e ir share" of the underlying income of 11 the offshore e n tity . This is the approach taken under the branch-equivalent ("BE") method. The second approach is to tax resid en ts on the d istrib u tio n s they receive from the offshore e n tity and the c a p ita l gain or lo ss th a t accrues to them each year. This is the all-em bracing approach of the CV method. 1.6.2 These two approaches d iffe r because taxable income may be less than comprehensive but, given a reasonably broad tax base, the prim ary d ifferen ce is th a t the BE method taxes what may be termed system atic gains (which are due prim arily to the accum ulation of assets w ithin companies as a re su lt of retain ed earn in g s), whereas the CV method taxes both system atic and non- system atic or unanticipated gains. From the point of view of the efficien cy of the tax system, i t is not necessary to tax unanticipated or w indfall gains and lo sses. Because such gains cannot be an ticip ated , they cannot influence investm ent decisions. Thus, the case fo r taxing them must re s t on some notion of fairn e ss. 1.6.3 Another way of viewing the d ifferen ce between the two methods is th a t BE income is taxable income as cu rren tly defined whereas CV income is the much less conventional economic concept of income. The Committee p refers the approach, wherever fea sib le, of taxing resid en ts on the underlying income of foreign e n titie s since th is focuses on system atic or planned gains and is co n sisten t w ith the p rin cip les of the cu rren t tax system . 1.6.4 Where th is approach (i.e . the BE method) is not fea sib le, the CD fa lls back on the CV method. Some of the Com m ittee's concerns about the CV approach were referred to above. An accrual a lte rn a tiv e to the CV method would be to tax resid en ts each year on th e ir share of the reported income of foreign companies based on the companies' audited accounts. In 12 order to avoid taxing resid en ts on the u n d istrib u ted income of foreign companies which they never receive, i t would be d esirab le to have a post facto wash up on disposal of shares. This post facto adjustm ent would determ ine the actual gain or lo ss derived by a taxpayer on a foreign investm ent by calcu latin g the d istrib u tio n s received and the c a p ita l gain or lo ss. Thus, a realisatio n -b ased c a p ita l gains tax is an inherent p a rt of th is approach. 1.6.5 The Committee do not advocate the adoption of th is approach now. We mention i t m ainly to suggest th a t th ere are a lte rn a tiv e s to the CV method th a t would meet the Government's objectives and in some respects are p referab le to the CV method. The option outlined would be best examined in the context of the current in v estig atio n of c a p ita l gains taxes and should be introduced only as p art of a general c ap ita l gains tax . 1.6.6 The CV method does, however, have a ro le as p a rt of the current reform s where th ere are system atic or expected gains resu ltin g from the accum ulation of income in an offshore e n tity , such as may be the case for some u n it tru s ts and mutual funds. We comment fu rth er on th is in chapter 3. 13 1 .7 Summary: Main B u ild in g B locks 1.7.1 The Com m ittee's proposals are developed in the follow ing chapters. The main elem ents a re : a the BE regime to apply to non-minor shareholders of co n tro lled companies which are e ith e r: i resid en t outside of the United S ta te s, the U nited Kingdom, West Germany, Canada, France, Japan or A u stralia; or i i if resid en t in one of those co u n tries, f a il the grey l i s t te s t outlined in section 7 concerning the e ffe c t of sig n ific a n t tax preferences in those countries; b a foreign investm ent fund regime to apply to resid en ts w ith in te re sts in c ertain investm ent vehicles dom iciled in low tax c o u n tries; c the s e ttlo r regime to apply to resid en t tru s ts (i.e . those w ith a resid en t s e ttlo r ) ; d tra n sitio n a l arrangem ents under which taxpayers would be exempt from: i the BE regime u n til 1 A pril 1990 in resp ect of in te re sts acquired on or before 17 December 1987 in companies which are not resid en t in low tax ju risd ic tio n s sp ecified in a tra n s itio n a l l is t; 14 i i the BE regime u n til 1 A pril 1989 in resp ect of in te re sts acquired a fte r 17 December 1987 in companies resid en t in a country lis te d in (a)(i); i i i the s e ttlo r regime in resp ect of settlem ents made on or before 17 December 1987 where the s e ttlo r so e le c ts, in which case an a lte rn a tiv e regime would apply to d istrib u tio n s to b e n e fic ia rie s and to the s e ttlo r where he or she had a debt, guarantee or other form of fin an cial assistan ce outstanding to the tru ste e ; e s tr ic t disclo su re requirem ents and p en alties fo r non- compliance; f eventually, but we would hope w ithin a re la tiv e ly sh o rt tim e, the extension of the income tax base to include c a p ita l gains on both dom estic and offshore investm ents, including offshore investm ents not covered by the present proposals; and g also as a m atter of p rio rity , the introduction of in te rj u risd ic tio n a l allo catio n ru les to ensure th a t New Zealand c o lle c ts the appropriate amount of revenue, p a rtic u la rly in re la tio n to New Zealand-source income. 15 CHAPTER 2 – BRANCH EQUIVALENT REGIME FOR CONTROLLED FOREIGN COMPANIES 2 .1 C ontrol T est 2.1.1 The BE method would tax New Zealand shareholders on th e ir proportionate shares of the und istrib u ted income of foreign companies measured according to New Zealand tax ru le s. Thus, the method req u ires taxpayers to have a ll of the inform ation necessary to recompute the taxable income of offshore companies. In p rac tic e, th is inform ation w ill generally not be av ailab le unless the resid en t(s) control the offshore company. In addition, as we have argued in section 1.5, i t is unreasonable to tax resid en ts on the und istrib u ted income of offshore companies which they may never receive, unless they a t le a st have access to i t , th a t is , they have the power to require d istrib u tio n i f they wish. For these two reasons, the Committee recommends th a t the BE regime apply only where resid en ts control an offshore company. 2.1.2 This would be in lin e w ith p ractice overseas, where BE- type regim es apply only where th ere is a controlled foreign company. Submissions were strongly in favour of a control te s t. This would not be a sig n ific a n t departure from the CD proposals since, in p rac tic e, the BE regime could be applied only where th ere is co n tro l. 2.1.3 A number of companies making subm issions noted th a t th e ir a b ility to re p a tria te p ro fits from non-resident su b sid iaries may be re s tric te d because of exchange co n tro ls, governm ental foreign investm ent requirem ents, or agreem ents made w ith co-venturers. Since businesses do not consciously make bad investm ent decisions, we would expect th a t the retu rn generated 16 from foreign su b sid iaries in these circum stances w ill be higher than otherw ise to re fle c t the co n strain ts imposed. Thus, the New Zealand parent w ill generally expect to be able to gain access to the foreign subsidiary p ro fits a t some stage, though not n ecessarily to re p a tria te them, and be compensated fo r any impediments and tim e delays. Even if th is were not the case, i t would be im practicable to give re lie f from the BE regime m erely because p ro fit access re s tric tio n s e x ist because taxpayers could v o lu n tarily en ter in to such arrangem ents to suspend the e ffe c t of the regim e. I t m ight also encourage foreign governments to impose re p a tria tio n con tro ls on New Zealand investm ent. Where such re s tric tio n s cu rren tly apply to foreign su b sid ia rie s, some r e lie f w ill be provided by the tra n sitio n a l provisions recommended by the Committee. 2.1.4 The Committee has considered the appropriate control te s t a fte r looking a t several overseas models. Any te s t must of necessity be somewhat a rb itra ry since, in p ractice, th ere are no c le arly defined c rite ria for co n tro l. We recommend defining control as the ownership of 50 percent or more of the shares (or rig h ts to income, d istrib u tio n s on wind up, votes, etc) of a company by 5 or fewer resid en ts. This is sim ilar to the Canadian te s t and th a t proposed in Annex 4 of the 1987 Budget. I t would be necessary to have a constructive ownership ru le so th a t in te re s ts held in nominees and associated p a rtie s would be aggregated. In addition, we propose an anti-avoidance provision aimed a t arrangem ents, such as voting tru s ts and understandings, which have the e ffe c t of defeating the in te n t and ap p licatio n of the control te s t. We would also add a de facto control te s t to cover situ a tio n s such as where a shareholder has a rig h t to require a d istrib u tio n or the wind up of a company. 17 2.1.5 Where a non-resident company fa lls w ithin the control te s t, a ll of its New Zealand shareholders or only the co n tro llin g ones could be subject to the regim e. The Committee favour the la tte r approach because only co n tro llin g shareholders have access to the necessary inform ation and the u n d istrib u ted income of the company. Since th ere may be more than one group of 5 resid en ts which s a tis fie s the control te s t, we recommend th a t a ll resid en t shareholders of co ntrolled companies w ith in te re s ts of 10 percent or more (h ereafter referred to as "non-minor" shareholders) be subject to the BE regim e. An exception should apply where control e x ists by v irtu e of the proposed anti-avoidance or de facto control provisions. In those cases, the resid en ts deemed to have control should be subject to the regime in accordance w ith th e ir proportionate in te re s ts . 2.1.6 Further d e ta ils of the control provisions proposed by the Committee are contained in Annex 1. Recommendation 2.1.7 The Committee th e r e fo r e recommends th a t, in r e la t io n to fo r e ig n com panies: a th e BE regim e apply on ly where New Zealand r e s id e n ts have c o n tr o l o f a company; b c o n tr o l be d efin ed as th e ownership by 5 or few er r e s id e n ts o f 50 p ercen t or more o f th e sh a res (or v o te s , r ig h ts to d iv id en d s or d is tr ib u tio n s on wind up) o f a company, su b je c t t o : 18 i a c o n str u c tiv e ow nership t e s t to in clu d e in t e r e s t s h eld through a ss o c ia te d p erso n s, nom inees and o th er c o n tr o lle d com panies; i i a de fa c to c o n tr o l p r o v isio n to in c lu d e w ith in th e regim e p erson s who have th e power t o req u ire a d is tr ib u tio n or th e wind-up o f a n o n -re sid e n t company; and i i i an a n ti-a v o id a n ce p r o v isio n to d e te r arrangem ents which have th e e f f e c t o f d e fe a tin g th e in te n t and a p p lic a tio n o f th e c o n tr o l t e s t ; and c r e s id e n t sh a reh o ld ers who d ir e c t ly or in d ir e c t ly h o ld a 10 p ercen t or g r e a te r in t e r e s t in a c o n tr o lle d company and r e s id e n ts who are deemed to have c o n tr o l by v ir tu e o f th e de fa c to c o n tr o l and a n ti-a v o id a n ce p r o v isio n s be su b je c t to th e BE regim e, but o th er r e sid e n t sh a reh o ld ers o f c o n tr o lle d com panies be exempt from i t . 2.2. W hite L is t 2.2.1 One of the critic ism s of the BE regime is th a t i t would involve heavy compliance costs fo r possibly l i t t l e revenue when i t applied to companies in "high tax" co u n tries, such as the U nited S tates and the U nited Kingdom. The compliance co sts would be most acute fo r New Z ealand's large in te rn a tio n a lly d iv e rsifie d com panies, some of which have hundreds of offshore su b sid ia rie s. In ad d itio n , the adm inistrative costs of the regime would be high. 19 2.2.2 The United Kingdom, West Germany and France address th is problem by having a so -called "white lis t" of co u n tries. I f a company is resid en t in a w hite l i s t country and the larg e bulk of its income is sourced and subject to tax in such co u n tries, i t is exempt from the CFC regim e. 2.2.3 In p rin cip le , i t is d esirab le to minimise com pliance costs where the revenue a t stake is not m aterial. The p ra c tic a l d iffic u lty in th is case is th a t the revenue lo ss re la tiv e to the compliance co st savings resu ltin g from some form of l i s t cannot read ily be q u an tified . N evertheless, the Committee recommends the adoption of a re s tric te d l i s t as a reasonable pragm atic compromise. We recognise th a t no l i s t can be w atertig h t and th a t there w ill be costs in com piling and updating i t . These problems must be weighed against the need to reduce the com pliance co sts of the regime where i t is unlikely th a t revenue would be co llected . 2.2.4 A ccordingly, the Committee favours a l i s t , q u a lifie d by tax preferences as se t out below, of countries which have comprehensive in tern atio n al tax ru les including CFC regim es. At p resent, th ere are six - the United Kingdom, the U nited S ta te s, West Germany, France, Canada and Japan. We understand th a t A u stralia is cu rren tly considering the introduction of a CFC regime and, given our proposed tra n sitio n a l provisions (discussed in chapter 7), we recommend th a t A ustralia be included on the l is t. The existence or otherw ise of a CFC regime gives the l i s t an objective b asis. 20 2.2.5 The U nited Kingdom w hite l i s t is q u alified by an income source ru le to the e ffe c t th a t, to be exempt from the CFC regime under the w hite l i s t provisions, co n tro lled companies must derive a t le a st 90 percent of th e ir income in the (white lis t) country in which they are resid en t. This ru le aims to ensure th a t, to q u alify fo r exem ption, the large bulk of the income of a co n tro lled company must be subject to tax in a w hite l i s t country. An a lte rn a tiv e approach is to "look through" companies resid en t in w hite l i s t countries to co n tro lled companies beneath them. These lower tie r controlled companies would be exempt only if they also s a tis fie d the q u alified w hite l i s t te s t. The Committee favours th is approach rath e r than an income source te st, In addition, i t would be necessary to l i s t as a sig n ific a n t preference the exemption of foreign-source income where a lis te d country excluded i t from its tax base. This is p resen tly the case w ith France. We discuss the issue of foreign tax preferences in the next subsection. 2 .3 Tax P referen ces 2.3.1 In addition to having a w hite l is t, the U nited Kingdom has a q u alified (or "grey") l i s t which provides fo r exemption from the CFC regime only if the foreign company does not b en efit from c e rta in lis te d tax preferences. Many subm issions argued th a t foreign tax preferences should be recognised under the BE regime to preserve the com petitiveness of foreign su b sid ia rie s of New Zealand companies. We commented b rie fly on the in te rn atio n al com petitiveness argument in section 1.5. The arguments against recognising foreign preferences are th a t: a i t would be in co n sisten t w ith dom estic tax p olicy, which is generally to remove tax preferences. This policy would make no sense a t a ll if foreign tax preferences 21 were recognised under the BE regime since i t would m erely encourage New Zealand resid en ts to in v est offshore. If tax incentives were to be allowed as a m atter of tax policy, i t would be b e tte r to provide them dom estically; b tax preferences are only one form of investm ent subsidy. Other types of assistan ce th a t may be provided in other countries include g ran ts, subsidised input c o sts, output bounties, ta r if f p ro tectio n , concessional loans and provision of free services such as research. A ll of these would have the e ffe c t of increasing the p ro fita b ility of foreign investm ents owned by New Zealand resid en ts but the b en efit of them would to some extent be clawed back under the BE regim e. I t would be im practical to preserve the e ffe c t of a ll types of assistan ce under the regime and we see no reason to preserve tax preferences in p a rtic u la r; and c tax preferences are sim ilar in e ffe c t to low or zero ra te s of tax. If the BE regime is to apply to co n tro lled companies in low tax countries ("tax havens”) , i t should also apply to such companies in high tax countries where e ffe ctiv e tax ra te s are low, not because of a low sta tu to ry tax ra te , but because of tax preferences. 2.3.2 In ad dition, the trend amongst OECD countries is to phase out or remove tax preferences. This is c e rta in ly the case in the U nited S tates, the United Kingdom and Canada. As tax preferences are removed, e ffe ctiv e tax ra te s in other co u n tries w ill ris e so th a t, since New Z ealand's sta tu to ry tax ra te s w ill be amongst the low est, if not the low est, in the OECD, our 22 e ffe c tiv e tax ra te s should be comparable to those in the countries where most of New Z ealand's offshore investm ent is located. The impact of the BE regime on the com petitiveness of New Zealand-owned foreign companies w ill th erefo re dim inish as the trend away from preferences continues. 2.3.3 In the Com m ittee's view, the arguments against recognising foreign tax preferences under the BE regime outweigh the counter argum ents. We th erefo re favour the q u a lific a tio n of the proposed w hite l i s t by the id e n tific a tio n of sig n ific a n t tax preferences in each country. As noted above, th is q u a lifie d l i s t is referred to as a grey l is t. Taxpayers would be required to ad ju st the taxable income of a CFC resid en t in a lis te d country, measured according to th a t country's tax ru les, fo r any id e n tifie d sig n ific a n t preferences th a t the CFC has u tilis e d . If the foreign tax paid as a proportion of the adjusted taxable income equals or exceeds the New Zealand company tax ra te , the taxpayer would be exempt from the regime in respect of th a t CFC. In our view, the reduction in the New Zealand sta tu to ry company tax ra te removes the need to base th is effectiv e tax ra te comparison on tw o-thirds of the sta tu to ry ra te , as proposed in Annex 4 of the 1987 Budget. 2.3.4 The comprehensiveness of the l i s t of preferences is larg ely a m atter of tax policy. New Zealand tax policy has been to elim inate e x p lic it preferences. This may suggest a re la tiv e ly extensive l is t, though m ateria lity and compliance co sts must be taken in to account. 2.3.5 A number of subm issions argue th a t the claw back of foreign tax preferences would be in co n sisten t w ith a number of New Z ealand's tax tre a tie s which include tax sparing prov isio n s. These provisions generally apply only to branches of New Zealand 23 companies in the tax tre a ty country and, since foreign branches are not affected by the present reform s, tax sparing would not be withdrawn or dim inished. We are sa tisfie d th a t the BE regime does not breach a tax tre a ty o b lig atio n . The tax sparing provisions were, however, entered in to before the in tro d u ctio n of the present proposals and may now appear to be in co n sisten t w ith the th ru st of the reform s. Recommendation 2.3.6 The Committee th e r e fo r e recommends th a t: a r e s id e n ts be exempt from th e BE regim e in r e sp e c t o f in t e r e s t s in com panies which are: i r e sid e n t fo r ta x purposes in c e r ta in l i s t e d c o u n tr ie s w ith com prehensive in te r n a tio n a l ta x regim es in c lu d in g CFC regim es ( i . e . t h e U n ited S ta te s , th e U nited Kingdom, West Germany, Canada, France and Japan) or A u str a lia ; and b i i do n o t b e n e fit from s p e c ifie d s ig n if ic a n t ta x p re fe re n c e s in th o se c o u n tr ie s such a s a c c e le r a te d c a p ita l w r ite - o f f s or th e exem ption o f c e r ta in fo r e ig n -so u r c e incom e. Where a company d id u t i l i s e a s p e c if ie d p r e fe r e n c e , i t would be req u ired t o a d ju st i t s ta x a b le incom e, determ ined accord in g to th e country o f r e sid e n c e ta x r u le s , fo r th e e f f e c t o f th e ta x p r e fe r e n c e (s ). I f i t s fo r e ig n ta x p aid a s a r a tio o f i t s a d ju sted ta x a b le income eq u a ls or exceed s th e New Zealand company ta x r a te , th e BE regim e would n o t apply; and 24 c non-m inor sh a reh o ld ers (and o th er sh a reh o ld ers deemed to have c o n tr o l) in a c o n tr o lle d company who have in t e r e s t s which are h e ld in d ir e c t ly through o th e r fo r e ig n com panies be su b je c t to th e regim e u n le ss th e c o n tr o lle d company s a t i s f i e s th e exem ption o u tlin e d in recommendation (a). 2.4 Subm issions 2.4.1 Most subm issions were in favour of a CFC regime along the lin e s of those applying in other co u n tries. The two main d ifferen ces between the regime proposed by the Committee and CFC regim es elsew here are th a t: a other CFC regim es generally make a d istin c tio n between so -called "active" and "passive" income. The la tte r is generally regarded as in te rn atio n ally "mobile" income such as in te re s t, dividends, ro y a ltie s and re la te d party sales and service income; b in some cases, the CFC regim es are to some ex ten t targ eted on tax haven CFCs. The United S tates and Canada do not, however, ta rg e t tax havens in th is way. 2.4.2 The a r tif ic ia lity of the d istin c tio n between activ e and passive income is b est illu s tra te d in the case of shares. A share p o rtfo lio of, say, one percent stakes in 100 companies is regarded as a passive investm ent even though each company may its e lf be an activ e business. Conversely, a 100 percent holding 25 in a sin g le company is regarded as a d ire c t or activ e investm ent. In the f ir s t case, an in te re s t is held in 100 activ e businesses. In the second case, an in te re s t is held in one activ e business. In both cases, the income of the shareholder co n sists of dividends and c a p ita l gain on the shares. Though these investm ents may d iffe r in other resp ects, both are u ltim ately investm ents in activ e businesses. Thus, th ere are boundary problems in d istin g u ish in g between activ e and passive investm ents. 2.4.3 Another problem w ith the activ e/p assiv e income d istin c tio n a rise s w ith c ertain classes of income. For example, in te re s t income is regarded as activ e business income when i t is earned by a fin an cial in s titu tio n but passive income when derived by other businesses. If the regime employed th is d istin c tio n , banks could sh e lte r in te re st income w hile other businesses would reorganise them selves in an attem pt to resem ble banks or they would e sta b lish finance su b sid iaries which were d iffic u lt to d istin g u ish from banks. This problem has forced the U nited S tates to include w ithin its d e fin itio n of CFC ( i.e , subpart F) income dividends, in te re s t and rea lised gains from the d isp o sitio n of shares and other se c u ritie s, reg ard less of the nature of the business deriving them. For sim ilar reasons, subpart F income now includes income from the insurance of risk s outside the in su re r's country of incorporation. 2.4.4 F in ally , the advantages of low tax ra te s and tax preferences are the same whether they apply to activ e or to passive income. In view of these considerations, the Committee considers th a t th ere is no m erit in d istin g u ish in g between d iffe re n t classes of income. 26 2.4.5 The argument fo r targ etin g the BE regime on tax haven CFCs is th a t these are the major avoidance v eh icles. There are, however, several problems w ith th is approach. The f ir s t is th a t th ere are d e fin itio n a l problem s. A country which is norm ally regarded as a high tax country may in p ractice be a tax haven for c ertain types of investm ent. An example was the U nited Kingdom in respect of m anufacturing a c tiv ity before i t commenced to phase out immediate c a p ita l w rite-o ffs in 1984. The e ffe c t of the c a p ita l w rite-o ffs was generally to elim inate the tax lia b ilitie s of m anufacturing businesses in the United Kingdom. I f th is had been achieved by abolishing income tax on m anufacturing, the United Kingdom would have been regarded as a tax haven fo r th is type of business. Thus, the existence of tax preferences removes any c le a r d istin c tio n between a tax haven and a non-tax haven. 2.4.6 The more general argument is th a t, from an a n ti-d e fe rra l p erspective, th ere is no difference between these two types of ju risd ic tio n . O ffshore income derived by resid en t companies th a t is u ltim ately taxable in New Zealand is foreign income net of foreign tax es. (Where foreign income is earned d ire c tly by an in d iv id u al, a c re d it is given fo r foreign tax es). I t does not m atter whether the income is sourced in a low- or high-tax ju risd ic tio n , the d e fe rral b en efit is the same. The CD does not, however, propose the complete elim ination of tax d e fe rral by perm itting companies only a deduction for foreign tax in the calcu latio n of a th e ir tax lia b ility on BE regime. Instead, a c re d it w ill be given, though th is is clawed back when the income is d istrib u te d . Thus, in the context of the CD proposals, New Zealand tax lia b ilitie s under the BE regime w ill depend on whether the foreign company is resid en t in a high- or low -tax ju risd ic tio n . For th is reason, the Committee advocates the adoption of a grey l i s t as outlined in section 2.3. 27 2.4.7 On a p ra c tic a l lev el, th ere would be obvious d iffic u ltie s w ith the a lte rn a tiv e approach of targ e tin g the regime on companies resid en t in lis te d tax havens. The l i s t would never be up to date and would probably exclude apparently high tax countries which nevertheless had sig n ific a n t tax preferences. For th is reason, no country except Japan bases its CFC regime on a form erly published tax haven l i s t . (The Committee does propose a d istin c tio n between tax havens and other countries as p a rt of its recommended tra n sitio n a l provisions but in th is case, a need fo r exhaustive coverage and updating does not a r is e .) 2 .5 D ividends R eceived by a C on tro lled Company, L o sses and F oreign Tax C red its 2.5.1 BE income w ill be calculated according to New Zealand tax law. A number of special ru les w ill, however, be required in respect of dividends received by a controlled company, BE lo sses and the calcu latio n of the amount of foreign tax to be cred ited against the New Zealand tax lia b ility on BE income. The Committee has had tim e to give only prelim inary consideration to these issues but we se t out below our current thinking. 2.5.2 The tax treatm ent of dividends received by a co n tro lled foreign company needs to m irror th e ir treatm ent in the hands of its resid en t shareholders. If th is were not the case, i t would be easy to avoid the dom estic ru les by trapping dividends in a non-resident v eh icle. There would then be l i t t l e p oint in changing the dom estic ru les. Thus, p o rtfo lio dividends received by a co n tro lled non-resident company should be assessable to both corporate and non-corporate resid en t non-minor shareholders. 28 N on-portfolio dividends received by the co ntrolled company should also be assessable to a non-corporate non-minor shareholder but a corporate non-minor shareholder would be subject to the proposed w ithholding payment system if the proposed dom estic tax ru le s applied to the calcu latio n of the BE income. In order to avoid the m ultiple levying of tax on dividends, i t would be necessary in the case of both corporate and non-corporate non-minor shareholders to exclude dividends received by a co n tro lled company from another company in re la tio n to which the taxpayer is also a non-minor shareholder. 2.5.3 This treatm ent would, however, be sim plified if a ll dividends received by a co ntrolled company, other than those received from another company in respect of which the taxpayer is a non-minor shareholder, were made assessable. I t would then not be necessary fo r a corporate shareholder to keep separate account of p o rtfo lio and non-portfolio dividends. 2.5.4 The BE regime its e lf and the proposed changes to the treatm ent of dividends received by companies have im plications for the d e d u c tib ility of in te re st on money borrowed by a company to acquire shares in non-resident companies. The d e d u c tib ility of in te re s t expense re la tin g to foreign investm ents would also be affected by in te rju risd ic tio n a l allo catio n ru les. I t would th erefo re be d esirab le to review the current provisions re la tin g to in te re s t d e d u c tib ility in the context of the consideration of a llo catio n ru les. 2.5.6 The treatm ent of BE losses was one of the most contentious issues raised in subm issions. The CD proposed th a t BE losses (which would be computed according to New Zealand tax rules) be "ring-fenced" to the BE regim e. That is , lo sses would be able to be o ffse t against any BE income of a taxpayer, but not 29 against non-BE taxable income (i.e New Zealand- and fo reig n - source income taxable under current law ). Any excess BE lo ss not able to be o ffse t against BE income in the current year would be carried forward fo r o ffse t against BE income in futu re income y ears. 2.5.7 Subm issions were opposed to any ring-fencing of BE losses and generally called fo r u n restric te d pooling of lo sses w ith a tax p ay er's other taxable income. The u n re stric te d o ffse t of BE lo sses would, however, lead to a decidedly asymmetric re su lt as fa r as the New Zealand tax base was concerned. When a taxpayer derived a BE p ro fit but the foreign tax paid by the co ntrolled company was a t le a st equal to the New Zealand tax lia b ility on the BE income, no New Zealand tax would be co llected . If, once the co ntrolled company made a lo ss, the lo ss could be o ffse t against other New Zealand taxable income, the ov erall re s u lt would be to dim inish the New Zealand tax base. Sim ilar problems a rise now w ith actual branches. There is no point in implementing a regime which would fu rth er erode the present tax base. 2.5.8 Another problem would a rise if taxpayers could acquire BE tax lo sses (by obtaining an in te re s t in non-resident companies which were in tax lo ss under New Zealand rules) to sh e lte r BE income in low tax ju risd ic tio n s. A nti-avoidance ru les could cope w ith th is to some extent but such ru les have th e ir own d eficen cies. 2.5.9 C onsiderations such as these suggest th a t the CD proposals w ill need to be tightened rath er than relaxed. At one extrem e, BE losses could be ring-fenced to the offshore e n tity fo r each taxpayer. This may, however, be im practicable sin ce, where control e x ists, taxpayers w ill generally have some 30 d isc retio n to s h ift taxable income between d iffe re n t co n tro lled companies, p a rtic u la rly where they are resid en t in the same country. Thus, a fu rth er p o ssib ility would be to allow the grouping of p ro fits and losses among e n titie s w ithin the same tax ju risd ic tio n . The Committee w ill rep o rt fu rth er on th is issu e. 2.5.10 The ru les fo r cred itin g foreign taxes need to be in teg rated w ith those applying to lo sses. The CD proposed th a t c re d its be lim ited on an e n tity by e n tity and a source of income b a sis. We have yet to discuss the appropriate ru les fo r foreign tax c re d its. 2.5.11 Some fu rth er discussion of various aspects of the BE regime is contained in Annex 2. 31 CHAPTER 3 – FOREIGN INVESTMENT FUNDS 3 .1 . Avoidance Problem s: Need fo r an A lte r n a tiv e Regime 3.1.1 I f , as recommended by the Committee, the BE regime applied only to the non-minor shareholders of co n tro lled foreign companies, the types of offshore investm ent outside the regime would be: a minor or non-controlling shareholdings in companies resid en t in high tax ju risd ic tio n s; b minor or non-controlling shareholdings in companies resid en t in low tax ju risd ic tio n s ("tax havens"); and c in te re s ts in investm ent com panies,unit tru s ts , mutual funds and sim ilar e n titie s , which c o lle c tiv e ly may be referred to as "foreign funds". 3.1.2 The CD proposes th a t the CV regime should apply to a ll of these types of investm ent. In the lig h t of the concerns about the CV regime outlined in chapter 1, the Committee considers th a t i t could be ju s tifie d now only where th ere is a serious avoidance problem th a t e x ists or can reasonably be expected to develop. O utside th a t area and CFCs, the tax atio n of the gains, other than dividends, th a t resid en ts derive from offshore investm ents should aw ait the introduction of a general c a p ita l gains tax . 3.1.3 In the Com mittee's view, minor or non-controlling shareholdings in companies resid en t outside tax havens c le a rly fa ll in the category of investm ents th a t are b est taxed under a c a p ita l gains tax . These companies cannot be used by the investor to erode the New Zealand tax base and the most im portant 32 of them, publicly lis te d companies, generally d istrib u te a su b sta n tia l proportion of th e ir income as dividends which are already taxed or w ill su ffer a sim ilar impost under the Government's new proposals. 3.1.4 Minor or non-controlling shareholdings in tax haven companies are a possible source of concern. The m ajority of problem cases w ill, however, be passive investm ent vehicles which would fa ll in to the foreign investm ent fund regime discussed in section 3.3. 3.1.5 O ffshore funds, esp ecially those located in tax havens, are c le arly the biggest avoidance problem. The Committee th erefo re favours the introduction of a foreign investm ent fund regime targ eted a t investm ent vehicles which confer sig n ific a n t tax b e n efits, such as u n it tru s ts based in tax havens. 3 .2 Coverage o f th e Regime 3.2.1 In summary, the two building blocks of the Com mittee's proposals fo r companies would be: a the BE regime to apply to co ntrolled foreign companies which do not meet the grey l i s t te s t outlined in chapter 2; and b a foreign investm ent fund regime to apply to investm ent v e h ic le s. 3.2.2 Between these two types of investm ent, no regime would apply. Three arguments have been advanced fo r a regime which applies to a ll foreign investm ents. The f ir s t is th a t complete coverage is needed to catch taxpayers who have control of an 33 foreign company but manage to avoid the control te s t. The response in other countries to vehicles which side step the control te s t has been to introduce an offshore fund regim e. We would sim ilarly expect th a t many of these non-controlled vehicles would fa ll in to the foreign investm ent fund regime proposed by the Committee. With a comprehensive d e fin itio n of control and a wide foreign investm ent fund d e fin itio n , the rem ainder of the problem does not ju s tify the adm inistration and compliance costs of a fu lly comprehensive regim e. We would also note th a t most companies find re a l m inority in te re sts disadvantagous. M inority in te re sts w ill be a ll the more u n a ttrac tiv e as a re su lt of these reform s since a su b stan tial though m inority shareholder in a non- resid en t company could be tipped in to the BE regime by the purchase of a possibly sm all in te re s t in the company by another New Zealand resid en t. 3.2.3 The second argument fo r comprehensive coverage is th a t a CV or comparable regime is needed to discourage resid en t companies from "going offshore", by penalising th e ir New Zealand resid en t shareholders. By going offshore i t is meant th a t a New Zealand company would e stab lish a non-resident holding company which would own its New Zealand and foreign su b sid ia rie s. No New Zealand company would then own foreign a sse ts. Thus, the corporate group would avoid the in tern atio n al regim e. Under the CD proposals, however, the resid en t shareholders in the foreign company would f a ll in to the re la tiv e ly draconian CV regim e, thereby discouraging such restu ctu rin g . 3.2.4 I t is obvious th a t th is restru c tu rin g does not re su lt in a s h ift of physical assets out of New Zealand. In addition, the resid en t shareholders end up in no b e tte r p o sitio n than resid en ts who own shares in what are now non-resident companies. Furtherm ore, the tax advantages are not one-sided since the restru ctu red company would lose the a b ility to pass im putation 34 c re d its fo r New Zealand tax paid through to its resid en t shareholders. In addition, non-resident dividend w ithholding tax on dividends paid out of New Zealand and dividend w ithholding payment on incoming dividends might also be incurred. Moreover, th ere are commercial co n strain ts on th is process since, a t the end of the day, New Zealand companies are dependent on New Zealand shareholders for th e ir equity base and need to m aintain good relatio n sh ip s w ith them. The Committee th erefo re considers th a t the second argument is not su ffic ie n t to w arrant a fu lly comprehensive regime a t th is stage. 3.2.5 The th ird argument is th a t a comprehensive regime would extend the tax base and perm it a fu rth er reduction in tax ra te s. If revenue were the objective, however, i t would be necessary to evaluate a lte rn a tiv e sources which might b e tte r meet the efficien cy , equity and sim p licity objectives of tax reform . As argued elsew here, the Committee considers th a t the tax atio n of foreign equity investm ents outside tax havens is b est le f t to a c a p ita l gains tax regime and could not be advanced now w ithout a rea l cost in taxpayer a ttitu d e s towards voluntary com pliance. 3.2.6 The Committee th erefo re concludes th a t there is in su ffic ie n t ju s tific a tio n for a fu lly comprehensive regime a t th is stage. If a problem emerges, ad d itio n al measures could be considered. In order to m onitor developments and encourage com pliance, i t is d esirab le to have comprehensive d isclosure requirem ents. For example, a ll taxpayers could be required to d isclo se offshore in te re sts th a t fa ll outside the BE and foreign fund investm ent regim es. This would enable the Inland Revenue Department to request fu rth er inform ation where necessary and hence keep abreast of responses to the new m easures. We consider th a t the approach of aiming to define the extent of the problem, if any, resu ltin g from incom plete coverage is p referab le to implementing an across-the-board regime now. 35 Recommendation 3.2.7 The Committee th e r e fo r e recommends th a t th e CV regim e apply o n ly t o in t e r e s t s in fo r e ig n in vestm en t fun ds, a s d isc u sse d in s e c tio n 3 .3 . 3 .3 F oreign Investm ent Fund Regime 3.3.1 The d e fin itio n of a foreign investm ent fund can p o te n tia lly be very wide. The regime should be targ eted a t non- resid en t e n titie s which provide sig n ific a n t tax advantages compared w ith comparable e n titie s in New Zealand. This is the case when the income of the e n tity is untaxed or only lig h tly taxed compared w ith the tax th a t would be levied on such income in New Zealand. For example, a u n it tru s t based in a tax haven which in v ests in debt se c u ritie s would o ffer sig n ific a n t tax advantages to New Zealand investors compared w ith an id en tica l u n it tru s t in New Zealand. A u n it tru s t investing exclusively in shares, however, o ffers tax advantages only to the extent th a t i t perm its dividend income to be converted in to c a p ita l gain. A d iv e rsifie d foreign investm ent fund w ill, however, ty p ic a lly own non-controlling in te re s ts in companies, debt instrum ents and other investm ents. 3.3.2 The other ta rg e ts of the foreign fund regime are e n titie s which s lip outside the BE regime because they provide tax b en efits which do not depend on co n tro l. This w ill generally be feasib le among non-associated persons only when th ere are w ell-defined means of purchasing and disposing of in te re sts and reg u larly quoted p rices fo r them so th a t members can m onitor fund perform ance. Thus, such funds w ill ty p ic a lly be lis te d on a stock exchange or have redem ption arrangem ents under which 36 investors can s e ll th e ir in te re sts to the fund manager a t a price based on the net assets of the fund. 3.3.3 In order to address the tax advantages offered by these types of fund, the Committee favours a regime based on the Canadian one. According to Canadian tax p ra c titio n e rs, th is has larg ely elim inated the m arketing of tax haven funds in Canada. The key c rite ria fo r the application of the regime would be th a t: a the fund (which would include any legal en tity ) derives its income or value prim arily or su b sta n tia lly from holding or trading in p o rtfo lio investm ents in shares, investm ents in debt instrum ents, re a l property, commodities, royalty agreem ents, e tc ; and b the e ffe c t of the residence of the e n tity fo r tax purposes and its d istrib u tio n policy is to reduce the tax payable on the income of the e n tity below what i t would be had the income been taxed in New Zealand as i t was derived. 3.3.4 We would define a "p o rtfo lio investm ent" as a non- co n tro llin g in te re s t where the investor has no sig n ific a n t influence over the investee. The term is incorporated in the foreign investm ent fund d e fin itio n not because we believe th a t th ere are p a rtic u la r tax advantages in holding shares in foreign funds (apart from the d eferral or avoidance of tax on dividends) but because such investm ents are c h a ra c te ristic of the type of fund we have in mind. 3.3.5 An e ffe c t te s t such as th a t outlined in (b) is to some extent subjective but i t is necessary to ta rg e t the regime on e n titie s in low tax countries. Taxpayer compliance would be encouraged by comprehensive disclosure requirem ents. 37 3.3.6 Canada taxes resid en ts on the b asis of a prescribed ra te of in te re s t applied to the amount of th e ir investm ent in such funds. Because th ere w ill usually be a quoted p rice for in te re sts in such funds which re fle c ts the underlying income they accum ulate, the Committee considers th a t the CV regime could apply to such investm ents. Thus, the inv esto r would be taxed on the d ifferen ce between the market p rice of the in te re s t a t the end of the income year and the equivalent value a t the beginning of the year, plus any d istrib u tio n s received during the year. Where a taxpayer was subject to both the BE and offshore fund regim es, the former should apply. 3.3.7 I t may be necessary to include an anti-avoidance ru le aimed a t e n titie s which are in substance foreign investm ent funds but which are stru ctu red to avoid the regim e. Further comment on the Com m ittee's recommended regime for foreign investm ent funds is provided in Annex 3. Recommendation 3 .3 .8 The Committee th e r e fo r e recommends th a t: a in a d d itio n to th e BE regim e, th e r e be a fo r e ig n in vestm en t fund regim e to apply to in t e r e s t s in e n t i t ie s which: i d e r iv e t h e ir income or v a lu e p rim a rily or s u b s ta n tia lly from h o ld in g or tra d in g p o r t f o lio in vestm en ts in sh a re s, in vestm en ts in debt in stru m en ts, r e a l p ro p erty , com m odities, e tc ; and 38 i i th e e f f e c t o f th e r e sid e n c e o f th e e n t it y fo r ta x purposes and i t s d is tr ib u tio n p o lic y i s to reduce th e ta x payable on th e income o f th e e n t it y below what i t would be had th e income been taxed in New Zealand a s i f i t were d eriv ed by th e in v e sto r ; b th e ta x a b le income d eriv ed by a r e sid e n t from an in t e r e s t in a fo r e ig n investm en t fund be c a lc u la te d as th e in c r e a se in th e market v a lu e o f th e in t e r e s t over th e income y ea r, p lu s any d is tr ib u tio n s r e c e iv a b le ; and c where an in t e r e s t in a n o n -re sid e n t e n t it y f a l l s w ith in both th e BE and fo r e ig n in vestm en t fund reg im es, th e BE regim e ap p ly. 39 CHAPTER 4 – TREATMENT OF DIVIDENDS 4 .1 Corporate R e cip ie n t 4.1.1 The CD d istin g u ish es between "p o rtfo lio " and "non- p o rtfo lio " dividends received by a resid en t company from a non- resid en t company. P o rtfo lio dividends are defined to be dividends received by a resid en t company from a non-resident company in which the resid en t owns le ss than 10 percent of the paid-up share c a p ita l. A ll other foreign dividends received by a resid en t company are defined to be non-portfolio dividends. 4.1.2 The CD proposes th a t p o rtfo lio dividends be assessab le to companies in accordance w ith general in te rn atio n al p ra c tic e . N on-portfolio dividends are to be subject to a w ithholding payment system , as outlined in the Government Economic Statem ent of 17 December 1987. The w ithholding payment system does not come d ire c tly w ithin the Committee's term s of reference but i t is necessary to consider i t in order to in te g rate the tax atio n of dividends w ith the tax atio n of u n d istrib u ted income under the BE regim e. The treatm ent of dividends received by a co n tro lled company fo r the purposes of calcu latin g BE income was discussed in section 2.5. 4.1.3 A number of subm issions called fo r the rete n tio n of the ex istin g dividend exemption for companies. Other subm issions took the view th a t dividends should be assessable to a company only if c re d it were given for both foreign w ithholding tax and the underlying foreign company tax. A number of other co u n tries have such a system in respect of non-portfolio dividends, including the United S tates, the United Kingdom and A u stralia. 40 While c re d it for foreign taxes may be allowed a t the corporate lev el, no country passes c re d its fo r foreign taxes through to non-corporate or individual shareholders. In th is resp ect, the proposal to allow c re d its for non-resident dividend w ithholding tax to pass through to individuals under the New Zealand im putation system goes fu rth er, as fa r as we are aware, than any other country. Thus, a ll countries u ltim ately claw back c re d its given to companies fo r underlying foreign company tax . This is not su rp risin g since the revenue consequences of perm itting c re d its to flow through to individual shareholders could be su b sta n tia l. 4.1.4 I f c re d its fo r foreign taxes do not pass through to individual shareholders, they are allowed to them in e ffe c t as a deduction from assessable income. Under the proposed w ithholding payment system , the conversion to a deduction system w ill be advanced from the ultim ate individual rec ip ie n t to the f ir s t corporate re c ip ie n t of a foreign dividend. This is very much the objective of the w ithholding payment system and i t would be incom patible w ith i t to allow the corporate dividend re c ip ie n t a c re d it fo r underlying foreign company tax . Foreign tax c re d it systems are also extrem ely complex, as the United S tates and Canadian system s illu s tra te , and inherently a rb itra ry because of the p ra c tic a l d iffic u lty of tracin g foreign dividends through tim e and among d iffe re n t companies. The Committee th erefo re considers th a t i t would not be feasib le from a compliance or adm inistrative point of view to introduce a foreign tax c re d it system fo r in terco rp o rate dividends, a t le a st in the cu rren t co n tex t. 4.1.5 Submissions also questioned the need for a separate w ithholding payment system for non-portfolio dividends. I t would undoubtedly be sim pler to make a ll foreign dividends assessable 41 to a corporate rec ip ie n t but th is would not be co n sisten t w ith a number of New Z ealand's tax tre a ty o b lig atio n s. 4.1.6 One of the d ifferen ces between taxing such dividends and the proposed w ithholding payment system is th a t a company in tax lo ss receiving foreign dividends would not incur any tax lia b ility if the dividends were assessable but would incur the w ithholding payment. This problem could be overcome by allow ing a company in tax lo ss to o ffse t the dividend against its lo ss. Thus, the lo ss would reduce by the amount of the gross dividend (i.e . the dividend received plus any foreign w ithholding ta x ), thereby extinguishing the w ithholding payment lia b ility . 4.1.7 In order to avoid taxing foreign-source income tw ice, once as BE income and again on rec eip t, the CD proposes th a t, in calcu latin g BE income, taxpayers be able to deduct any dividends received from the foreign company concerned. We consider th a t th ere are serious problems w ith th is deduction system . For example, a company which had a BE loss in the year i t received a dividend would obtain no re lie f from double tax atio n . There are p o te n tia lly many tim ing differences between New Z ealand's and other co u n tries' tax ru les which could lead to th is re s u lt. 4.1.8 In order to avoid these problem s, in p rin cip le a separate account needs to be kept of tax paid on BE income. When a resid en t receives a dividend from a controlled company, the tax (or w ithholding payment) lia b ility on the dividend would be o ffse t in whole or in p a rt according to the balance of the tax paid in the sp ecial account. In p ractice, for resid en t companies, the Im putation C redit Account ("ICA") proposed fo r the im putation system can perform ju st th is function so th a t a separate account is not necessary. 42 4.1.9 The Committee propose to d e ta il its recommendations on the in teg ratio n of the in te rn a tio n a l, im putation and w ithholding payment regim es in P art 2 of th is rep o rt and in our rep o rt on the im putation proposals. 4 .2 Non-Corporate R ecip ien t 4.2.1 For the same purpose of avoiding the double tax atio n of offshore income, i t would be necessary to require in dividual and other non-corporate non-minor shareholders to keep the equivalent of an ICA. We w ill also rep o rt fu rth er on th is aspect in P art 2 of th is rep o rt and our rep o rt on full im putation. 43 CHAPTER 5 – TRUSTS 5 .1 In tro d u ctio n 5.1.1 In th is chapter we comment on the future regime fo r tru s ts (which also has im plications for ex istin g tr u s ts ) . By ex istin g tru s ts , we mean settlem ents made before 17 December 1987. The treatm ent of these tru s ts , and the tra n s itio n to the proposed new regim e, is d e alt w ith in chapter 7. 5 .2 . T rust Income 5.2.1 The in tern atio n al tax reform s cannot be fu lly e ffe c tiv e unless th ere is a regime to apply to tru s ts since, in many cases, a tru s t can su b stitu te for a company. The CD tre a ts "foreign tru sts" (i.e . those w ith non-resident tru stee s) in a sim ilar manner to foreign companies. Since th ere is no resid en t tru ste e and the b e n eficiarie s may not be id e n tifie d , the CD proposes th a t resid en t s e ttlo rs be lia b le fo r tax on tru s te e 's income. This approach ignores the leg al relatio n sh ip s between a s e ttlo r and a tru ste e since the former has no rig h t to the income of the tru s t. Indeed, the whole point of a tru s t is to ensure th a t property and the income i t produces is leg ally divested by a s e ttlo r. In re a lity , however, a s e ttlo r often has su b sta n tia l influence over the tru ste e , usually on an inform al b asis though th ere may be sp ecific provision in the tru s t deed and, in p ractice if not in law, may be able to wind up the tru s t and take back the property. Thus, the economic substance of a tru s t may d iffe r from its leg al appearance. 44 5.2.2 In order to meet the objectives of the in te rn atio n al reform s, tru s t income derived by non-resident tru ste e s of tru s ts se ttle d by New Zealand resid en ts must be taxed each year as i t is earned. Ignoring enforcem ent problem s, the b est course would be to tax the income in the hands of the tru ste e as i f he or she were a resid en t. Where the tru ste e did not comply, th ere would be l i t t l e a lte rn a tiv e but to tax the resid en t s e ttlo r since th ere may be no id e n tifia b le resid en t b e n e fic ia rie s. In the f ir s t instance, however, the legal lia b ility fo r the tax should be placed on the tru ste e . This could be achieved by defining tru s ts w ith resid en t s e ttlo rs to be New Zealand resid en ts fo r tax purposes. The tru s t would then be lia b le fo r New Zealand tax on its foreign- and New Zealand- source income in the same way as other resid en ts. Where a non-resident tru ste e defaulted on the lia b ility , the resid en t s e ttlo r would be lia b le as the agent of the tru ste e . I t would be necessary to define a tru s t settlem ent w idely to include settlem ents made in d ire c tly through nominees or asso ciates and a ll d isp o sitio n s of property to a tru s t made fo r le ss than fu ll consideration. 5.2.3 The Committee th erefo re supports the basic approach of the CD. This clo sely follow s the grantor tru s t provisions in the United S tates. This regime would, however, be u n ju stifia b ly severe if i t applied to a ll ex istin g tru s ts since s e ttlo rs w ill usually be unable to a lte r th e ir s e ttlo r sta tu s and, furtherm ore, d istrib u tio n requirem ents and tru s te e s ' powers are com paratively in fle x ib le . Hence, we recommend more generous tra n s itio n a l provisions fo r tru s ts than for companies. 5.2.4 The concept of the residence of a tru s t could also apply to ex istin g tru s ts . As w ith future tru s ts , residence would be determ ined by the residence of the s e ttlo r. Where th ere was: 45 a a resid en t s e ttlo r and a resid en t tru s te e , the tru ste e would be lia b le fo r tax on tru s t income, w hether sourced in New Zealand or elsew here, as a t presen t; b a resid en t s e ttlo r and a non-resident tru s te e , the tru ste e would be lia b le for tax on tru s t income, as in (a ), but in the event of d efau lt, the s e ttlo r would be lia b le ; c no resid en t s e ttlo r but a resid en t tru s te e , the tru ste e would be lia b le for tax on the tr u s t's New Zealand- source income as would be the case w ith any o th er non- resid en t. If, however, the tru s t had no New Zealand- source income, the tru ste e would have no New Zealand tax lia b ility . 5.2.5 One consequence of th is approach would be th a t New Zealand would not tax the foreign-source tru s t income of a resid en t who was the tru ste e of a tru s t w ith a non-resident s e ttlo r. In our view, th is is the appropriate treatm ent since such income has no d e fin ite connection w ith New Zealand ap art from the existence here of the tru s t adm inistrator (who w ill, however, have no b en eficial in te re s t in the incom e). B en eficiaries may be resid en t here, but th e ir in te re s ts do not m aterialise u n til th ere is a d istrib u tio n or v estin g . This makes i t in fea sib le to tax b en eficiarie s on tru s t income. R esident b e n eficiarie s should, however, be taxed on any tru s t income which is d istrib u te d to or vested in them, as discussed in the next subsection. This leaves only the resid en t tru ste e to tax but, if th a t were done, he or she would of course resign in favour of a non-resident tru ste e . Thus, we believe there is l i t t l e to be gained from attem pting to tax foreign-source income derived by resid en t tru ste e s of non-resident tru s ts . 46 5.2.6 The adoption of th is tru s t residence ru le would remove some am biguities in the tax atio n of ex istin g tru s ts . There may be other consequential changes to the current treatm ent of tru s ts th a t w ill need to be addressed when the Committee considers the d ra ft le g isla tio n dealing w ith tru s ts . 5 .3 D istr ib u tio n s From R esid en t T ru sts 5.3.1 D istrib u tio n s to b en eficiarie s from resid en t tru s ts (as defined in the previous section) made out of tru s t income (i.e . income which has been taxed as assessable income in the hands of the tru ste e or the resid en t se ttlo r) should be exempt from tax since they w ill have already borne the appropriate amount of New Zealand tax. 5.3.2 Where a d istrib u tio n from a resid en t tru s t is not made out of tru s t income, i t should continue to be assessable or exempt to the b eneficiary as under the present ru le s, except in the situ a tio n d e alt w ith in paragraph 7.2.4. 5 .4 D istr ib u tio n s From N on-R esident T ru sts 5.4.1 There are d eficien cies in the present tax treatm ent of tru s t d istrib u tio n s received by resid en t b e n eficiarie s from non- resid en t tru s ts (i.e those w ith no resid en t s e ttlo r ) . Case law supports the view th a t if tru s t income has been taxed in the hands of the non-resident tru ste e , i t is not assessable a second tim e in the hands of the beneficiary. If, however, the tru ste e has not paid tax on th a t income, the treatm ent of the d istrib u tio n in the hands of the b eneficiary is unclear. 47 5.4.2 This u n satisfacto ry am biguity should be resolved by amending the law to make i t c le a r th a t resid en t b e n eficiarie s w ill be assessable on a ll income d istrib u tio n s received from non- resid en t tru s ts . A c re d it should be given fo r any foreign or New Zealand tax paid by the tru ste e on the income out of which the d istrib u tio n is made. This would n ecessitate the tru ste e keeping records of the income of the tru s t and the tax paid, but the onus for estab lish in g th a t a c re d it should be given can be placed on the b en eficiary . 5.4.3 The tru s t regime should m irror the tax atio n of individuals since individuals are u ltim ately the b e n e fic ia rie s of tru s t income. Since c a p ita l gains w ill norm ally be exempt in the hands of resid en t in d iv id u als, c ap ita l p ro fits , as defined in New Zealand tax term s, d istrib u te d to b e n eficiarie s should also be exempt in th e ir hands. S im ilarly, a d istrib u tio n of the corpus (i.e . the o rig in al c ap ita l se ttle d plus a ll ad d itio n al settlem ents) of the tru s t should not be assessable to a beneficiary. 5.4.4 Further elaboration of the Com m ittee's views on tru s ts is contained in Annex 4. Our recommendations on tra n sitio n a l provisions re la tin g to ex istin g tru s ts are outlined in chapter 7. Recommendation 5.4.5 The Committee recommends t h a t , in r e sp e c t o f fu tu re t r u s t se ttle m e n ts: a a s e t t lo r be w id ely d efin ed a s any person who d ir e c t ly or in d ir e c t ly p ro v id es money, goods, s e r v ic e s or o th er b e n e f it s to a t r u s t fo r inadequate c o n sid e r a tio n ; 48 b a t r u s t be tr e a te d a s a r e s id e n t o f New Zealand fo r income ta x purposes i f th e s e t t lo r o f th e t r u s t i s a New Zealand r e sid e n t; c th e tr u s te e o f a r e sid e n t t r u s t be p rim a rily l i a b l e fo r ta x on t r u s t income b u t, in th e ev en t o f th e tr u s te e d e fa u ltin g on such a l i a b i l i t y , th e s e t t lo r be l i a b l e a s agen t o f th e tr u s te e ; d d is tr ib u tio n s o f t r u s t income ( i . e . income w hich has been ta x ed in th e hands o f th e tr u s te e or th e r e s id e n t s e t t lo r ) t o a b e n e fic ia r y from a r e s id e n t t r u s t be exempt from ta x in th e b e n e fic ia r y 's hands; e a l l d is tr ib u tio n s o f income to a b e n e fic ia r y from a non- r e s id e n t t r u s t be ta x a b le in th e hands o f th e b e n e fic ia r y , but th e b e n e fic ia r y be allow ed a c r e d it fo r any fo r e ig n or New Zealand ta x p aid by th e tr u s t e e ; and f d is tr ib u tio n s o f c a p ita l p r o f it s a s d e fin e d in New Zealand ta x term s or th e corpus to a r e sid e n t b e n e fic ia r y from a n o n -re sid e n t t r u s t be exempt from ta x in th e hands o f th e b e n e fic ia r y . 49 CHAPTER 6 – DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS AND PENALTIES 6 .1 D isc lo su r e Requirem ents and P e n a ltie s 6.1.1 The objective of inform ation d isclo su re is tw ofold. F irst, i t provides the Inland Revenue Department w ith the base data necessary to adm inister the tax system . Secondly, i t encourages taxpayers to comply w ith the law since they commit an offence if they f a il to provide the inform ation requested. New Zealand req u ires a much lower level of d isclo su re than co u n tries such as A u stralia, the United S tates and the U nited Kingdom. Furtherm ore, our p en alties fo r non-com pliance are g enerally lig h te r than those applying in these co u n tries. A com bination of minimal d isclo su re and low p en alties reduces compliance and makes enforcem ent more d iffic u lt. 6.1.2 Both of these m atters need to be addressed in the context of the in te rn atio n al tax reform s. The Department w ill be dependent in the f ir s t instance on the inform ation provided by taxpayers. The objective of disclosure is not to obtain exhaustive inform ation from every taxpayer. That would m erely swamp the Department and impose unnecessary compliance co sts on taxpayers. R ather, a t the f ir s t level of d isclo su re, a sm all number of key questions should be asked of a ll taxpayers. This enables the Department to id en tify those taxpayers who should then be required to provide fu lle r d isclo su re. 6.1.3 The Committee w ill comment fu rth er on disclo su re requirem ents and p en alties in the context of the present reform s in P art 2 of its rep o rt. 50 CHAPTER 7 – TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 7 .1 Branch E q u ivalen t Regime 7.1.1 The CD proposes no tra n s itio n a l arrangem ents ap art from the d efe rral of the im plem entation date of the BE and CV regim es u n til 1 A pril 1988. A number of subm issions argue fo r com plete exemption of investm ents entered in to before the announcement of the regime and you w ill be aware of the general argum ents made against retro sp ectiv e tax changes. The Committee considers th a t complete "grandfathering" can seldom be ju s tifie d since commercial decisions do not assume th a t the tax system applying when they are made w ill continue in d e fin ite ly . N evertheless, we consider th a t a reasonable period of adjustm ent is necessary in order to give taxpayers tim e to restru c tu re th e ir a ffa irs and gear up to comply w ith the regim e. There has, however, been fa ir warning of the Government's in ten tio n to address tax haven avoidance. 7.1.2 To th is end, we recommend th a t resid en ts be exempt from the BE regime u n til 1 A pril 1990 in respect of in te re s ts acquired on or before 17 December 1987 in companies th a t are not resid en t in low tax ju risd ic tio n s sp ecified in a tra n sitio n a l l i s t . An illu s tra tiv e tra n sitio n a l l i s t is shown in Annex 5. Shareholders w ith co n tro llin g in te re sts in tax haven companies w ill generally have known since a t le a st the date of the 1987 Budget th a t they were to be subject to a CFC regim e. We th erefo re consider th a t a 1 A pril 1988 im plem entation date is appropriate in these cases. 7.1.3 We also recommend th a t resid en ts be exempt from the BE regime u n til 1 A pril 1989 in respect of in te re sts acquired a fte r 17 December 1987 in companies which are resid en t in the lis te d 51 countries (though the exemption of any underlying co n tro lled companies would depend on whether they also were resid en t in a lis te d country). A fter th a t date, a continued exemption would apply only if the company met the grey l i s t te s t outlined in section 2.3. Taxpayers in th is p o sitio n would th erefo re not have to ad ju st the taxable income of the co n tro lled company for sig n ific a n t preferences in the f ir s t year. I t would in any case be d iffic u lt to compile lis ts of sig n ific a n t preferences in tim e for a 1 A pril 1988 s ta r t date. 7.1.4 For the purposes of determ ining whether a non-resident company is co n tro lled , a re sid e n t's to ta l in te re s t in the company, whether acquired before or a fte r 17 December 1987, would be considered. S im ilarly, a re sid e n t's to ta l shareholding would be considered for the purposes of determ ining whether the 10 percent in te re s t threshold fo r a ttrib u tio n of income was trig g ered . A ttrib u tio n of income during the tra n s itio n a l period would, however, be based on th a t p art of a re s id e n t's to ta l in te re s t th a t was acquired a fte r 17 December 1987. An example illu s tra tin g these tra n sitio n a l provisions is shown in Annex 2. 7 .2 R esid en t T ru sts 7.2.1 As mentioned above, we consider th a t a more generous tra n sitio n is ju s tifie d fo r ex istin g resid en t tru s ts (as defined in chapter 5) w ith non-resident tru ste e s. In some cases, s e ttlo rs w ill be able to wind up a tru s t and remove them selves from the new regime but th is w ill often not be p o ssib le. Thus, some s e ttlo rs of such resid en t tru s ts would be unable to a lte r th e ir s e ttlo r sta tu s and could su ffer a considerable ad d itio n al tax lia b ility th a t could not have been an ticip ated . The regime 52 should not, however, p ro tect ex istin g s e ttlo rs forever where they are able, through th e ir influence over the tru ste e , to e ffe c t a wind up of a tru s t since a decision not to do so rep resen ts in e ffe c t a new settlem ent. Where a wind up is not fe a sib le , the s e ttlo r should not be subject to the new regim e. Since the tru ste e is offshore, the only other p arty , if any, w ith a connection w ith New Zealand w ill be resid en t b e n e fic ia rie s. We do not consider th a t i t is feasib le to tax b e n eficiarie s on u n d istrib u ted tru s t income each year, but the b en efit of d e fe rra l of tax th a t they enjoy can to some extent be addressed once a d istrib u tio n (or vesting) is made. 7.2.2 The Committee th erefo re favours a tru s t tra n s itio n which encourages s e ttlo rs and tru ste e s to wind up ex istin g resid en t tru s ts w ith non-resident tru ste e s if they can. I f they are not able to , an in te re s t elem ent should be incorporated in to the determ ination of the assessable income of a b en eficiary re su ltin g from a tru s t d istrib u tio n . The la tte r approach is adopted in the United S tates in respect of d istrib u tio n s to United S tates b e n eficiarie s from tru s ts se ttle d by non-residents. 7.2.3 In order to encourage d isso lu tio n of a tru s t where i t is fea sib le, we propose th a t d istrib u tio n s of income made on or before 31 March 1989 from ex istin g tru s ts w ith non-resident tru ste e s be su b ject to a fin a l tax levied a t a ra te of 10 percent, provided th a t e ith e r the tru s t is wound up before 1 A pril 1989 or the s e ttlo r e le c ts to be subject to the new s e ttlo r regime from th a t date. D istrib u tio n s of c ap ita l p ro fits and the corpus of such a tru s t made on or before 31 March 1989 should be exempt from tax in b e n e fic ia rie s' hands. Our proposed ra te of 10 percent re fle c ts a compromise between the ra te of tax which would have been payable had the d istrib u tio n been unambiguously taxable under cu rren t law and the ra te needed to encourage d isso lu tio n . 53 7.2.4 Where these a lte rn a tiv e s are not availed of, we recommend th a t the non-resident tru ste e and the resid en t s e ttlo r not be subject to the s e ttlo r regim e, but th a t a ll d istrib u tio n s, whether of income or c a p ita l (other than of the corpus of the tr u s t) , should be assessable in the hands of a resid en t ben eficiary w ith an in te re st charge to reduce the advantage of d e fe rra l. The in te re s t should be calcu lated from 1 A pril 1988, the im plem entation date of the s e ttlo r regim e. A c re d it should be given fo r any foreign tax paid by the tru ste e . In ad d itio n , where a s e ttlo r has a loan, guarantee or other form of fin an cial assistan ce outstanding to the tru ste e , he or she should be assessed on imputed in te re st a t a prescribed ra te (less any in te re s t actu ally received by the s e ttlo r or paid by the tru ste e , as the case may be) computed on the amount of the loan, guarantee or other assistan ce. 7.2.5 A le ss strin g en t tra n sitio n is ju s tifie d fo r resid en t testam entary tru s ts w ith non-resident tru ste e s since these are not used for avoidance purposes. Where such tru s ts are wound up on or before 31 March 1989, the provisions o u tlin ed in paragraph 7.2.3 should apply. We propose th a t d istrib u tio n s of c a p ita l p ro fits from th is category of testam entary tru s ts made a fte r 31 March 1989 be exempt in the hands of b e n e fic ia rie s. D istrib u tio n s of income should, however, be assessable w ith the in te re s t charge since the b en eficiaries of testam entary tru s ts may enjoy the advantages of tax d eferral to the same ex ten t as b e n eficiarie s of other tru s ts . 7.2.6 Where a settlem ent is made a fte r 17 December 1987 to an ex istin g resid en t tru s t, the whole of the tru s t income could be subject to the new regime or only th a t p a rt a ttrib u ta b le to post- 17 December 1987 settlem ents. I t would, however, be d iffic u lt to arriv e a t workable apportionm ent ru les because of the need to 54 trace and compare settlem ents made a t d iffe re n t tim es in the p ast and in various forms. We th erefo re favour the approach of bringing a ll tru s t income w ithin the regime where a new settlem ent is made to an ex istin g tru s t. This would have l i t t l e p ra c tic a l im pact, since future settlem ents could be made to a new tru s t on the same term s as an ex istin g tru s t, but would avoid the need for apportionm ent ru les. 7.2.7 In order to implement th is tra n sitio n , resid en t s e ttlo rs should be required to d isclo se a ll settlem ents, as w idely defined, on non-resident tru ste e s ex istin g on 1 A pril 1988. S e ttlo rs should also n o tify the Inland Revenue Department of the tra n sitio n they have elected . 7.2.8 Settlem ents of tru s ts made by resid en ts a fte r 17 December 1987 and d istrib u tio n s of income or c a p ita l from such tru sts would be subject to the new regime proposed in chapter 5. 7 .3 N on-R esident T ru sts 7.3.1 N on-resident tru s ts (i.e those which are not s e ttle d by a New Zealand resident) are not affected by the s e ttlo r regim e, irresp ectiv e of when they were se ttle d . The treatm ent of d istrib u tio n s from such tru s ts to resid en t b e n eficiarie s is , however, to be c la rifie d as p a rt of the present reform s. The Committee's recommended treatm ent was outlined in chapter 5. The Government's in ten tio n to c la rify the law in th is area was included in the CD. We th erefo re propose th a t our recommended regime apply to d istrib u tio n s from non-resident tru s ts made a fte r 17 December 1987. 55 7 .4 F oreign Investm ent Funds 7.4.1 The foreign investm ent fund regime is targ eted a t tax haven e n titie s . The Government sig n alled its concern about the use of tax havens in 1986 and again in the 1987 Budget. In addition, taxpayers w ill usually be read ily able to dispose of the in te re sts th a t would be affected by the regime. Thus, the Committee supports the im plem entation of the foreign investm ent fund regime from 1 A pril 1988. 7 .5 Recommendations 7 .5 .1 The Committee recommends t h a t : a taxp a y ers be exempt from th e BE regim e fo r a two year p erio d ( i . e . u n t il 1 A p ril 1990) in r e sp e c t o f in t e r e s t s acquired on or b efo re 17 December 1987 in com panies which are n ot r e sid e n t in a tr a n s itio n a l l i s t o f s p e c if ie d ta x havens; b taxp a y ers be exempt from th e BE regim e fo r a one year p erio d ( i . e . u n t il 1 A p ril 1989) w ith r e sp e c t to in t e r e s t s which were acquired a f t e r 17 December 1987 in com panies which are r e sid e n t in th e l i s t o f c o u n tr ie s s p e c if ie d in recommendation (a) o f paragraph 7 .1 7 ; c d is tr ib u tio n s o f income made on or b efo re 31 March 1989 from e x is t in g t r u s t s w ith n o n -re sid e n t t r u s t e e s , be su b je c t to a f in a l ta x le v ie d a t a r a te o f 10 p e r ce n t, provided th a t e ith e r th e tr u s t i s wound up by 1 A p ril 1989 or th e s e t t lo r e le c t s to be su b je c t to th e new s e t t lo r regim e from th a t d a te . Where e it h e r o f th e se o p tio n s a p p lie s , d is tr ib u tio n s o f c a p it a l p r o f it s 56 and th e corpus o f th e t r u s t made on or b efo re 31 March 1989 should be exempt from ta x in b e n e f ic ia r ie s ' hands; d where n e ith e r o p tio n o u tlin e d in (c) a p p lie s in r e sp e c t o f e x is t in g t r u s t s w ith n o n -re sid e n t t r u s t e e s , o th er than testam en tary se ttle m e n ts: i a l l d is tr ib u tio n s , w hether o f income or c a p ita l (o th er than o f th e corpus o f th e t r u s t ) , should be a s s e s s a b le in th e hands o f a r e sid e n t b e n e fic ia r y su b je c t to an in t e r e s t charge c a lc u la te d from 1 A p ril 1988, w ith th e b e n e fic ia r y r e c e iv in g a c r e d it fo r any fo r e ig n ta x paid by th e tr u s te e ; and i i where a s e t t lo r has a lo a n , gu aran tee or o th er form o f fin a n c ia l a s s is ta n c e o u tsta n d in g to th e t r u s t e e , he o r sh e should be a sse sse d on imputed in t e r e s t a t a p rescrib ed r a te ( le s s any in t e r e s t a c tu a lly rec eiv ed by th e s e t t lo r or p aid by th e t r u s te e , a s th e c a se may be) computed on th e amount o f th e lo a n , guarantee or o th er a s s is ta n c e o u tsta n d in g ; e in th e ca se o f testam en tary t r u s t s in e x is te n c e on 17 December 1987 where th e deceased person was a r e s id e n t and which do n ot wind up pursuant to recommendation (c): i d is tr ib u tio n s o f c a p it a l p r o f it s made a f t e r 31 March 1989 co n tin u e to be 57 exempt in th e hands o f b e n e f ic ia r ie s ; and i i d is tr ib u tio n s o f income be a s s e s s a b le su b je c t to an in t e r e s t charge c a lc u la te d from 1 A p ril 1988; f where a r e sid e n t makes a se ttle m e n t a f t e r 17 December 1987 to a t r u s t in e x is te n c e on th a t d a te , a l l o f th e t r u s t se ttle m e n ts be deemed to have been made a f t e r 17 December 1987; g taxp a y ers be req u ired to make f u l l d is c lo s u r e o f a l l s e ttle m e n ts , as w id ely d e fin e d , to t r u s t s w ith non- r e s id e n t tr u s te e s e x is t in g on 1 A p ril 1988; h th e im plem entation d ate fo r th e proposed changes to th e treatm en t o f d is tr ib u tio n s from n o n -re sid e n t t r u s t s be 17 December 1987; and i th e im plem entation d a te fo r th e fo r e ig n in vestm en t fund regim e be 1 A p ril 1988. 58 CHAPTER 8 – FURTHER MEASURES 8 .1 R ole o f a C ap ital Gains Tax 8.1.1 We have commented already on the possible ro le of a c ap ita l gains tax in the context of the present reform s. In many cases, the income th a t resid en ts derive through offshore investm ents (apart from d istrib u tio n s) is b est ch aracterised as c ap ital gain and, short of v io latin g accepted income tax p rin cip les, is most appropriately taxed under a c a p ita l gains tax. 8.1.2 The lack of the comprehensive tax atio n of c a p ita l gains in New Zealand is the la s t outstanding gap in our tax system . The reform s th a t the Government has implemented over the la s t few years have gone a long way to broadening the tax base and addressing sources of avoidance. The f ir s t major base broadening measure was the introduction of GST. W ithin the income tax system, the next step was the removal of e x p lic it tax concessions such as export incentives and accelerated depreciation provisions. The removal of such incentives in return fo r a reduction in tax ra te s is very much the cen tral theme of cu rren t tax reform programmes in OECD countries. 8.1.3 The th ird se t of reform s was the adoption of comprehensive accrual ru les. These were aimed a t countering tax planning based on the d eferral of fin an cial arrangem ent income or the advancing of tax deductions. The fourth and present se t of reform s address the avoidance and d eferral o p portunities which 59 a rise in the in tern atio n al context. The Government has also moved sim ultaneously to reduce the avoidance problems which a rise w ith the exemption of the superannuation funds and other e n titie s . 8.1.4 The la s t major tax base problem is the general exclusion of c a p ita l gains from the d e fin itio n of assessable income. There is widespread support amongst tax p ra c titio n e rs for the tax atio n of c a p ita l gains. The Committee endorses th is view. Many of the rem aining d eficien cies in the tax system have th e ir o rig in in or are compounded by the lack of a c ap ita l gains tax. The next step in the Government's tax reform programme should be to extend the tax base to include c ap ita l gains as soon as i t is fea sib le to do so w ith the objective of fa c ilita tin g a fu rth er reduction in tax ra te s . 8.1.5 New Zealand is the only country in the OECD which s t i l l has no general c a p ita l gains tax. C ountries such as the U nited S tates, the United Kingdom, West Germany, France and Japan have a ll taxed c a p ita l gains for some tim e, w hile A ustralia introduced a c a p ita l gains tax in 1985. 8 .2 In te r j u r is d ic tio n a l A llo c a tio n R ules 8.2.1 In addition, we reaffirm our view th a t p rio rity should also be given to the introduction of in te rju risd ic tio n a l allo catio n ru les to ensure th a t New Zealand c o lle c ts its share of tax. Along w ith the tax atio n of c ap ita l gains, such ru les form one of the basic building blocks of the tax systems of countries such as the U nited S tates and the United Kingdom. 60 8 .3 Recommendation 8.3.1 The Committee th e r e fo r e recommends th a t, in a d d itio n to g iv in g p r io r ity to th e e x te n sio n o f th e income ta x b ase to in clu d e c a p ita l g a in s , th e Government g iv e p r io r it y to th e in tro d u ctio n o f in t e r j u r is d ic t io n a l a llo c a tio n r u le s , such as expense a llo c a tio n r u le s and more e f f e c t iv e tr a n s fe r p r ic in g p r o v is io n s . 61 CHAPTER 9 – SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 9 .1 Summary o f Recommendations 9.1.1 In summary, the Committee's recommendations are th a t: BE Method a the BE regime apply only where New Zealand resid en ts have control of a company; b control be defined as the ownership by 5 or fewer resid en ts of 50 percent or more of the shares (or votes, rig h ts to dividends or d istrib u tio n s on wind up) of a company, subject to : i a constructive ownership te s t to include in te re sts held through associated persons, nominees and other co ntrolled companies; i i a de facto control provision to include w ithin the regime persons who have the power to require a d istrib u tio n or the wind-up of a non-resident company; and i i i an anti-avoidance provision to d eter arrangem ents which have the e ffe c t of defeating the in te n t and app licatio n of the control te s t; and 62 c resid en t shareholders who d ire c tly or in d ire c tly hold a 10 percent or g reater in te re st in a co n tro lled company and resid en ts who are deemed to have control by v irtu e of the de facto control and anti-avoidance provisions be subject to the BE regim e, but other resid en t shareholders of co ntrolled companies be exempt from i t; d resid en ts be exempt from the BE regime in resp ect of in te re sts in companies which are: i resid en t for tax purposes in c e rta in lis te d countries w ith comprehensive in te rn atio n al tax regimes including CFC regim es (i.e .th e U nited S tates, the United Kingdom, West Germany, Canada, France and Japan) or A u stralia; and i i do not b en efit from sp ecified sig n ific a n t tax preferences in those countries such as accelerated c ap ita l w rite-o ffs or the exemption of c ertain foreign-source income. Where a company did u tilis e a sp ecified preference, i t would be required to ad ju st its taxable income, determ ined according to the country of residence tax ru les, for the e ffe c t of the tax p referen ce(s). If its foreign tax paid as a ra tio of its adjusted taxable income equals or exceeds the New Zealand company tax ra te , the BE regime would not apply; e non-minor shareholders (and other shareholders deemed to have control) in a controlled company who have in te re sts which are held in d ire c tly through other foreign 63 companies be subject to the regime unless the co n tro lled company s a tis fie s the exemption outlined in recommendation (d); CV Method f the CV regime apply only to in te re sts in foreign investm ent funds, as outlined in recommendation g; Foreign Fund Regime g in addition to the BE regim e, th ere be a foreign investm ent fund regime to apply to in te re sts in e n titie s which: i derive th e ir income or value prim arily or su b sta n tia lly from holding or trad in g p o rtfo lio investm ents in shares, investm ents in debt instrum ents, rea l property, commodities, e tc ; and i i the e ffe c t of the residence of the e n tity fo r tax purposes and its d istrib u tio n policy is to reduce the tax payable on the income of the e n tity below what i t would be had the income been taxed in New Zealand as if i t were derived by the investor; h the taxable income derived by a resid en t from an in te re st in a foreign investm ent fund be calcu lated as the increase in the market value of the in te re s t over the income year, plus any d istrib u tio n s receiv ab le; 64 i where an in te re st in a non-resident e n tity fa lls w ithin both the BE and foreign investm ent fund regim es, the BE regime apply; T rusts j a s e ttlo r be w idely defined as any person who d ire c tly or in d ire c tly provides money, goods, services or other b en efits to a tru s t for inadequate consideration; k a tru s t be trea te d as a resid en t of New Zealand fo r income tax purposes i f the s e ttlo r of the tru s t is a New Zealand resid en t; l the tru ste e of a resid en t tru s t be prim arily lia b le fo r tax on tru s t income but, in the event of the tru ste e defau ltin g on such a lia b ility , the s e ttlo r be lia b le as agent of the tru ste e ; m d istrib u tio n s of tru s t income (i.e . income which has been taxed in the hands of the tru ste e or the resid en t se ttlo r) to a beneficiary from a resid en t tru s t be exempt from tax in the b e n eficiary 's hands; n a ll d istrib u tio n s of income to a b eneficiary from a non- resid en t tru s t be taxable in the hands of the b en eficiary , but the b eneficiary be allowed a c re d it fo r any foreign or New Zealand tax paid by the tru ste e ; 65 o d istrib u tio n s of c ap ita l p ro fits or the corpus to a resid en t beneficiary from a non-resident tru s t be exempt from tax in the hands of the beneficiary; T ransition p taxpayers be exempt from the BE regime for a two year period (i.e . u n til 1 A pril 1990) in respect of in te re s ts acquired on or before 17 December 1987 in companies which are not resid en t in a tra n sitio n a l l i s t of sp ecified low tax ju risd ic tio n s; q taxpayers be exempt from the BE regime for a one year period (i.e . u n til 1 A pril 1989) w ith respect to in te re s ts which were acquired a fte r 17 December 1987 in companies which are resid en t in the l i s t of countries sp ecified in recommendation (d)(i); r d istrib u tio n s of income made on or before 31 March 1989 from settlem ents by resid en ts, on non-resident tru ste e s, in existence on 17 December 1987 be subject to a fin a l tax levied a t a ra te of 10 percent, provided th a t e ith e r the tru s t is wound up on or before th a t date or the s e ttlo r e le c ts to be subject to the new s e ttlo r regime from th a t date. Where e ith e r of these options ap p lies, d istrib u tio n s of c a p ita l p ro fits and the corpus of the tru s t made on or before 31 March 1989 should be exempt from tax in b e n e fic ia rie s' hands; s where n eith er option outlined in (r) applies in respect of settlem ents in existence on 17 December 1987 made by resid en ts, other than testam entary settlem ents: 66 i a ll d istrib u tio n s, whether of income or c a p ita l (other than of the corpus of the tr u s t) , should be assessable in the hands of a resid en t b en eficiary subject to an in te re st charge calcu lated from 1 A pril 1988, w ith the ben eficiary receiving a c re d it fo r any foreign tax paid by the tru ste e ; and i i where a s e ttlo r has a loan, guarantee or other form of fin an cial assistan ce outstanding to the tru ste e , he or she should be assessed on imputed in te re s t a t a prescribed ra te (less any in te re s t actu ally received by the s e ttlo r or paid by the tru ste e , as the case may be) computed on the amount of the loan, guarantee or other assistan ce outstanding; t in the case of testam entary tru s ts in existence on 17 December 1987 where the deceased person was a resid en t and which do not wind up pursuant to recommendation ( r ) : i d istrib u tio n s of c a p ita l p ro fits made a fte r 31 March 1989 continue to be exempt in the hands of b e n e fic ia rie s; and i i d istrib u tio n s of income be assessable subject to an in te re s t charge calcu lated from 1 A pril 1988; 67 u where a resid en t makes a settlem ent a fte r 17 December 1987 to a tru s t in existence on th a t date, a ll of the tru s t settlem ents be deemed to have been made a fte r 17 December 1987; v taxpayers be required to make fu ll d isclosure of a ll settlem ents to tru s ts w ith non-resident tru ste e s ex istin g on 1 A pril 1988; w the im plem entation date fo r the proposed changes to the treatm ent of d istrib u tio n s from non-resident tru s ts be 17 December 1987; x the im plem entation date for the foreign investm ent fund regime be 1 A pril 1988; Other Reforms y in addition to giving p rio rity to the extension of the income tax base to include c ap ita l gains, the Government give p rio rity to the introduction of in te rju risd ic tio n a l allo catio n ru les, such as expense allo catio n ru les and more effe ctiv e tra n sfe r p ricing provisions. 9.2 C onclusion 9.2.1 We believe th a t the regime we have outlined goes as far as is p racticab le towards achieving the Government's objectives w ithin the boundaries of ex istin g income tax p rin cip le s, given the c o n strain ts imposed by compliance and adm inistrative co sts. I t d iffe rs from the CD proposals prim arily by introducing a control te s t and a grey l i s t exemption to the BE regim e, 68 c u rta ilin g the scope of the CV regime and giving more tra n sitio n a l re lie f. While our regime is more lim ited in scope than th a t in the CD, we have sought to make i t e ffe c tiv e in its area of ap p licatio n . 9.2.2 Once we have your response to our recommendations, we w ill consider the more d etailed design issues and advance the d ra ft le g isla tio n . There are many subsidiary issues to consider. We w ill rep o rt fu rth er on these, along w ith our proposed d ra ft le g isla tio n . 69 ANNEX 1 CONTROL INTERESTS OF RESIDENTS IN CONTROLLED FOREIGN COMPANIES. 1 I n tr o d u c tio n 1.1 Under the branch equivalent ("BE") regim e, the income of co n tro lled foreign companies would be assessed to th e ir New Zealand resid en t shareholders in proportion to the in te re s t held by each shareholder. 1.2 In order to determ ine whether income w ill be assessed in New Zealand on the basis of an in te re st held in a foreign company, a taxpayer w ill be required to e stab lish : a f ir s t, whether the in te re st held is w ithin the am bit of the regim e; and b second, if so, whether the in te re s t held d ire c tly or in d ire c tly , by the taxpayer, e ith e r ind iv id u ally or combined w ith the in te re sts held by other resid en ts, is su ffic ie n t fo r the ru les fo r a ttrib u tin g the income of the foreign company to apply. 70 2 I n t e r e s t s to which th e Regime A p p lies 2.1 As outlined in the C onsultative Document ("CD"), the regime w ill apply to in te re sts in companies th a t are not resid en t in New Zealand or th a t are resid en t in New Zealand but, by v irtu e of the provisions of a double tax agreem ent, are not subject to tax in respect of foreign source income. The d e fin itio n of a company w ill include e n titie s th a t have a leg al p erso n ality and existence d is tin c t from th a t of th e ir members. 2.2 The BE regime should apply to resid en ts in resp ect of th e ir in te re sts in foreign companies. The control te s t advocated by the Committee would determ ine th a t a foreign company would be a co ntrolled foreign company if five or fewer New Zealand resid en ts owned 50 percent or more of its equity. This te s t requires taxpayers to determ ine th e ir resp ectiv e proportions of the equity of a foreign company. 2.4 The proportion so calculated fo r each resid en t is term ed the re sid e n t's c o n tr o l in t e r e s t. For th is purpose, the Committee favours no minimum shareholding threshold fo r a re sid e n t's control in te re st to be taken into account when determ ining whether a company is a controlled foreign company. However, as explained in Chapter 2, taxpayers w ith in te re s ts in a co n tro lled foreign company below a minimum threshold would not be required to include any p a rt of th a t controlled foreign company's income in th e ir assessable income. 2.5 A foreign company would be a co ntrolled foreign company if , a t any tim e in the foreign company's accounting year, the sum of the control in te re sts held by fiv e or fewer New Zealand resid en ts is g reater than or equal to 50 percent. The Committee favours applying the te s t to determ ine control a t any tim e in 71 the year to prevent taxpayers 'd e -co n tro llin g ' by disposing of in te re s ts in co ntrolled foreign companies through permanent sale to non-residents before the end of each accounting year of a foreign company. By disposing of in te re s ts in th is manner taxpayers could accum ulate income in the non-resident company and s e ll th e ir in te re s t for a tax free c a p ita l gain. Other countries w ith CFC regim es tend to apply the control te s t to in te re s ts held a t the end of a foreign company's accounting year. However, th is te s t does not provide an avoidance opportunity because, unlike the p o sitio n in New Zealand, c ap ita l gains taxes in these countries ensure th a t a taxpayer is taxed on any gains re a lise d on the disposal of in te re sts in foreign companies during an accounting year. 3 Measurement o f a C ontrol I n te r e s t 3.1 A control in te re s t measures the proportion of a foreign company's equ ity or p ro fits over which a resid en t is considered to have co n tro l. This includes control in te re sts held through nominees of the taxpayer and control in te re s ts held in d ire c tly by the resid en t through other controlled foreign companies. Taxpayers could avoid the 50 percent control by fiv e or fewer resid en ts te s t by fragm enting shareholding or by exercising de facto control of a foreign company. The control te s t would th erefo re need to be supported by constructive ownership ru les to include, in the control in te re st of a resid en t, control in te re sts held by persons associated w ith the resid en t. In addition, de facto control ru les w ill be needed to deal w ith situ a tio n s where taxpayers can exercise control over the d istrib u tio n of a foreign company's income or c ap ita l but do not fa ll w ithin the formal control te s ts . 72 3.2 To prevent avoidance of the control te s t, determ ination of a control in te re s t in a foreign company needs to take account of in te re sts held by a taxpayer in a number of ways. For the purpose of determ ining whether a company is a co n tro lled foreign company, the Committee considers th a t the control in te re s t a ttrib u ta b le to a taxpayer should include: a any in te re s t in the foreign company held d ire c tly by the taxpayer; b any in te re s t in the foreign company held in d ire c tly by way of another foreign company in which the taxpayer has an in te re s t; c an in te re s t held d ire c tly or in d ire c tly by a nominee of the taxpayer; and d an in te re s t in the foreign company held d ire c tly or in d ire c tly by associated persons of the taxpayer. 3.3 The Committee favours an approach fo r m easuring a control in te re st based on th a t se t out in section 191 of the Income Tax Act 1976 fo r m easuring a "prescribed proportion" of the equity of two or more companies. We propose th a t the control in te re s t in a company held by a resid en t be the proportion of: a paid-up c a p ita l; b nominal value of the a llo tte d shares; c e n titl ement to p ro fits (including the entitlem ent to d istrib u tio n s on winding-up, whether from the c a p ita l or from the p ro fits of the company); or d the voting power; 73 e where appropriate, com binations of the above whichever is the highest. 3.4 The taxpayer would be required to take into account a ll classes of shares held when determ ining a control in te re s t as w ell as rig h ts to acquire equity in the foreign company whether in the form of options, convertible debt or other contingent in te re s ts . 4 Nominees and T ru stees 4.1 In te re sts in companies in the names of tru ste e s and nominees are a p a rtic u la r form of b en eficial ownership. In te re sts held by nominees or by bare tru ste e s would th erefo re be a ttrib u ta b le to th e ir b en eficial owners. Nominee ru les would also a ttrib u te a control in te re st to a shareholder who has an arrangem ent w ith another person to resume ownership of shares a t a subsequent date (through so called "warehousing" of sh a res). 4.2 The Committee' s general approach to the tax atio n of tru s ts is th a t th e ir tax treatm ent should be determ ined by reference to the residence of s e ttlo rs (see Annex 4). In accordance w ith th is p referred approach, the Committee considers th a t a control in te re s t in a controlled foreign company held by tru ste e s of d iscretio n ary tru s ts should be a ttrib u te d to any New Zealand resid en t who has se ttle d property on the tru s t. In th is context, the tru ste e s of the d iscretio n ary tru s t se ttle d by the resid en t would be considered to be nominees of the resid en t. A settlem ent of a tru s t is defined in Annex 4. 74 5 I n d ir e c t C ontrol R ules 5.1 To determ ine accurately the level of a tax p ay er's control in te re st in a foreign company, control in te re sts held in the foreign company in d ire c tly by a taxpayer through another controlled foreign company would need to be combined w ith control in te re sts held d ire c tly by the taxpayer. 5.2 In d irect control in te re sts held through a chain of controlled foreign companies would be determ ined by m ultiplying the tax p ay er's control in te re st in the top tie r co n tro lled foreign company by the top tie r company's control in te re s t in the second tie r controlled foreign company and so on. The in d ire ct control te s t would 'look through' each co n tro lled foreign company in a corporate tie r in th is manner u n til the combined control in te re st of the taxpayer and four other resid en ts in the foreign company is less than 50 percent (i.e . the lowest tie r foreign company is not a co ntrolled foreign company). 5.3 For the purposes of tracin g control down a corporate tie r , a resid en t w ith a d ire c t control in te re s t in a f i r s t tie r controlled foreign company of more than 50 percent would be deemed to hold a 100 percent control in te re s t in the foreign company. S im ilarly, where a higher tie r co ntrolled foreign company in which a taxpayer has an in te re st controls a lower tie r foreign company (i.e . its control in te re st is 50% or more) the higher tie r company would be deemed to hold a 100 percent control in te re s t in the lower tie r company. This ru le is necessary to prevent taxpayers avoiding the 50 percent control threshold in respect of an in te re st in a p a rtic u la r foreign company by interposing between them selves and the company in question a se rie s of controlled foreign companies in which the control in te re s t held by the taxpayers is less than 100 percent. 75 5.4 The e ffe c t of the procedure for tracin g control down a corporate tie r described in paragraph 5.3 is th a t, where a co n tro lled foreign company holds a control in te re s t of le ss than 50 percent in a foreign company, the control in te re s t held by the co n tro lled foreign company would be considered to be held by its New Zealand resid en t shareholders. 5.5 The follow ing example illu s tra te s the operation of the in d ire c t control ru les. 76 NZCO, a company resid en t in New Zealand has a 40 percent control in te re s t in SUBCO1, a non-resident company in which another resid en t holds a control in te re s t of 30 percent, making SUBCO1 a co n tro lled foreign company. NZCO also holds a d ire c t control in te re s t of 40 percent in CFC, another non-resident company. SUBCO1 holds a 60 percent control in te re s t in SUBCO2, which in turn holds a 25 percent control in te re st in CFC. NZCO would determ ine its in d ire ct control in te re s t in CFC by m ultiplying its control in te re s t in SUBCO1 by SUBCO1 's control in te re st in SUBCO2, and SUBCO2 's control in te re s t in CFC. As SUBCO1's control in te re st in SUBCO2 is 60 percent, SUBCO1 would be deemed to hold a 100 percent control in te re s t in SUBCO2 fo r the purposes of computing NZCO's in d ire ct control in te re s t in CFC. NZCO's control in te re st in CFC held in d ire c tly would th erefo re be 10 percent (i.e . 40% x 100% x 25%). NZCO's aggregate control in te re s t in CFC would be 50 percent, being the sum of its d ire c t control in te re st (40 percent) and its in d ire ct control in te re st (10 p ercen t). 5.6 In the example se t out in paragraph 5.5, if SUBCO1 was not a CFC, NZCO would not be required to m ultiply its control in te re st in SUBCO1 by any of SUBCO1's control in te re s ts . S im ilarly, if SUBCO2 was not a co ntrolled foreign company, NZCO would not be required to m ultiply its control in te re s t in SUBCO2 by any of SUBCO2 's control in te re sts. However, where fiv e or fewer New Zealand resid en ts have an in d ire c t income in te re s t in a foreign company of 50 percent or more, a ru le described in paragraph 2.13 of Annex 2 w ill apply to make the company a controlled foreign company. 77 6 C o n stru ctiv e Ownership R ules 6.1 The Committee considers th a t constructive ownership and control ru les are necessary in order to prevent avoidance of the regime by spreading ownership of foreign companies among a number of associated persons. For the purpose of determ ining the control in te re st in a foreign company held by a New Zealand resid en t, constructive ownership ru les would a ttrib u te to the resid en t ownership and control rig h ts th a t in fact or in law belong to h is or her asso ciates or re la tiv e s. 6.2 C onstructive ownership ru les should only apply fo r the purposes of the control te s t and to determ ine the minimum lev el of in te re st before income is a ttrib u te d to a taxpayer (described in Annex 2). C onstructive ownership ru les would not apply fo r the purpose of determ ining the b asis on which income would be a ttrib u te d . 6.3 Persons considered to be associated for the purposes of the controlled foreign company ru les would include, as a minimum: a any two persons w ith shared in te re sts; b any two companies which co n sist of su b sta n tia lly the same shareholders; c any two persons who are re la tiv e s connected w ithin the second degree of relatio n sh ip ; 78 d any company and any person (other than a company) who are associated persons w ithin the meaning of section 8 (1 )(b) of the Income Tax Act; e a partnership and any person who is a partn er in the partnership. 6.4 The associated persons ru le in conjunction w ith the constructive ownership ru le may be illu s tra te d by way of example. Suppose four New Zealand resid en ts together own 40 percent of Nonresco, a non-resident company. A fifth New Zealand resid en t owns a fu rth er 2 percent. However, the f if th resid en t has four children, each of whom also owns 2 percent. In these circum stances, the shareholding of the children w ill be a ttrib u te d to the fifth resid en t whether the children are resid en t in New Zealand or abroad. Nonresco would thereby be considered to be a controlled foreign company. 6.5 A fu rth er example of the operation of the associated persons ru le in the context of constructive ownership provisions is a large New Zealand company w ith many shareholders th a t estab lish es a foreign associated company, with the same shareholders as the New Zealand company, holding in te re sts in the same proportion. If the shares of the two companies are 'sta p le d ' (th at is , they may be tran sfe rred only if kept together) the companies have a relatio n sh ip th a t is somewhat sim ilar to a holding company and subsidiary. The subsidiary would be a controlled foreign company, but, in the absence of special ru les, the stapled associated company would not, unless by chance i t was controlled by five or fewer New Zealand resid en ts. However, the associated persons ru le tre a t the two companies as one person as they have shared in te re s ts . 79 6.6 The Committee is review ing the d e fin itio n s of associated persons and nominees in the Income Tax Act to make the d e fin itio n s more co n sisten t and e ffe c tiv e , where necessary. 7 D e-fa cto C ontrol and A n ti-avoid an ce R ules 7.1 The Committee favours an anti-avoidance rule as p a rt of the control te s t th a t would apply to taxpayers who exercise de facto control of a foreign company. R esidents who are e n title d to c a ll fo r or prevent the d istrib u tio n of the p ro fits of a foreign company, or who have the power to c a ll for the wind-up of a foreign company would be deemed to have a 50 percent control in te re s t and the company would th erefo re be a co n tro lled foreign company, irresp ectiv e of the proportion of the equity of the company held by New Zealand resid en ts. The anti-avoidance ru le would also be aimed a t arrangem ents, such as voting tru s ts and understandings, which have the e ffe c t of defeating the in te n t and application of the control te s t. The Committee considers th a t these anti-avoidance ru les w ill support the nominee ru les. 7.2 Taxpayers w ill include a ll the in te re sts they hold in a foreign company to compute a control in te re s t, irre sp e c tiv e of whether these were acquired before or a fte r 17 December 1987. However, in respect of investm ents in countries th a t are not on the tra n sitio n a l l i s t of specified low tax ju risd ic tio n s, income would be a ttrib u te d during the tra n sitio n a l period only in respect of in te re s ts acquired a fte r 17 December (see Annex 2) . 80 ANNEX 2 ISSUES RELATING TO THE DETERMINATION AND ATTRIBUTION OF BRANCH- EQUIVALENT INCOME 1 I n tr o d u c tio n 1.1 As noted in the Com mittee's rep o rt, we favour a tax atio n regime th a t only requires taxpayers w ith in te re s ts in excess of a minimum lev el in co ntrolled foreign companies to rep o rt income on a branch-equivalent b asis. The amount of income to be reported would be determ ined by applying the a ttrib u tio n ru les to the to ta l annual income of the company, computed on the b asis of New Zealand tax ru les. 1.2 Income a ttrib u te d under th is regime would be included in a taxpayer' s assessable income and taxed a t personal or corporate rates applicable to income derived by the taxpayer. The Committee is s t i l l considering appropriate ru les fo r the treatm ent of lo sses. 1.3 The two aspects of the in tern atio n al tax regime addressed in th is annex w ill be d e ta ils of the a ttrib u tio n ru les and guidance fo r taxpayers on procedures for computing the income of a co n tro lled foreign company on a branch-equivalent b a sis. 81 2 A ttr ib u tio n o f Branch-equiv a le n t Income D eterm ination of an Annual Income In te re st. 2.1 The annual branch-equivalent income of a co n tro lled foreign company would be a ttrib u te d to a taxpayer on the b asis of the income in t e r e s t held by the taxpayer. A tax p ay er's income in te re s t in a controlled foreign company is the b asis upon which income is a ttrib u te d under the proposed regim e. I t is computed by reference to the control in te re s t held by the taxpayer and the nominee of the taxpayer as described in Annex 1. 2.2 The Committee considers th a t a taxpayer should be required to include in assessable income only income to which he or she can reasonably be considered to have access. C onsistent w ith th is view, control in te re sts in a foreign company held by associated persons of the taxpayer and a ttrib u te d to the taxpayer fo r the purpose of determ ining h is or her control in te re st should be excluded when determ ining the income in te re s t held by the taxpayer. 2.3 As would be the case in determ ining a control in te re s t, in d ire ct in te re s ts held by a taxpayer would be taken in to account when determ ining an income in te re st held by a taxpayer. However, an income in te re st would be computed by reference to the actual in te re s ts held a t each tie r in a chain of co n tro lled foreign companies rath er than deemed in te re sts as would be the case when determ ining a control in te re s t. The calcu latio n of an income in te re s t held in d ire c tly is explained below in paragraphs 2.11 to 2.14. 82 2.4 In addition to the im portant d ifferen ces between an income in te re s t and a control in te re s t described above an income in te re s t d iffe rs from a control in te re s t in the follow ing respects: a i t excludes rig h ts held by the taxpayer to acqu ire a future in te re st in a foreign company in circum stances described in paragraph 2.5 below; and b i t takes account of the varying lev els of in te re s t in a controlled foreign company the taxpayer may have held during the course of the company's accounting year. 2.5 To avoid a ttrib u tio n of the u n d istrib u ted income of a co ntrolled foreign company, taxpayers may hold rig h ts to acquire in te re sts in a foreign company in the form of o p tio ns or other contingent in te re s ts . R ights held by a taxpayer th a t e n title the taxpayer to acquire a future in te re st in the company are taken into account when determ ining a control in te re s t (as explained in Annex 1). I t is the Com m ittee's view th a t such rig h ts are also to be taken in to account when determ ining an income in te re st in re la tio n to any accounting year of a foreign company in which the company derives a taxable p ro fit. For th is purpose, however, a taxpayer may exclude any rig h ts to acquire in te re sts in the company pursuant to normal commercial tran sactio n s where the rig h ts, such as options or convertible debt, are acquired or are exerciseable by the taxpayer a t fa ir market value. 2.6 Taking account of the varying lev els of in te re st held during the accounting year of a controlled foreign company is considered to be more equitable than a ttrib u tin g income on the b asis of the income in te re st held a t the end of its accounting 83 year. The form er approach w ill re fle c t more accurately an in te re st b u ilt up by a taxpayer during the course of a co ntrolled foreign company's accounting year. 2.7 The f ir s t step in estab lish in g the lev el of a tax p ay er's income in te re s t would be to calcu late the in te re s t in the company fo r each period during its accounting year in which the control in te re s t remained unchanged. The income in te re s t in each period would be determ ined according to the ru les fo r determ ining an ownership in te re st se t out in Annex 1 su b ject to the m odifications se t out in paragraphs 2.1 to 2.5 above. 2.8 The next step would be to p ro -rate the income in te re s t determ ined fo r each period by the proportion of the year (or p art-y ear where the non-resident e n tity has an accounting period of le ss than a year) the in te re st remained unchanged. A tax p ay er's o v erall income in te re st w ill be the sum of the pro- rated in te re s ts computed fo r each period in the non-resident e n tity 's accounting year. In respect of any accounting year of a co n tro lled foreign company, income a ttrib u ta b le to a resid en t is derived by m ultiplying the income in te re st computed fo r th a t year by the annual branch-equivalent income for th a t accounting year (or p art-y ear as appropriate). 2.9 The p ro -ratin g of in te re sts for any relev an t period during the accounting year of the controlled foreign company would be on the basis of the number of days in th a t period as a proportion of 365, or the number of days in the controlled foreign company's accounting period if th is is less than a year. 84 2.10 The method for determ ining the lev el of a tax p ay er's in te re st in a non-resident e n tity fo r the purpose of a ttrib u tin g income is illu s tra te d in the example se t out below: Example Taxpayer X holds an in te re s t in Nonresco, a co n tro lled foreign company. A summary of X 's control in te re s t during N onresco's accounting year, m odified to conform w ith the adjustm ents se t out in paragraphs 2.1 to 2.5 above, is: - 33 percent fo r the f ir s t th ree months; - 50 percent fo r the next six months; - 66 percent fo r the la s t th ree months. X's in te re s t is computed as follow s: P ro-rated in te re s t for the f ir s t 3 months = 33% x 25% = 8.3% P ro-rated in te re s t for next 6 months = 50% x 50% = 25.0% P ro-rated in te re s t fo r la s t 3 months = 66% x 25% = 16.5% T otal Income In te re st = 49.8% If N onresco's branch-equivalent income fo r its relev an t accounting year was (say) $100, $49.80 would be a ttrib u te d to X on the b asis of X 's in te re s t. Income In te re sts where there is In d irect Ownership. 2.11 I f a controlled foreign company is a second or lower tie r company, its income w ill be a ttrib u te d d ire c tly to New Zealand resid en ts in accordance w ith th e ir d ire c t and in d ire c t in te re s t in the co ntrolled foreign company. For th is purpose, an income in te re s t is determ ined by m ultiplying the tax p ay er's income in te re st in the top tie r controlled foreign company by the top tie r company's income in te re st in the second tie r co n tro lled 85 foreign company company and so on. A taxpayer would m ultiply income in te re s ts in co ntrolled foreign companies a t each tie r u n til the lower tie r company e ith e r was not a co ntrolled company, or the tax p ay er's income in te re st fe ll below the minimum lev el of in te re st fo r income a ttrib u tio n . 2.12 The procedure for determ ining an in d ire c t income in te re s t in a co n tro lled foreign company held through a se rie s of higher tie r co n tro lled foreign companies co n trasts w ith th a t fo r determ ining a control in te re st down a corporate tie r described in Annex 1. Under the la tte r approach, a higher tie r co n tro lled foreign company is considered to hold a 100 percent control in te re st in any lower tie r foreign companies i t co n tro ls. 2.13 O rdinarily, a taxpayer should not be required to m ultiply an income in te re s t held in a company th a t is not a co n tro lled foreign company by income in te re sts th a t the foreign company has in other foreign companies. This is because i t is im possible, in normal commercial circum stances, for a taxpayer to 'look through' a company th a t is not a controlled foreign company to trace in d ire c t in te re s ts . However, the Committee is considering a ru le aimed a t situ a tio n s where five or fewer taxpayers stru ctu re th e ir in d ire ct in te re sts in order to c o lle c tiv e ly hold more than 50 percent of an income in te re st in a foreign company but hold a control in te re st of less than 50 percent. Such a ru le might require a taxpayer to m ultiply an in te re st in a top tie r foreign company th a t is not a controlled foreign company by an income in te re s t the top tie r company holds in a lower tie r foreign company where there was such an arrangement and its app licatio n resu lted in the lower tie r e n tity becoming a controlled foreign company. 86 2.14 The follow ing example illu s tra te s the operation of these ru les: X, a resid en t company, holds a 60 percent income in te re s t in Nonresco1, a controlled foreign company. Nonresco1 has a 60 percent income in te re st in Nonresco2 which in tu rn , has an income in te re s t of 25 percent in CFC. X also holds d ire c tly an income in te re st of 35 percent in CFC. X 's income in te re s t in CFC held in d ire c tly through Nonresco1 and Nonresco2 would be 9 percent (i.e . 60% x 60% x 25%) which, when combined w ith X 's d ire c t in te re st of 35 percent, gives an o verall income in te re s t held by X of 44 percent. 87 Minimum In te re st fo r the A ttrib u tio n of Income 2.15 The Committee considers th a t where an income in te re s t of a taxpayer in a controlled foreign company is below 10 percent, branch-equivalent income of the company should not be a ttrib u te d to the taxpayer. 2.16 To prevent fragm entation of shareholding in order to f a ll below th is threshold, constructive ownership ru les th a t combine the in te re sts of associated persons of any taxpayer w ith those of the taxpayer, w ill be used to determ ine w hether a tax p ay er's in te re s t is above the minimum threshold. This means, fo r example, th a t if a taxpayer held a fiv e percent income in te re s t in a controlled foreign company and associated persons of the taxpayer held income in te re sts of another five percent, the income in te re s t of the taxpayer for the purpose of applying th is te s t w ill be ten percent. As the in te re s t of the taxpayer is above the minimum threshold, branch-equivalent income of the co n tro lled foreign company would be a ttrib u te d to the taxpayer and persons associated w ith the taxpayer. 2.17 While the in te re st held by a taxpayer and associated persons of the taxpayer would be combined when applying the minimum in te re s t te s t, income would be a ttrib u te d to the taxpayer, and persons associated w ith the taxpayer, on the basis of the in te re sts held by each in d iv id u ally . T ransition Rule 2.18 Whether an income in te re st is above the minimum threshold for a ttrib u tio n needs to be determ ined having regard to the proposed tra n sitio n a l m easures. To determ ine whether income in te re sts are above the minimum threshold, a taxpayer would 88 take in to account a ll income in te re sts held irresp e ctiv e of whether they were acquired before or a fte r 17 December 1987. However, during the tra n sitio n a l period, should i t apply, income would be a ttrib u te d to the taxpayer only on the b asis of income in te re sts acquired a fte r 17 December 1987. 2.19 For example, a taxpayer may have an income in te re s t of 15 percent in a co ntrolled company resid en t in a country th a t is not on the tra n sitio n a l l i s t of designated low tax ju risd ic tio n s. The tra n sitio n a l provisions would th erefo re apply. The tax p ay er's income in te re st in the company as a t 17 December was 8 percent and the taxpayer acquired a 7 percent income in te re s t in the company a fte r 17 December. Income of the controlled foreign company would be a ttrib u te d to the taxpayer on the b asis of the 7 percent income in te re s t acquired a fte r 17 December during the tra n sitio n a l period. Changes of Residence 2.20 The CD proposed on page 20 th a t a person would not be a resid en t of New Zealand for the purposes of income a ttrib u tio n where the person had been a resid en t of New Zealand fo r a cum ulative period of less than 24 months in the im m ediately preceding 15 years. 2.21 The Committee w ill review th is proposal together w ith the appropriate treatm ent under the regime of persons who become, or cease to be New Zealand resid en ts. The ru les for determ ining residence in the Income Tax Act, p a rtic u la rly as they re la te to in d ividuals, w ill also be reviewed to ensure th a t they do not provide scope for unacceptable avoidance of the regime by taxpayers. 89 3 C a lc u la tio n o f th e Income o f a C on tro lled F oreign Company on a B ran ch -eq u ivalen t B a sis. 3.1 Opening Balance Sheets 3.1.1 In order fo r taxpayers to compute the income of co n tro lled foreign companies on a branch-equivalent b a sis, some of the opening balance sheet item s w ill need to be re sta te d , in the foreign currency, but as if New Zealand tax ru les applied. The proposals se t out below are designed to reduce compliance costs where th ere is l i t t l e , if any, revenue consequence. 3.1.2 The ru les which follow in re la tio n to the opening values of fixed assets and trading stock give the taxpayer the option of choosing opening values in accordance w ith e ith e r New Zealand tax ru les or the tax ru les of the country of residence or income source of the foreign company. Whichever option a taxpayer e le c ts to use, he or she would be required to use the same b asis fo r determ ining the opening values of both fixed assets and trading stock to ensure the co n sisten t ap p licatio n of whichever option is chosen. Fixed A ssets 3.1.3 The opening tax value of fixed assets for the year in which the taxpayer commences reporting on a branch-equivalent basis should be, a t the tax p ay er's option e ith e r: a the depreciated tax value determ ined in accordance w ith the tax ru les of the country of residence of the company, provided th a t the value does not exceed current m arket value; or 90 b the depreciated tax value determ ined in accordance w ith New Zealand tax ru les. Trading Stock, including Livestock 3.1.4 The opening tax value of trad in g stock should be, a t the tax p ay er's option e ith e r: a the tax value determ ined in accordance w ith the tax ru les of the country of residence of the company; or b the tax value determ ined in accordance w ith New Zealand tax ru le s . This opening value of trading stock should be deemed to be cost for the purpose of subsequent value fo r branch-equivalent income determ ination. Financial Arrangements 3.1.5 The opening tax value of fin an cial arrangem ents should be, a t the tax p ay er's option e ith e r: a m arket value; or b adjusted base p rice, being acq u isitio n p rice plus accrued expenses less payments in the case of issu e rs, and acq u isitio n price plus accrued income less payments received in the case of holders. 91 Prepayments 3.1.6 If under New Zealand income tax ru les a resid en t incurs a deductible expense in the accounting year of the foreign co n tro lled company preceding the accounting year in which income is assessed to the resid en t on a branch-equivalent b asis, the taxpayer should not be perm itted to include an adjustm ent fo r prepayments in respect of the expense in the opening balance sheet. However, if a deduction would not have been perm itted in respect of the previous accounting year under New Zealand tax ru les, an opening adjustm ent to the balance sheet fo r prepayments in respect of the deduction should be perm itted. Specified Leases 3.1.7 S pecified leases entered into by a co ntrolled foreign company a fte r 1 A pril 1988 would be brought into the balance sheet fo r the purpose of computing branch-equivalent income as if New Zealand tax ru les had applied from the commencement of the lease. S pecified leases entered in to before th a t date should be disregarded. 3.2 C alculation of Annual Income 3.2.1 There are two basic approaches to the calcu latio n of annual income on a branch-equivalent b asis. One is to apply New Zealand tax ru les and conversion to New Zealand currency on a tran sactio n -b y -tran sactio n b asis. The other is to apply New Zealand tax ru les to item s in the p ro fit and loss account in the foreign currency, and convert the net annual income to New 92 Zealand currency as a second step . The la tte r method is im p licit in the CD, and the Committee considers th a t i t is preferable on the grounds of m inim ising compliance c o sts. 3.2.2 In general, the application of New Zealand tax ru les w ithin the branch-equivalent regime as recommended should not impose undue compliance costs on New Zealand taxpayers. There are a t le a st two types of provision, however, which may need amendment. 3.2.3 S pecific references to "New Zealand" in the Income Tax Act w ill need to be reviewed to determ ine whether the relev an t provision: o ffers a b en efit or concession intended to be confined to New Zealand; contains a d e fin itio n of New Zealand source income; or lim its the scope of the tax n et. Such provisions may need to be m odified in the context of the branch-equivalent regim e. As a general ru le, provisions of the Income Tax Act th a t provide a sp ecific tax concession fo r income sourced in New Zealand should not be taken in to account when computing income on a branch-equivalent b asis. 3.2.4 A review w ill also be undertaken by the Committee of the ap p licatio n of the associated persons provisions of the Income Tax Act. There does not, for example, seem to be any ju s tific a tio n for determ ining the a sse ssa b ility of the income of controlled foreign companies to resid en ts by reference to the a c tiv itie s of associated persons who are non-resident shareholders. 93 3.3 Conversion Rules 3.3.1 I t is proposed th a t branch-equivalent income, expressed as a sin g le figure in foreign currency, be converted in to New Zealand currency a t the average of the mid-monthly exchange ra te s fo r the relev an t year. Exchange ra te movements in resp ect of balance sheet item s would not be taken into account in determ ining annual branch-equivalent income. 3.4 D iffering Balance Dates 3.4.1 A tax p ay er's share of the income of co ntrolled foreign companies should be assessable in h is or her income year in accordance w ith section 15(1) of the Income Tax Act. That is , a taxpayer would include the branch-equivalent income of a co n tro lled foreign company in income for the income year ending w ith the 31st day of March nearest to the end of the foreign company's accounting year. 3.4.2 For in te re sts in controlled foreign companies taxable from A pril 1 1988, or from the date when the regime may otherw ise apply pursuant to the tra n sitio n a l provisions se t out in the Com m ittee's rep o rt, annual branch-equivalent income would be p ro -rated to apply to th a t proportion of the foreign company' s accounting year subsequent to the commencement date of the regim e. 3.4.3 This means th a t a taxpayer would be required to compute income according to New Zealand income tax ru les (including adjustm ents to the opening balance sheet se t out in paragraphs 3.1.2 to 3.1.7) for the accounting year of the foreign company th a t strad d les the date from which the regime applies. 94 3.5 Losses 3.5.1 Ju st as past p ro fits would not be subject to the new regim e, the Committee considers th a t th ere should also be no re lie f fo r p ast lo sses, except to the extent th a t the tra n sitio n a l measures recommended by the Committee w ill provide a period of adjustm ent and p o ten tial lo ss recoupment fo r taxpayers covered by them. With th is lim ited exception, p ast losses should not be able to be brought forward in to the f ir s t year of the branch-equivalent regim e. 3.5.2 Q uite ap art from m aintaining p a rity of treatm ent w ith past p ro fits , another reason for not perm itting p ast lo sses to be brought forward is th a t they w ill not have been computed according to New Zealand tax ru les, and may w ell be the re s u lt of tax preferences in the foreign country which should not be brought through in to the New Zealand tax base. 3.5.3 There should, however, be a lim ited amount of r e lie f fo r current year lo sses. The CD (page 7) proposed th a t lo sses from in te re sts in non-resident companies could be carried forward or o ffse t against other branch-equivalent income, but not ag ain st other assessable income, w hile losses from in te re sts in tru s ts could only be carried forward. As noted in our rep o rt, the Committee considers th a t these proposals could lead to a sig n ific a n t erosion of New Zealand tax revenue. Taxpayers could defer New Zealand tax by, for example, o ffse ttin g lo sses in high tax ju risd ic tio n s against p ro fits in low tax ju risd ic tio n s, w hile at the same tim e carrying forward the losses to be o ffse t against subsequent y ears' p ro fits in the high tax ju risd ic tio n s. 95 3.5.4 One p o ssib ility being considered by the Committee would be to allow losses in respect of a tax p ay er's income in te re s t in a co n tro lled foreign company to be e ith e r carried forw ard, or o ffse t against the income in respect of income in te re s ts held by the taxpayer in a group of co ntrolled foreign companies resid en t in the same ju risd ic tio n , under the grouping provisions of sections 188 and 191. The Committee w ill rep o rt fu rth er on th is issue. 3.6 Dividends Received by a C ontrolled Foreign Company 3.6.1 As noted in our rep o rt, i t is necessary fo r non- p o rtfo lio dividends received by controlled foreign companies to be e ith e r subject to the w ithholding payment system or to be made assessable. This is necessary to prevent co ntrolled foreign companies being used as dividend trap s to avoid the dom estic ru les th a t apply to non-portfolio dividends. The Committee has yet to consider th is issue in d e ta il but considers th a t the treatm ent of dividends received by co ntrolled foreign companies would be sim plified if they were made assessable. However, to avoid the m ultiple levying of New Zealand tax on dividends, taxpayers would exclude dividends received by a controlled foreign company from another co ntrolled foreign company in re la tio n to which the taxpayer rep o rts income on a branch-equivalent b asis. 3.7 Foreign Tax C redits 3.7.1 The CD proposed th a t foreign tax c re d its be lim ited on an e n tity by e n tity and a source of income basis and be a ttrib u te d on the same basis as the branch-equivalent income of a foreign company. I t is immediately apparent th a t foreign tax should be cred itab le to a taxpayer on the same basis th a t the 96 income of a co n tro lled foreign company is a ttrib u te d (i.e . on the basis of income in te re sts held by taxpayers in co n tro lled foreign com panies). However, issues th a t the Committee has yet to discuss include: a the character of foreign taxes th a t should be c re d ita b le ; b any adjustm ents to foreign tax c re d its over tim e (such as the recognition of tim ing d iffe re n c e s); c the nature and extent of any lim itatio n s for c re d itin g foreign taxes. The Committee w ill rep o rt on these issues in its next rep o rt. 3.8 Treatm ent of Dividends from Tax Paid Income 3.8.1 The Committee o u tlin es in its report problems th a t may re su lt from the adoption of the proposal in the CD th a t taxpayers should be able to deduct dividends they receive from accumulated income of a foreign company for the purposes of computing branch-equivalent income. We consider th a t the proposed im putation system may provide an appropriate means of affording re lie f for dividends received by taxpayers from the accumulated income of a foreign company th a t has been subject to New Zealand income tax. The Im putation C redit Account (ICA) records amounts of New Zealand tax paid by resid en t companies including th a t on the a ttrib u te d income of controlled foreign companies. A ppropriate balances in the ICA could, fo r example, be used to reduce or o ffse t New Zealand tax a t the shareholder level on dividends received by resid en t companies from controlled foreign companies in which they have income in te re s ts . 97 3.8.2 As an a lte rn a tiv e to meeting a w ithholding payment lia b ility in cash, consideration is being given to allow ing resid en t companies the option of meeting w ithholding payment requirem ents in respect of dividends received from co n tro lled foreign companies by: a making appropriate reductions to ICA c re d it balances; or b making an appropriate reduction in any carried forward lo ss of the rec ip ie n t company. In e ith e r case the reduction in tax b en efit a risin g from the reduction in carried forward loss or the ICA balance w ill match the w ithholding payment lia b ility . 3.8.3 In order to avoid m ultiple levying of New Zealand tax on income derived by an individual through a controlled foreign company, i t would be necessary to require the individual to keep the equivalent of an ICA in respect of income a ttrib u te d d ire c tly to him or her under th is regime. 3.8.4 The Committee w ill report fu rth er on th is aspect of the regime in P art 2 of its rep o rt. 98 ANNEX 3 FOREIGN INVESTMENT FUNDS 1 C h a r a c te r is tic s o f F oreign Investm ent Funds 1.1 Foreign investm ent funds are usually e n titie s re sid en t in tax havens which hold p o rtfo lio in te re sts in shares, or which invest in fin an cial arrangem ents, re a l e sta te , comm odities, currencies or a range of such investm ents. The funds often re - invest th e ir income to increase th e ir value, or they may d istrib u te the income to investors in non-taxabl e form s. 1.2 A ty p ical foreign investm ent fund is one which in v ests the savings of its members in order to provide them w ith retirem ent b en efits, such as pension or lump sum superannuation. I ts co n stitu tio n is often not a m aterial consideration. I t may be organised in a form th a t has a fisc a l p erso n ality ap art from its members, such as a company or u n it tru s t. Such a fund is 'fo re ig n ' if i t is not a New Zealand resid en t for tax purposes. 1.3 The shares or u n its of some funds are lis te d on public stock exchanges. Other funds are not lis te d but o ffe r to re - purchase the shares of members, usually a t a price th a t is published from tim e to tim e. Sometimes the price is guaranteed not to fa ll below a certain minimum, perhaps related to the value of the investm ents of the fund v e rifie d by an independent v alu er. 99 2 Need to Counter T axation Advantages o f F oreign Funds 2.1 Where a foreign investm ent fund is based in a ju risd ic tio n th a t lev ies l i t t l e or no income tax, or where the investm ents of the fund are taxed a t a lower ra te than comparable investm ents in New Zealand, resid en ts who invest in the fund enjoy a fisc a l advantage over other New Zealanders who invest dom estically. Some funds d istrib u te dividends to th e ir members. O thers, however, may 'r o ll up' th e ir p ro fits each year into more investm ents so th a t members must s e ll th e ir shares or u n its in order to re a lis e a retu rn . Where a fund ro lls up its income, the fisc a l advantage may be enhanced since the in v e sto r's proceeds on re a lisa tio n are generally tre a te d as a c ap ita l receip t not subject to income tax . 2.2 If the in tern atio n al tax regime did not embrace foreign investm ent funds, they would provide resid en ts w ith an easy opportunity to sh e lte r income from New Zealand tax atio n and thus defeat the in te n t of the regim e. Other countries have found i t necessary to deal w ith such funds, which were being used to circum vent th e ir own in tern atio n al tax regim es. New Zealand must also address foreign investm ents funds, esp ecially in the lig h t of current proposals to reform the tax treatm ent of lif e insurance and superannuation. Domestic superannuation funds are to lose th e ir tax exempt sta tu s whereas many foreign investm ent funds, which provide superannuation b en efits, may enjoy sig n ific a n t tax advantages. If, for tax reasons, resid en ts were induced to invest in these foreign funds, a considerable sw itching of investm ent would occur to the detrim ent of both the New Zealand tax base and dom estic savings in stitu tio n s . 100 3 B a sis fo r Taxing Funds 3.1 Investors may obtain tax b en efits through foreign investm ent funds w ithout co n tro llin g them. They w ill th erefo re slip outside the controlled foreign company regim e. R esidents should nonetheless be taxed on fund income accruing to th e ir b en efit. However, since they do not have control and are unlikely to be able to rep o rt income measured according to New Zealand ru les, an a lte rn a tiv e basis of tax atio n is necessary. I t is considered th a t, as a proxy or surrogate measure fo r the d ire c t tax atio n of income as conventionally defined, the com parative-value b asis of tax atio n (see section 5 below) is appropriate in the follow ing circum stances: – where an investor has straightforw ard access to the underlying income of the fund. This w ill be the case where th ere are w ell-defined means of buying and se llin g in te re s ts ; – where the value of the in te re st is lik e ly to reasonably re fle c t the underlying income. This w ill be the case where the investm ents are e sse n tia lly of a passive nature and producing system atic gains; – where i t is apparent th a t the investor is obtaining a tax advantage. This w ill be the case where the foreign tax levied is lower than the comparable tax in New Zealand. 3.2 I t is considered th a t the regime should apply to any in te re st held by a New Zealand resid en t in a foreign investm ent fund (as defined in section 4 below) where the e ffe c t of making the investm ent is to reduce the tax th a t is levied on the income earned through the fund to a level below th a t which would be paid had the income been taxed in New Zealand as i t accrued. However, 101 as those subject to the regime w ill generally have non-controlling in te re s ts , and th erefo re lim ited access to inform ation, the e ffe c t te s t w ill often involve an elem ent of su b je ctiv ity . Comprehensive d isclosure is th erefo re e sse n tia l to ensure its effectiv en ess. Moreover, other facto rs such as the dom icile or residence of the fund and its d istrib u tio n policy should be taken in to account. 4 D e fin itio n o f F oreign Investm ent Fund 4.1 A foreign investm ent fund w ill be defined by reference to its investm ents. A fund is any leg al e n tity which derives its income or value prim arily or su b sta n tia lly from p o rtfo lio (or non-controlling) investm ents in shares, or from investm ents of a passive nature. 4.2 Thus, investm ents ch aracterisin g an e n tity as a foreign investm ent fund include non-controlling investm ents in companies, tru s ts , p artn ersh ip s and other business and investm ent e n titie s , and investm ents in land held for ren t or other investm ent retu rn , fin an cial arrangem ents, an n u ities, b u llio n , commodities, foreign currency, rig h ts to ro y a ltie s, and rig h ts or options to acquire any of these. Fund investm ents would generally not include co n tro llin g in te re s ts in active businesses or in companies th a t carry on activ e businesses. 4.3 Funds subject to the regime include e n titie s whose prim ary investm ents are in other foreign funds, even where those investm ents represent co n tro llin g in te re sts. Hence, a non- resid en t holding company th a t controlled a number of trading su b sid iaries would not be a fund for purposes of the regim e, but i t would be if i t controlled several investm ent funds. 102 4.4 The ch aracterisatio n of investm ents is c ritic a l because an e n tity earning m ainly activ e rath er than passive income would not be a fund and would fa ll outside the regim e. The d istin c tio n between activ e and passive income is hot p recise, so a t the margin th ere w ill be pressure on the d e fin itio n of a fund. In order to prevent passive income being disguised as activ e income, the need fo r a special anti-avoidance ru le is being considered. 5 Measurement o f A sse ssa b le Income 5.1 A New Zealand resid en t subject to tax on an in te re s t in a foreign investm ent fund w ill be taxed on d istrib u tio n s received plus or minus the change in value of the in te re st from the beginning to the end of the tax p ay er's income year. If th ere is a market for in te re s ts in the fund, eg by way of stock exchange lis tin g , market p rices w ill be employed. Otherwise quoted redem ption p rices offered by fund organisers w ill be used. 5.2 In the absence of such data, taxpayers w ill be required to value th e ir in te re sts in offshore funds by some com m ercially acceptable means. For example, a fund may provide members w ith market valuations of investm ents from tim e to tim e. 5.3 Where re lia b le valuation is unavailable, i t w ill be necessary to impute a ra te of retu rn on the tax p ay er's o rig in a l investm ent in the fund and tax the notional income derived. 103 6 O verlap w ith C o n tro lled F oreign Company Regime 6.1 The d e fin itio n s of 'co n tro lled foreign company' and 'fo reig n investm ent fund' may overlap. Consider a holding company co n tro lled by five or fewer New Zealand resid en ts th a t invests prim arily in p o rtfo lio shares. I t would be a co n tro lled foreign company as w ell as an offshore fund. R esidents holding more than a 10 percent in te re st could be subject to tax tw ice. Hence, a resid en t in th is p o sitio n w ill be required to rep o rt on a branch-equivalent b asis. 104 ANNEX 4 TRUST REGIME 1 In tro d u ctio n 1.1 A tru s t is created whenever a s e ttlo r tra n sfe rs property to tru ste e s to be held for the b en efit of b e n e fic ia rie s. S tric tly speaking, a fu rth er settlem ent on the same tru ste e s for the same b en eficiaries upon the same tru s t provisions creates a new tru s t. For the sake of c la rity , however, the individual tra n sfe rs w ill be referred to in th is annex as "settlem ents" and the c o llectio n of settlem ents made on the same term s as a " tru s t" . 1.2 T rust income which vests in or is d istrib u te d to b e n eficiarie s is termed "b en e ficiaries' income". By " tru st income" we mean income which is not vested or d istrib u te d and th erefo re belongs to b e n eficiarie s, defined or undefined, whose in te re sts w ill c ry s ta llise only in the future. 1.3 Though there is no present beneficiary in whose hands tru s t income can feasib ly be taxed, the objective of the in tern atio n al tax reform s require th a t the income be taxed on an annual b asis. The issues are th erefo re: a when should tru s t income be subject to New Zealand tax ; and b who should bear the lia b ility for the tax? 105 2 R esidence and Taxpayer 2.1 For individuals and companies, the f ir s t question is answered in term s of residence and source. The in te rn atio n al regime extends th is basic stru ctu re by a ttrib u tin g to New Zealand resid en t shareholders a share of the taxable income (including non-New Zealand source income) derived by non-resident companies. 2.2 In the Com mittee's view, the tax atio n of tru s ts should follow th a t of individuals and companies by developing ru les for the residence of tru s ts . 2.3 D eterm ination of residence defines the income to be taxed (worldwide income or source incom e). A closely re la te d but separate issue is the id e n tific a tio n of the taxpayer. I t is d esirab le fo r p ra c tic a l and philosophical reasons th a t, wherever po ssib le, the rec ip ie n t of the income should be the taxpayer. If th is is not p o ssib le, the residence of the taxpayer and the income rec ip ie n t should be the same, since residence is a key c rite rio n fo r determ ining the amount of income which is taxable. F ailing th a t, for enforcem ent reasons, the taxpayer must be a person who is resid en t. 2.4 The only candidates for payers of tax on tru s t income are the tru ste e s and the s e ttlo r. There is a good case fo r levying tax on the tru ste e s: they are the leg al owners of the income, they have the power of d isp o sitio n over i t and th erefo re the a b ility to pay tax from tru s t funds. The s e ttlo r has none of these and o rd in arily could not oblige the tru stee s to meet what would be h is or her own tax lia b ility . In fact, the tru ste e s would be in breach of tru s t if they did so. The best source of tax on tru s t income is therefore the tru ste e s. 106 2.5 There are obvious d iffic u ltie s in determ ining the residence of tru s ts by reference to the residence of the tru ste e s. Individual tru ste e s may be resid en t in a number of countries and i t is easy to change the tru ste e s of a tru s t. This would make residence ephem eral. 2.6 I t would be p ossible, by analogy w ith companies, to determ ine residence by a concept such as "centre of adm inistration and co n tro l". Where more than one such centre ex isted , a tie -b rea k er te s t or dual/m ultiple residence ru les would be required. Such provisions would, however, be d iffic u lt for New Zealand to implement u n ila te ra lly in respect of tru s ts w ith centres of adm inistration and control outside New Zealand. In addition, th is approach would not sa tisfy the requirem ent of the in te rn atio n al regime to tax foreign-source tru s t income where the o rig in of the tru s t and/or its corpus goes back to New Zealand. 2.7 An a lte rn a tiv e approach would be to look fo r an ownership analogy w ith companies. Corporate stru c tu re s provide a nexus of ownership between the offshore corporate income and New Zealand resid en t shareholders su ffic ie n t to ju s tify taxing those shareholders on such income, provided th a t they have a power of d isp o sitio n over the income or over system atic gains which are a reasonable surrogate for i t . 2.8 The point of tru s ts , however, is th a t the ownership nexus is severed, except to the extent th a t the s e ttlo r re ta in s a claim over the se ttle d property in the form of outstanding debt. A nexus does, however, e x ist in the form of the influence or control which the s e ttlo r exercises through the establishm ent of the tru s t term s and, in some cases, through the power of the s e ttlo r to appoint or replace tru ste e s. In the context of a n ti- 107 avoidance le g isla tio n , th is more tenuous nexus could be regarded as su ffic ie n t to ju s tify determ ining the residence of a tr u s t by the residence of the s e ttlo r. 2.9 Since no other d e fin itio n of residence is fea sib le as a basis fo r taxing tru s t income, including foreign-source income, we propose th a t tru ste e s should be lia b le fo r tax on tr u s t income on the b asis of residence as determ ined by the residence of the s e ttlo r. 3 Future S ettlem en ts 3.1 There are considerable legal d iffic u ltie s in applying new ru les to ex istin g settlem ents. These are d ealt w ith in section 4 below. New ru les can, however, be applied imm ediately to settlem ents made on or a fte r 17 December 1987, the date of release of the CD. 3.2 T rustees in a foreign ju risd ic tio n may or may not accept th a t th e ir tru s t is a New Zealand resid en t. I t is expected th a t the m ajority w ill do so, and w ill th erefo re pay tax on tru s t income a t the g reater of the foreign or the New Zealand ra te . Should any d efau lt occur, i t is necessary to provide th a t any New Zealand s e ttlo r w ill be deemed to be the agent of the tru ste e s and be assessable and lia b le for tax accordingly. This is not unduly harsh given the fa c t th a t the s e ttlo r w ill know the ru les at the tim e of making the settlem ent and could require an indem nity from the tru ste e s for tax lia b ilitie s . 3.3 For these purposes, "se ttlo r" w ill need to be w idely defined as any person who has, d ire c tly or in d ire ctly , caused an increm ent in w ealth of the tru s t by the tra n sfe r to i t of money, 108 goods, serv ices of other b en efits a t less than arm s-length p rices. Where th ere is more than one resid en t s e ttlo r, the s e ttlo rs should be jo in tly and sev erally lia b le . Where resid en ts and non-residents make settlem ents on the same tru s t, resid en ts w ill be tre a te d as having made a ll settlem ents on the tru s t. This ru le is necessary to avoid the need for com plicated apportionm ent ru les. I t is not disadvantageous because resid en ts and non-residents can make settlem ents on separate tru s ts . 3.4 In summary, we propose th a t the ru les fo r fu tu re settlem ents be as follow s: a " se ttlo r" be defined as any person who provides money, goods, services or other b en efit to a tru s t fo r inadequate consideration, and "settlem ent" be defined accordingly; b a tru s t, being a ll settlem ents made on or a fte r 17 December 1987 by a resid en t s e ttlo r subject to the same tru s t provisions, be resid en t in New Zealand if and as long as any s e ttlo r of the tru s t is resid en t in New Zealand; c s e ttlo rs be required to make d isclo su re, w ithin a se t period, of any settlem ents as defined; d New Zealand resid en t tru s ts be taxable in New Zealand on worldwide tru s t income; e the tru ste e s of a resid en t tru s t be lia b le fo r tax a t the dom estic tru ste e ra te as if the tru ste e s were one individual b en eficially e n title d to the income and be e n title d to a c re d it for any foreign tax paid, but not 109 e n title d to tax rebates or income support m easures; f to the extent th a t any resid en t tru s t fa ils to meet its tax lia b ilitie s , the New Zealand s e ttlo r be lia b le fo r the tax as agent of the tru ste e or, where th ere is more than one resid en t s e ttlo r, they be jo in tly and sev erally lia b le . 4 E x istin g S ettlem en ts 4.1 If the above ru les were applied to ex istin g settlem en ts, they could be unduly harsh because in many ju risd ic tio n s a s e ttlo r has no way of changing h is or her sta tu s as a s e ttlo r and has no legal access to tru s t funds from which to pay the tax . R esident shareholders disadvantaged by the new in te rn atio n al regime fo r companies a t le a st have the option of se llin g th e ir shares. The only way out for a disadvantaged s e ttlo r would be to em igrate from New Zealand. The Committee has th erefo re proposed a tra n sitio n for tru s ts which recognises these leg al c o n strain ts. 5 D istr ib u tio n s 5.1 Under the proposed ru les for future settlem ents, tru ste e s and s e ttlo rs w ill taxed on income which w ill eventually accrue to b e n eficiarie s. At present, individuals who derive foreign income are e n title d to c re d its for foreign tax paid on the income and, in the absence of the general taxation of c a p ita l gains in New Zealand, they are not taxed on cap ital gains. I t is proposed to carry these p rin cip les through to the tax treatm ent of d istrib u tio n s from tru s ts se ttle d a fte r 17 December 1987. 110 5.2 D istrib u tio n s to New Zealand resid en t b e n e fic ia rie s, excluding c a p ita l, c a p ita l gains, and d istrib u tio n s from assessable income which has already borne New Zealand income tax would be taxed in the hands of those b e n eficiarie s, w ith a c re d it for foreign tax paid on the income. For tax purposes, such d istrib u tio n s should be deemed to be made p ro -rata from a ll sources w ithin each income year, and on a la s t in f ir s t out ("LIFO") b asis from year to year. 6 E xtinguishm ent o f a S e ttlo r 6.1 As the tru s t regime proposed by the Committee has as its basis the residence of the s e ttlo r, i t is necessary to have ru les to determ ine the residence of the tru s t on the extinguishm ent of the s e ttlo r. The Committee proposes th a t, on the death of an individual s e ttlo r of a tru s t, whether in te r vivos or testam entary, the future residence of the tru s t should be determ ined by the residence of the s e ttlo r a t death. 6.2 Where a tru s t is a su b -tru st th a t has its e lf been s e ttle d by a tru s t, or where a tru s t has been se ttle d by a company, the s e ttlo r of the tru s t which se ttle d the su b -tru st, or the shareholders of the company, as the case may be, w ill be deemed to be s e ttlo rs of the first-m entioned tru s t. Thus, in the Com mittee's view: : a on the winding up or extinguishm ent of a tru s t which has se ttle d a su b -tru st, the residence of the s e ttlo r of the tru s t should determ ine the future residence of the sub- tru s t; 111 b on the winding up, liq u id atio n , or extinguishm ent of a company s e ttlo r, the residence of the shareholders of the company a t the date of settlem ent should determ ine the future residence of the tru s t. 6.3 These ru les follow the p rin cip le th a t the residence of a tru s t should be traced back to the residence of the o rig in al s e ttlo r. With respect to ru les (a) and (b) above, the s e ttlin g of a tru s t through another tru s t or through a company should be tre a te d as being equivalent to an in d ire ct settlem ent by the s e ttlo r of the f ir s t tru s t or by the shareholders of the company. 6.4 The Committee are considering whether, for these purposes, the b est te s t of the residence of a tru s t is the dom icile ra th e r than the residence of the extinguished s e ttlo r. 7. R e la tio n sh ip Between Proposed Regime and E x istin g Law 7.1 The Committee intends to review the relatio n sh ip between th is proposed tru s t regime and the present law governing ex istin g tru s ts and w ill comment fu rth er in its next report. 112 ANNEX 5 : AN ILLUSTRATIVE TRANSITIONAL LIST OF LOW TAX JURISDICTIONS ANDORRA MACAU ANGUILLA MALAYSIA ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA MARSHALL ISLANDS BAHAMAS MONACO BAHRAIN MONTSERRAT BARBADOS NAURU BERMUDA NETHERLANDS ANTILLES BRITISH CHANNEL ISLANDS NETHERLANDS BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS NEVIS BRUNEI NEW CALEDONIA CAMPIONE NORFOLK ISLAND CAYMAN ISLANDS OMAN COOK ISLANDS PANAMA COSTA RICA PHILIPPINES CYPRUS SAINT HELENA DJIBOUTI SAINT KITTS DOMINICA SAINT LUCIA FRENCH POLYNESIA SAINT VINCENT GIBRALTAR SEYCHELLES GRENADA SINGAPORE HONG KONG SRI LANKA ISLE OF MAN SWITZERLAND JAMAICA TONGA JORDAN TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS KUWAIT UNITED ARAB EMIRATES LIBERIA URUGUAY LIECHTENSTEIN VANUATU LUXEMBOURG VENEZUELA (Some of the above ju risd ic tio n s are lis te d as they tax on a te r r ito r ia l b asis.) V. R. WARD, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WELLINGTON, NEW ZEALAND—1988 83136D-88PTK