Ref: 22OIA1730 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 02 April 2022 Tēnā k oe , Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 30 March 2022. You requested the following (numbered for ease of response): 1. Please inform me of any extra costs involved with Rainbow Tick, for example payments made for training staff and managers and registration fees for the Rainbow excellence awards. Please show the amount broken down year by year. 2. Have the policies been put in place either of our own volition or in the process of accreditation for the Rainbow Tick? 3. What training was given to your department to obtain the Rainbow Tick or because of the Tick. What entity supplied the training and what costs were involved from 2016 to the present day and year by year. What was the program? Please supply copies of the training documents. 4. What reports were made to Rainbow Tick to secure their endorsement? Please supply copies of these reports. 5. Have you put in place policies to encourage other individuals or companies to join the Rainbow tick? Please provide copies of these policies. Diversity and inclusion at Inland Revenue Inland Revenue’s approach to diversity and inclusion in the workplace supports us to source, recruit and develop an inclusive workforce representative of the customers we serve. To do that we need an inclusive culture where people from all walks of life can achieve their full potential. The Rainbow Tick accreditation supports us in these goals by ensuring we are a safe organisation for members of the LGBTTQIA+ community. Rainbow Tick certification As set out on Rainbow Tick’s website (https://www.rainbowtick.nz/#offer ), their certification process evaluates an organisation’s level of LGBTTQIA+ inclusion in the following five areas: • Policies • Staf f Training • Staff Engagement & Support • External Engagement • Monitoring Inland Revenue had updated its policies and processes across these areas of evaluation before seeking certification from Rainbow Tick. In response to the evaluation, Inland Revenue supplied examples of various policies, guidelines and documents to support how LGBTTQIA+ inclusion fits into each of the areas. Along with the evaluation, were references Ref: 22OIA1730 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] to individuals’ success stories, internal communication, and Inland Revenue’s internal websites. Question 1 Please inform me of any extra costs involved with Rainbow Tick, for example payments made for training staff and managers and registration fees for the Rainbow excellence awards. Please show the amount broken down year by year. There are no extra costs involved with th e Rainbow Tick, other than the annual subscription fees. Details of payments that have already been made to Rainbow Tick regarding the annual subscription costs and the Rainbow Excellence awards, are outlined in our response to your previous OIA request 22OIA1447 sent to you on 15 December 2021. Question 2 Have the policies been put in place either of our own volition or in the process of accreditation for the Rainbow Tick? As mentioned above, Inland Revenue already had a number of policies and practices in place that support it to be an inclusive organisation. The Rainbow Tick accreditation programme offers us a way to systematically assess, with a rainbow lens, all aspects of our work environment, including policies and procedures, and we continue to monitor and evaluate these policies to ensure they remain current. Question 3 What training was given to your department to obtain the Rainbow Tick or because of the Tick. What entity supplied the training and what costs were involved from 2016 to the present day and year by year. What was the program? Please supply copies of the training documents. As part of achieving the Rainbow Tick, the Rainbow Tick Organisation will provide training sessions within the organisation. This training is the intellectual property of Rainbow Tick and there are no extra costs involved to receive this training. Release of this training material is therefore refused under section 9(2)(j) of the OIA, as releasing this would prejudice future negotiations between Rainbow Tick and Inland Revenue. More information on Rainbow Tick’s processes and resources can be found on their website www.rainbowtick.nz and on their social media sites: LinkedIn:www.linkedin.com/company/rainbow-tick-nz/ Facebook: www.facebook.com/rainbowtick Question 4: What reports were made to Rainbow Tick to secure their endorsement? Please supply copies of these reports. We have interpreted your request for reports made to Rainbow Tick to be the self- evaluation sheet Inland Revenue completed, which was considered by Rainbow Tick. This evaluation sheet is the intellectual property of Rainbow Tick and is refused under section 9(2)(j) of the OIA as releasing this would prejudice future negotiations between Rainbow Tick and Inland Revenue. Although I have decided to withhold the evaluation sheet under the above section of the OIA, I did consider providing a copy of the evaluation sheet and redacting the information owned by Rainbow Tick. However, due to the nature of Inland Revenue’s responses the redacted information could potentially be identified. I have therefore provided a summary of what was included in Inland Revenues response under sections 16(1)(e) and 16(2)(c) of the OIA. This summary can be found in the above Rainbow Tick certification section of this response Ref: 22OIA1730 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Question 5: Have you put in place policies to encourage other individuals or companies to join the Rainbow Tick? Please provide copies of these reports Inland Revenue has not put any new policies in place to encourage other individuals or companies to join the Rainbow Tick as a result of our relationship with Rainbow Tick. Right of Review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you again for your request. Yours sincerely Erin a Clayton Kaiārahi Hinonga - Tangata me te Wāhi Mahi Enterprise Leader – People & Workplace Services