Rewriting the Income Tax Act: Exposure Draft Definitions, consequential amendments, and tables Table of terminating provisions 215 TABLE OF TERMINATING PROVISIONS Note: We have reached tentative conclusions on the terminating provisions in subparts CZ, DZ, and EZ. This table sets out the status of each of the current provisions. SectionIssues paperCommentStatus CZ CZ 1Gains and losses due to exchange variations in respect of repayment of loans IP 1, page 21, omit subsection (3) Subsections (1), (2), (4), and (5) rewritten as section CZ 9 CZ 2Application provision in respect of income from certain money lent or redemption payments The legislation changed in 1983 to deal with financial transactions that involved discounts or premiums rather than interest. The intention was to treat the discounts and premiums in the same way as interest (the courts had regarded them as capital up to that time). Commercial bills entered into before 29 July 1983 were protected from the change in treatment. By 2003, the date of 29 July 1983 will be 20 years previously. The date needs to be preserved only if any commercial bills entered into before that date will still exist in 2003. More information is needed on this point. Rewritten as section CZ 4 CZ 3Fringe benefit taxIP 1, page 22, omitNot rewritten CZ 4Treatment of units and interests in unit trusts and group investment funds on issue as at 1 April 1999 IP 1, page 23, omit subsections (1) and (2) Subsections (3) to (5) rewritten as section CZ 8 Rewriting the Income Tax Act: Exposure Draft Definitions, consequential amendments, and tables 216 Table of terminating provisions CZ 4ATreatment of superannuation fund interests in group investment funds on 1 April 1999 The section provides that the slice rule does not apply to a superannuation fund investment in a group investment fund on 1 April 1999. Rewritten as section CZ 7 CZ 4BElection to use slice rule The group investment fund could elect, before 31 March 1999, that CZ4A not apply to a superannuation fund interest in it. The election element should be omitted. Rewritten as section CZ 7 CZ 6Insurance companies other than life insurance companies IP 2, page 20, omit except for (c)(iv) (should read (vi)) and (d)(vii) Subparagraphs rewritten as section CZ 2 (2) and (3) ((d)(vi) and (vii)) and section DZ 2 ((c)(vi)). DZ DZ 1Premium paid in respect of leased machinery IP 1, page34, omitNot rewritten DZ 2Certain expenditure on land used for forestry purposes IP 1, page35, omitNot rewritten DZ 3Certain expenditure on land used for farming or agricultural purposes IP 1, page35, omitNot rewritten DZ 4Deduction of certain expenditure incurred by persons engaged in aquaculture IP 1, page35, omitNot rewritten Rewriting the Income Tax Act: Exposure Draft Definitions, consequential amendments, and tables Table of terminating provisions 217 DZ 5 Transactions between 2 petroleum mining companies The section provides that, if one petroleum mining company pays, before 1/10/90, another for exploration expenditure incurred by the other, it can claim a deduction as if it had incurred it itself. The maximum period over which it could claim the deduction is seven years, so the provision is now spent. Not rewritten DZ 6Companies engaged in exploring for, searching for, or mining petroleum This section deals with the pre-October 1990 Maui expenditure. Section DM 11 applies to post 1990 expenditure. Section DM 11 is being repealed as spent and section DZ 6 should also be repealed. Not rewritten EZ EZ 1Spreading of income arising in 1992-93 income year from revaluation of specified livestock IP 1, page 37, omitNot rewritten EZ 2Spreading of liquor revaluation income IP 1, page 38, omitNot rewritten EZ 3Depreciation allowances, etc., on motorcars IP 1, page 39, omitNot rewritten EZ 4Valuation election for livestock bailed or leased as at 2 September 1992 The section may have some marginal relevance (see subsection (4)(1)(d): 70% rolling average value). Rewritten as section EZ 23 EZ 5Purchase of patent rights Expenditure incurred before 1 April 1993 on the purchase of patent rights may be deducted over the term of the rights. Rewritten as section EZ 24 Rewriting the Income Tax Act: Exposure Draft Definitions, consequential amendments, and tables 218 Table of terminating provisions EZ 6Premium paid in respect of lease of land The section enables a premium paid for the grant or renewal of a lease before 1 April1993 to be deducted over the term of the lease. Rewritten as section EZ 25 EZ 7Unreturned retail profit in relation to goods sold on hire purchase IP 1, page 40, omitNot rewritten EZ 8No first year depreciation allowance for previously exempt taxpayers IP 1, page 41, omitNot rewritten EZ 9New start grants for farmers This section deals with the consequences of forgiveness or remission of debt before 30 September 1990 or 1991. Application of the section is limited to the year of forgiveness, which cannot be later than the income year ended 31 March 1992. Not rewritten EZ 10Special rules in relation to financial arrangements entered into before 1996-97 income year Not rewritten. To be included with the sections in division 1 of subpart EH at the end of subpart EZ EZ 11Depreciation deduction for assets acquired by taxpayer from associated persons before a certain date Rewritten as section EZ 7