Part M–Memorandum accounts MF–Available subscribed capital accounts 160 Subpart MF–Available subscribed capital accounts Contents Introductory provisions MF 1 General rules for companies with ASC accounts MF 2 ASC accounts MF 3 Choosing to become ASC account company MF 4 When qualifying trust or group investment fund is liquidated ASC account credits Table M11: ASC account credits MF 5 ASCA redemption debit ASC account debits Table M12: ASC account credits MF 6 ASCA transfer to imputation credit account Part M–Memorandum accounts MF–Available subscribed capital accounts 161 Introductory provisions MF 1 General rules for companies with ASC accounts ASC account company (1) A qualifying unit trust or a group investment that derives category A income may choose to become an ASC account company. ASC account (2) An ASC account company must maintain an ASC account for a tax year. The account is a record of ASC account credits and ASC account debits that arise in the account during the tax year. Credits (3) Credits to the account include redemption proceeds that are less than the ASC company’s available subscribed capital calculated under the slice rule. Debits (4) Debits to the account include a transfer of a credit balance to the company’s imputation credit account. Defined in this Act: ASC account, ASC account company, available subscribed capital, category A income, company, group investment fund, imputation credit account, qualifying unit trust, slice rule, tax year Origin: 2004 No 35 ss MJ 1(1), MJ 5(1), MJ 6(1) MF 2 ASC accounts The general rules on memorandum accounts set out in sections MA 2 and MA 3 (which relate to the treatment of memorandum accounts) apply to the ASC account of an ASC account company. Defined in this Act: ASC account, ASC account company, memorandum account Origin: 2004 No 35 s MJ 3(1) MF 3 Choosing to become ASC account company Election (1) A company may choose to become an ASC account company if— (a) it is a qualifying unit trust, or a group investment fund that derives category A income; and Part M–Memorandum accounts MF–Available subscribed capital accounts 162 (b) it has issued shares on terms that their redemption will be subject to section CD 14(4) (Returns of capital: off-market share cancellations). Notifying Commissioner (2) A company that makes an election under subsection (1) must notify the Commissioner of the election no later than the day on which the company is required to file a return of income for the tax year that corresponds to the income year in which the election is made. Effect of election (3) An ASC account company must maintain the ASC account referred to in section MF 1(2) from the day the company chooses to become an ASC account company. Defined in this Act: ASC account company, category A income, Commissioner, company, group investment fund, income year, notify, qualifying unit trust, return of income, share, tax year Origin: 2004 No 35 s MJ 1(1) MF 4 When qualifying trust or group investment fund is liquidated When this section applies (1) This section applies when a qualifying unit trust or group investment fund is liquidated without having become an ASC account company. Becoming ASC account company with opening credit balance (2) The trust or fund may become an ASC account company and calculate an opening credit balance under section MA 7 (Opening balances of memorandum accounts). Opening credit balance treated as closing credit balance (3) The opening credit balance in subsection (2) is treated as the closing credit balance of the ASC account. Defined in this Act: ASC account company, group investment fund, liquidation, qualifying unit trust Origin: 2004 No 35 s MJ 7 Part M–Memorandum accounts MF–Available subscribed capital accounts 163 ASC account credits Table M11: ASC account credits Row ASC account credit Credit date Further defined 1 Opening credit balance Opening credit balance 1 April section MA 7 2 Redemption credit The amount by which the ASC is more than the proceeds on a redemption of shares day the shares are redeemed section MF 5 How to use this table Each row of the table describes— (a) the ASC account credits that may arise in the ASC account of an ASC account company during a tax year; and (b) the credit date when the credit arises. A more detailed description of the ASC account credits is contained in the section noted in the last column. MF 5 ASCA redemption credit Credit (1) An ASC account company has an ASC account credit as described in table M11: ASC account credits, row 2 (redemption credit) when the company redeems a share in the company for an amount calculated using the formula— Definition of items in formula (2) In the formula,— (a) ASC amount is the amount of the available subscribed capital for the redemption calculated under section CD 14(4) (Returns of capital: off- market share cancellations): (b) redemption proceeds is the amount of the proceeds from the redemption calculated under sections CD 3 to CD 5 (which relate to the nature of a dividend). Positive result (3) If the result of the formula in subsection (1) is negative, the amount is treated as zero. ASC amount - redemption proceeds. Part M–Memorandum accounts MF–Available subscribed capital accounts 164 Credit date (4) The credit date is the day the company redeems the share. Defined in this Act: amount, ASC account, ASC account company, ASC account credit, available subscribed capital, share Origin: 2004 No 35 s MJ 5(1) ASC account debits Table M12: ASC account debits Row ASC account debit Debit date Further defined 1 Opening debit balance Opening debit balance 1 April section MA 7 2 Transfer to imputation credit account A transfer of a credit balance to the imputation credit account set out in section MF 7 section MF 7 How to use this table Each row of the table describes— (a) the ASC account debits that may arise in the ASC account of an ASC account company during a tax year; and (b) the debit date when the debit arises. A more detailed description of the ASC account debits and, as necessary, their debit dates is contained in the section in the last column. MF 6 ASCA transfer to imputation credit account Election (1) An ASC account company may choose that some or all of the credit balance in the company’s ASC account is transferred to the company’s imputation credit account. Debit and credit (2) The amount of the credit balance transferred is— (a) an ASC account debit described in table M12: ASC account debits, row 2 (transfer to imputation credit account) for the full amount of the credit balance transferred; and (b) an imputation credit described in table M1: imputation credits, row 16 (transfer from ASC account) for the amount calculated under subsection (3). Part M–Memorandum accounts MF–Available subscribed capital accounts 165 Amount (3) The amount of the credit to the imputation credit account is calculated using the formula— Definitions of items in formula (4) In the formula in subsection (3),— (a) credit balance is the credit balance in the company’s ASC account at the time of the transfer: (b) maximum imputation ratio is the maximum imputation ratio calculated using the formula in subsection (5). Ratio formula (5) The maximum imputation ratio is calculated using the formula— Definition of item in formula (6) In the formula in subsection (5), tax rate is the decimal fraction that is the basic rate of income tax for companies set out in schedule 1, part A, clause 5 (Basic rates of income tax and specified superannuation contribution withholding tax). Timing of election (7) An election under subsection (1) may be made at any time when the company is an ICA company. Manner of election (8) A company makes an election under subsection (1) by recording the credit balance transferred as— (a) a debit in the company’s ASC account; and (b) a credit in the company’s imputation credit account. Debit date (9) The debit date is— (a) the day of election; or (b) the day just before the company stops being an ICA company if the election is made on the occasion of cessation. Defined in this Act: amount, ASC account, ASC account company, ASC account debit, basic rate, ICA company, imputation credit, imputation credit account, imputation ratio, income tax, income year, tax year Origin: 2004 No 35 ss ME 4(1)(da), MJ 6 credit balance x maximum imputation ratio. tax rate (1 - tax rate).