Taxation (Annual Rates, Savings Investment, and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill Officials’ Report to the Finance and Expenditure Committee on Submissions on the Bill Volume 2 Non-technical submissions on the new tax rules for offshore portfolio investment in shares 20 November 2006 Prepared by the Policy Advice Division of the Inland Revenue Department and the Treasury CONTENTS Non-technical submissions on the new tax rules for offshore portfolio investment in shares 1 Overview 3 General comments on why the offshore proposals should not proceed 5 Issue: The proposals will distort investment decisions 5 Issue: The proposals are unfair 6 Issue: The proposals are unnecessary 7 Issue: Diversity will be discouraged 7 Issue: Savings will be discouraged 8 Issue: The proposals undermine KiwiSaver 8 Issue: The proposals will inflate the property market 9 Issue: The proposals will deter skilled migrants from coming to New Zealand or encourage skilled people to leave 9 Issue: The proposals are very complex and will impose significant compliance costs 10 Issue: Changes will not raise revenue 11 Issue: Biased towards managed funds 11 Issue: New Zealanders do not invest overseas to avoid paying tax 12 Issue: Insufficient consultation 12 General recommendation on these submissions 12 Other general submission points 13 Issue: Unrealised gains should not be taxed 13 Issue: Tax rates should not be different for grey list and non-grey list countries 14 Deferral of introduction of the new rules 15 Discount on market value methods 17 The $50,000 threshold 18 Issue: Level of threshold 18 Issue: Threshold should be inflation-indexed 18 Issue: Actual cost 19 Issue: Family trusts 19 Five-year exemption (GPG) 20 Issue: GPG should not get an exemption 20 Potential double taxation 21 Treatment of currency fluctuations 22 Inflation 23 Foreign tax credits 24 Treatment of losses 25 Venture capital 26 Employee share options 27 Exemption for shares in Australian companies 28 Issue: Australian shares should not be exempted 28 Issue: Exemption for Australian shares should be extended 28 Issue: Stapled securities 29 Issue: Australian unit trusts 30 Further exemptions 31 Issue: Tax liability should be extinguished on death 31 Issue: Exemption for retired individuals 31 Issue: Exemption for gifted or inherited shares 32 Issue: Tax liability extinguished on shares held for more than five years 32 Issue: Shares in overseas companies with New Zealand subsidiaries 33 Issue: Overseas retirement funds should be exempt 33 Issue: Exemption for shares in South Africa 34 Issue: Exemption for recent migrants 34 Issue: Exemption for shares purchased with funds that have been earned overseas 35 Issue: Temporary exemption for existing investors 35 Issue: Temporary exemption for UK trust shares where market value at transition date is less than original cost 36 Alternatives suggested to offshore rules 37 Issue: Redefinition of capital/revenue boundary 37 Issue: Increasing discount on long-term investment 37 Issue: Alternative FIF calculation methods 38 Outside scope of the bill 39 Appendix of submissions 40 1 Non-technical submissions on the new tax rules for offshore portfolio investment in shares 2 3 OVERVIEW This volume of the officials’ report deals with submissions on the offshore portfolio investment tax proposals that expressed views on the proposals but were not of a technical nature. Volume 3 deals with the technical submissions on the offshore tax proposals, including the new fair dividend rate method. Therefore, volumes 2 and 3 should be read together, with volume 3 being referred to for officials’ main comments. The Committee forwarded us about 1350 submissions that fell into this category. About one-quarter of them appeared to be variations of standard forms or standard material. We were sent only a few of the many submissions that consisted of signed, standard forms, reportedly over 2000 of them, because they were, in many cases, nearly identical. Submissions covered in this volume of the report often supported the proposals relating to portfolio investment entities, when they were mentioned, but not those relating to offshore investment. Only two submissions supported the offshore investment proposals. Key concerns expressed by most of this group were that the proposed changes would introduce a capital gains tax, and they were excessively complex. We note that the proposed fair dividend rate approach, which is under consideration by the Committee, should deal with their concerns to a large extent. This volume covers the main issues raised in the submissions, both those forwarded to us by the Committee and the form letters of which we received samples. Given the number of submissions, points made in them are not attributed to those who made them. The appendix to this volume lists submissions by number and name as they were supplied to us by the Committee. It does not include the sample standard-form submissions described above. 4 5 GENERAL COMMENTS ON WHY THE OFFSHORE PROPOSALS SHOULD NOT PROCEED Nearly all the submissions covered in this volume of the report were opposed to the offshore tax proposals. Most argued that the grey list should be retained, and that the proposals should not proceed. Many were concerned that the offshore proposals introduced a tax on capital gains. Some argued that a modified grey list should be retained for certain countries, including the UK, Canada and the US. Several submitted that the Australian exemption should apply to the UK, Canada and the US. Others argued that the grey list should be extended to all countries with which New Zealand has a double tax agreement, or to countries with which New Zealand has an important trading relationship, such as Asian or European countries. The main reasons for general opposition to the proposals are given in more detail below. Issue: The proposals will distort investment decisions Several submissions noted that they were not opposed to a capital gains tax, but that any capital gains tax on offshore shares should be extended to other assets such as local shares and property. In particular, many expressed concern that capital gains on shares are taxed, whereas capital gains on property are not taxed. Comment The proposals were introduced to remove several distortions from the current savings rules, between investing in portfolio shares in grey list countries and non-grey list countries, and between investing directly and investing through managed funds. Under current rules, investment in New Zealand companies is taxed fairly comprehensively (under New Zealand’s company tax rules), whereas investment in foreign companies resident in grey list countries is generally taxable in New Zealand on dividends only, if held by individuals. This can create an incentive to invest in grey list companies, especially if the company pays little or no tax in the foreign jurisdiction. On the other hand, investments in non-grey list countries (which comprise most of the world) are generally taxed on 100% of the change in share value each year. This is a significant tax barrier to investing in those countries. The current tax rules also create different outcomes depending on whether investment is via a managed fund (generally taxable on capital gains as well as dividends) or directly by an individual (generally taxable on dividends only). This disadvantages investors who use managed funds to invest in New Zealand and offshore. 6 The proposals aim to correct the imbalance by treating investments in New Zealand and Australian companies via a managed fund on a similar basis to direct investments in those companies. This will result in investments in Australian- resident listed companies being taxable primarily on dividends only. This is reasonable as the Australian tax system, like the New Zealand tax system, encourages a significant proportion of the earnings of Australian companies to be paid out as dividends. The approach is also justified given the Closer Economic Relationship between the two countries, and the desirability of treating the two markets as one for investment purposes. For investments outside Australia and New Zealand where dividend-only taxation is not reasonable (given the low level of dividend distribution), the new rules will treat portfolio investors in grey list countries (outside Australia) in the same way as investors in non-grey list countries. In the case of the former, these new rules would, for substantial portfolios, generally result in more tax being payable than at present. In the case of the latter, the new rules will reduce the amount of tax they are required to pay. The new rules should therefore improve the current tax position for those who have investments in Asia and other non-grey list countries and encourage more New Zealanders to diversify into those countries. Issue: The proposals are unfair Submissions cited a range of reasons for considering the proposals unfair: • The proposals are unfair because other investments such as rental property and local shares are not taxed on capital gains. • The proposals are unfair to existing investors who have saved for their retirement. • The proposals discriminate against “ordinary New Zealanders” (taxpayers with middle or lower incomes) as these taxpayers will not be able to rearrange affairs easily and will not have investments under the exemption threshold. • The proposals are not as fair as overseas tax systems such as Australia. • The proposals are unfair because offshore investments are already taxed twice (first in their own jurisdiction and secondly when New Zealand tax is imposed on dividends received). • The proposals are unfair to migrants who have overseas investments. • It is unfair to individual beneficiaries of Maori trusts and incorporations, for whom directly held global investments are owned for their long-term benefit. These beneficiaries should not be disadvantaged by the ownership structure because this is not something they can change. • The proposals are unfair to professional share traders who will not get relief from tax on their New Zealand and Australian shares. 7 Comment The proposals are designed to make it easier and fairer for most investors to invest and save. The key principle behind the changes is that it is only fair that if you live in New Zealand, you should pay tax in New Zealand on your income, whether it comes from New Zealand or overseas. The proposals are designed to levy a reasonable amount of tax on overseas income each year and to remove a number of current distortions. One such distortion is the difference in tax treatment when an investor invests in shares (both onshore and offshore) directly and through a New Zealand managed fund. Issue: The proposals are unnecessary Several submissions questioned the need for the new rules for offshore investment when taxpayers are already taxed on overseas dividends. Comment Low levels of dividend distribution mean that investments in grey list countries are not comprehensively taxed, unlike shares in non-grey list countries. The proposals are designed to address this issue by ensuring that tax is paid on an amount similar to a reasonable dividend yield. Issue: Diversity will be discouraged Many submissions argued that the proposals would discourage diversity of investment by discouraging portfolio investment into overseas shares, and encouraging investment in local shares and property. Some noted that it is particularly important that our overseas investment is diversified, to protect New Zealanders’ wealth in the event of a disaster such as a tsunami or an outbreak of foot and mouth disease. Several submissions noted that one of the fiduciary obligations imposed on trustees and investment advisors is the duty to invest prudently, and that the effect of the proposals might cause trustees to breach this obligation. That might occur because if the trustee attempted to satisfy the obligation to invest prudently by ensuring that a trust portfolio contained overseas shares, it would subject the portfolio to higher tax. Many submissions noted that the New Zealand Superannuation fund diversifies by investing overseas. 8 Comment The proposals are designed to encourage diversity, by correcting the imbalance in the current rules, which give favourable treatment to investments into certain countries and require more tax from investments made into others. That is, under the proposals, diversification will be encouraged by systematically reducing the tax that is paid on investments in countries outside the grey list, including Asian countries such as China and Singapore. Issue: Savings will be discouraged Many submissions expressed concern that the offshore proposals would discourage retirement savings, especially amongst among lower and middle income earners. Some held that savings should not be taxed, or should not be over-taxed. Comment For the substantial majority, the proposals should provide a worthwhile boost to savings. Under the proposals, the many New Zealanders who invest through managed funds will receive significant capital gains tax relief and will have their investment income taxed at the correct rate – for example, 19.5% taxpayers will be taxed at 19.5%, not at 33%, as under current law. Issue: The proposals undermine KiwiSaver Submissions expressed concern that the proposals would discourage investment in KiwiSaver because KiwiSaver will be taxed on its offshore shares. Comment KiwiSaver has been a key driver in ensuring that investment via a managed fund is not tax-disadvantaged. Many thousands of ordinary New Zealanders will receive capital gain tax relief and tax rate relief on their KiwiSaver investments from 2007 under the new rules. 9 Issue: The proposals will inflate the property market Many expressed concern that the effect of the proposals would be to discourage savings in overseas shares and encourage investors to hold residential property. If this happened, they said, it would inflate the property market, making home ownership more unaffordable. Comment If, as has been suggested, there is a significant flow of funds back to New Zealand, and into property, one could reasonably expect that the risk associated with such investments would increase. Consequently, in risk-adjusted terms, there should still be an incentive for New Zealanders to hold a diversified portfolio of assets. It is also worth noting that there are comprehensive tax rules for those people who buy and sell assets, such as residential property, with the intention of making a profit, and these people are required to pay tax on any capital gain. Therefore, it is incorrect to say that there are no tax consequences associated with investing in property with the intention of making capital gains. Issue: The proposals will deter skilled migrants from coming to New Zealand or encourage skilled people to leave Submissions expressed concern that the proposals would encourage skilled people to leave New Zealand, or discourage skilled migrants from coming or returning to New Zealand, because many skilled migrants have investments in overseas shares. Comment Most overseas jurisdictions have realised capital gains tax on their investments and some, like Australia, also have foreign investment fund rules (for “passive” investments offshore) that generally tax full unrealised capital gains. Most overseas residents will also have experience paying a realised capital gains tax on their investments. In contrast, the proposed fair dividend rate method attempts to tax a reasonable dividend yield. The proposed rules should therefore not be a significant disincentive to relocate to New Zealand, especially given the recently introduced four- year exemption from New Zealand’s foreign investment fund rules for new migrants and returning residents. This four-year window should provide plenty of time for them to become familiar with the new rules and, if necessary, make any adjustments to their portfolios. 10 Issue: The proposals are very complex and will impose significant compliance costs • Most submissions expressed concern about the complexity of the proposals. Many argued that they were difficult for ordinary taxpayers to understand. Several argued that the rules were overly complex in relation to the tax that will be collected. • Compliance costs would be greatly increased because taxpayers who had previously completed returns themselves would need to employ accountants. Several were concerned that compliance costs would fall disproportionately on lower income taxpayers. • Administrative costs for Inland Revenue would be increased as it would be difficult to collect the tax. • Many submissions suggested that the number of people affected by the proposals would be more than expected. • More taxpayers would be required to file tax returns because of the proposals. • More people would incur use-of-money interest and penalties as a result of not being able to apply the rules because they are too complex. Comment Concerns about the complexity of the new offshore tax rules relate to the smooth market value method proposed in the bill as introduced. The government has suggested that it be replaced with a new fair dividend rate method. Under the fair dividend rate method: • Individuals would be taxed on a maximum of 5% of the opening market value of their offshore shares in a given year. • When individual investors make a return of less than 5%, their taxable income would be correspondingly lower. • No tax would be payable when investors make losses. • Dividends would not be taxed separately even if they exceed 5%. The fair dividend rate method would be much simpler to apply than the offshore tax proposals in the bill as introduced, because complex calculations to work out income would not be necessary. For example, gains of more than 5% would not have to be carried forward to be taxed in later years, which was the main reason for the complexity in the smoothed market value method. For most individuals, taxable income would simply be 5% of the value of their shares at the start of the year, and less if they made a return lower than 5% for the year. 11 Issue: Changes will not raise revenue Several submissions suggested that the measures would not raise revenue expected by the government, because taxpayers would withdraw their savings from offshore investments and invest in onshore shares or property, or simply not comply with the measures. Revenue gains would be offset by increased use of public health services and welfare agencies by older investors, who would lose planned income as a result of the changes. Comment It should be noted that the aim of the proposals was not to raise revenue. Rather, the key rationale was to reduce investment distortions. The overall impact of these specific changes to the taxation of overseas investment is largely revenue-neutral. The whole package of investment tax changes (including the PIE rules) will actually reduce government revenue by over $100 million a year. However, the government has said that if we are to improve the savings culture in New Zealand, this is a valuable investment to make. Issue: Biased towards managed funds Several submissions were concerned that the proposals encourage investment in managed funds rather than direct investment because managed funds would get an exemption from tax on offshore shares. They noted that managed funds should not be given an advantage but should be treated the same as individuals. Comment Investors in managed funds would not, in fact, receive an advantage over direct investors in relation to investments in offshore shares. The proposed exclusion for Australasian trading gains made by PIEs broadly reflects the treatment of Australasian investments if held directly. Like direct investors, managed funds would be subject to the fair dividend rate, if it is adopted, on investments outside Australasia. Further, managed funds would pay tax on a flat 5% rate, which may be seen as less attractive than the 5% variable rate for individual direct investors, although this would be offset by the benefits to managed fund investors from the PIE tax rules. In addition, investors in managed funds would not receive the benefit of the $50,000 threshold. The reason for these differences is to minimise any potential compliance costs faced by individuals. 12 Issue: New Zealanders do not invest overseas to avoid paying tax New Zealanders do not invest overseas in order to avoid paying tax. Many New Zealanders invest in offshore shares and funds that pay dividends. Comment It is acknowledged that most New Zealanders who invest offshore do so for genuine reasons, including diversification and access to industries not available in New Zealand. However, the tax systems of many countries discourage the payment of dividends, with the result that dividend yields are low. To ensure that a reasonable level of tax is paid on the income of New Zealand residents’ offshore income, it is necessary to deem a reasonable dividend yield. Issue: Insufficient consultation Several submissions stated that there had been insufficient consultation and, in particular, there had been a lack of consultation with private investors. Comment Officials conducted significant consultation with a wide variety of interested parties. While it was impossible to consult with all interested private investors, we consulted with a number of groups representing individual investors. These included stockbrokers, investment advisers, the New Zealand Shareholders’ Association, and the Retirement Commissioner. General recommendation on these submissions Officials have recommended in volume 3 that the fair dividend rate method replace the market value and smoothed market value methods proposed in the bill. The fair dividend rate should address complexity concerns and concern that gains in excess of 5% would be taxed on repatriation. Officials consider an extended grey list with a black list is not sustainable for the following reasons: • It would create significant complexity to define and maintain a black list. For example, it would be difficult to monitor effective tax rates and tax advantaged vehicles in an expanded group of grey list countries. • There would be a significant fiscal cost to extending capital account treatment to managed funds. 13 • The incentive to invest in countries that do not have a comparable company tax system to New Zealand would remain. • It would not address the issue that many offshore shares do not provide a reasonable dividend yield, meaning that offshore investment would continue to be tax advantaged relative to New Zealand shares. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. It should be noted that the proposed fair dividend rate method should address many of the concerns raised in submissions. Other general submission points Issue: Unrealised gains should not be taxed Many submissions expressed concern that offshore shares would be subject to tax on unrealised gains. Several noted that they did not oppose tax on capital gains, but that they were opposed to tax on gains that were not realised at the time. Several submissions expressed concern that taxpayers would have to sell assets in order to meet their tax liability. Comment The smoothed market value method, which in most years would tax only 5% of the value of an investment, was designed to address liquidity concerns. This meant that in most years, tax on more than 5% of the investment’s value could be met with dividends of less than 2%. Most people should be receiving a dividend yield of at least 2% from a diversified portfolio, which would generally eliminate the need for investors to sell an investment to pay a tax liability. This concern has been further addressed by the introduction of the fair dividend rate, which would not require gains in excess of the 5% cap to be carried forward to be taxed in later years. Recommendation That the submission be declined. 14 Issue: Tax rates should not be different for grey list and non-grey list countries Submission Several submissions expressed concern that the proposals introduced different tax rates for investment in grey list and non-grey list countries. Comment The proposals do not, in fact, introduce different tax treatment for grey list and non- grey list countries. Instead, they remove the existing distortion which encourages investment in grey list countries. Under current rules, investments in such countries are not fully taxed on their income, while investors in non-grey list countries are generally taxed on 100% of their gain. The proposals remove this distortion by generally reducing the amount of tax payable on shares in a non-grey list country and ensuring that the same level of tax is paid on overseas shares regardless of whether the investment is in a grey list country. Recommendation That the submission be noted. 15 DEFERRAL OF INTRODUCTION OF THE NEW RULES Submissions • The introduction of the offshore proposals should be delayed until further review. • The introduction of the offshore proposals should be delayed until at least 2008 to provide time for further consultation. • The introduction of the offshore proposals should be delayed until at least 2008 to give investors time to rearrange their portfolios. • Many noted their support for the proposed portfolio investment entity (PIE) rules, but argued that the introduction date of the PIE and offshore rules should not be linked. Comment The current application date in the bill provides that both the new offshore tax rules and the PIE rules will apply for income years starting on or after 1 April 2007. The key policy objective of the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules is to remove the current distortions between investing directly or through a managed fund and between investing in grey list and non-grey list countries. These distortions should be removed as soon as practicable, and given the scheduled enactment date of this legislation before the end of this year, this would support a general 1 April 2007 application date, as is currently proposed in the bill. The Minister of Finance and the Minister of Revenue wrote to the Committee in August recommending that the application date for the new PIE tax rules be deferred until 1 October 2007. This deferral was connected to the deferral of the KiwiSaver scheme (since the PIE tax rules will be compulsory for KiwiSaver default funds). The deferral to 1 October 2007 also gives savings vehicles more time to prepare for the implementation of the PIE tax rules. The resulting non-alignment between the application dates for the new offshore tax rules (1 April 2007) and the PIE tax rules (1 October 2007) creates tax timing problems for some savings vehicles that intend to become PIEs from 1 October 2007. Officials consider that these problems can be addressed by allowing entities that will be eligible to be PIEs to elect that the new offshore tax rules will not apply to them until 1 October 2007, or, if an entity elects to become a PIE in its first income year starting on or after 1 October 2007, from the date that the election is effective. This does not necessarily mean that less tax will be paid by these entities during this interim period because, in general, more tax is paid by institutions under the current offshore tax rules than will be paid under the new rules. 16 Officials do not support shifting the current 1 April 2007 application date to 1 October 2007 for the offshore tax rules for individuals. The majority of individuals have a 31 March balance date, and to defer the introduction date to 1 October would mean that individuals would need to calculate their offshore investment tax liabilities under two different sets of rules for the income year starting on 1 April 2007. This would involve significant complexity for individual investors. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. 17 DISCOUNT ON MARKET VALUE METHODS Submission The taxable amount of gains on overseas shares should not be 85% as currently proposed. The taxable amount should be limited to between 5 to 70% of the change in the value of the share price, with many submissions suggesting that the taxable amount should be limited to 25% or 50% of the share gain. Comment Officials consider this issue does not need to be addressed in light of the recommendation to replace the market value and smoothed market value methods with the fair dividend rate. The level of discount is not relevant to the fair dividend rate method. Recommendation Officials have recommended that the market value and smoothed market value methods be replaced with the fair dividend rate method. If this recommendation is accepted the issue in this submission will no longer be applicable. 18 THE $50,000 THRESHOLD Issue: Level of threshold Submissions • The $50,000 threshold level should be raised to a more realistic level. • The threshold should be raised to a level that would ensure that lower or middle income investors are not caught by the rules. • Submissions suggested various higher threshold levels between $80,000 and $5 million. Quoted figures included $80,000, $100,000, $150,000, $200,000 $250,000, $300,000, $350,000, $500,000, $1,000,000, and, $5,000,000. Comment Raising the proposed threshold significantly would undermine the core objective of these reforms, which is to remove the current distortion between investing directly in offshore shares and investing through New Zealand collective investment vehicles. A modest threshold such as that proposed in the bill can be justified as the extra accuracy from applying more complicated tax rules can be outweighed by the extra compliance costs for modest holdings. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. Issue: Threshold should be inflation-indexed Submission The level of the threshold should be inflation-indexed. Comment While an argument exists for inflation-indexing thresholds, such an approach would significantly increase complexity. For this reason, such an approach is not adopted for other thresholds in tax legislation. Recommendation That the submission be declined. 19 Issue: Actual cost Submission The actual cost of the share rather than its market value should be used in determining whether a person’s shareholdings are under the threshold. Comment The main rule for determining whether a person’s share portfolio falls below the threshold is cost, not market value. Therefore there is no need to make an amendment to the bill. Recommendation That the submission be noted. Issue: Family trusts Submission The threshold should be extended to include discretionary family trusts, as these are legitimate vehicles for estate planning. Specific anti-avoidance should be enacted if there is a risk of abuse. Comment The reason the $50,000 threshold does not apply to trusts is to prevent it being exploited by the creation of multiple trusts for the benefit of the same individuals. For example, ten family trusts could be established for the benefit of the same individual, thereby effectively increasing the threshold to $500,000. Officials do not consider it is feasible to introduce specific anti-avoidance rules to effectively address the risk of trusts being used to exploit the exemption. Recommendation That the submission be declined. 20 FIVE-YEAR EXEMPTION (GPG) Issue: GPG should not get an exemption Submissions • It is unfair that GPG gets special treatment. • Investors in GPG should not get an exemption when investors in other offshore companies do not. Comment The five-year exemption will give widely held foreign companies that have a substantial New Zealand shareholder base, such as GPG, time to consider shifting their headquarters to New Zealand. This will provide sufficient time for the government to complete its review of the controlled foreign company rules. The outcome of this review could materially affect the decision of such companies on whether to relocate their headquarters to New Zealand. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. 21 POTENTIAL DOUBLE TAXATION Submission Investors could be double taxed because they could be taxed on year-to-year increases and then on the gain realised upon sale of the shares. Comment Double tax as described above was not possible under the smoothed market value method. This is because gains taxed on a year-to-year basis are not included in the excess gains that are carried forward. Therefore, the gains that are taxed on repatriation are those that have not been taxed in previous years. This issue does not arise under the fair dividend rate. Recommendation That the submission be declined. 22 TREATMENT OF CURRENCY FLUCTUATIONS Submission Gains made as the result of currency fluctuations should not be taxed. Comment The concern raised is that rules that tax offshore income under a change in value approach can give rise to volatile tax results as currency cross-rates can shift significantly during the measurement period. Under the recommended fair dividend rate, taxable income in most years will be determined by applying 5% to the investment’s opening value at the beginning of the tax year. As taxable income under this method will now not generally depend on the change in value of the investment over the measurement period, the volatility issue described above will largely be addressed. Recommendation That the submission be declined. 23 INFLATION Submission Inflation should be taken into account when calculating share gains for the purposes of the new rules, as investors should not be taxed on gains made from inflation. Comment As a general rule, New Zealand’s tax system works on a nominal basis and does not take account of inflation. To inflation-index the proposed rules would be inconsistent with this general approach and could lead to additional distortion. Further, inflation- indexing would add significant complexity to the rules. Officials note that the issue has been superseded as the recommended fair dividend rate does not target capital gains, rather something approximating a reasonable dividend yield. Recommendation That the submission be declined. 24 FOREIGN TAX CREDITS Submission Credit should be given for foreign tax paid against the realised gain. Comment This was an issue under the FIF rules proposed in the bill. However, because the recommended fair dividend rate method does not tax capital gains, no credit should be allowed for foreign capital gains taxes. Credits for foreign tax paid on any dividends would be allowed under the fair dividend rate method. Recommendation That the submission be declined. 25 TREATMENT OF LOSSES Submission If gains on shares will be taxable, losses on shares should also be recognised in the calculation of taxable income. Comment Losses would have been deductible under the smoothed market value method in the same way and to the same extent that any gains would have been taxable. It is not appropriate to allow capital losses under the fair dividend rate because it does not target capital gains. Recommendation That the submission be declined. 26 VENTURE CAPITAL Submission Shares in companies that start in New Zealand and subsequently migrate to a grey list country should be exempt for a period of five to seven years from the date of migration. Comment Officials agree with the need for an exemption for venture capital companies that migrate offshore. The primary reason for this exemption is that venture capital investment is not substitutable for normal offshore portfolio investment. Officials have developed exemption criteria for a broad range of venture capital cases. These criteria are discussed in volume 3 of the officials’ report. Recommendation That it be noted that officials are proposing new exemption criteria for investments in venture capital. 27 EMPLOYEE SHARE OPTIONS Submissions • Employee share schemes should be exempt. Such schemes encourage employee loyalty and are distinguishable from other shareholdings as they can be considered “active” investments. • There should be a five-year holiday for investors in employee share schemes upon leaving the employment. Alternatively, shares acquired before a certain date or those with restrictions on disposal should be exempt for five years. • The threshold should be raised to $300,000 when employee share options are owned. Comment Officials agree that a temporary exemption from the new offshore tax rules for employee share options is justified in certain circumstances. This issue is considered in volume 3 of the officials’ report. Recommendation That it be noted that officials are proposing new exemption criteria for shares acquired through employee share purchase schemes in certain circumstances. 28 EXEMPTION FOR SHARES IN AUSTRALIAN COMPANIES Issue: Australian shares should not be exempted Submissions • Australian shares should not be exempted. Exempting shares will give the Australian share market a competitive advantage with no corresponding gain for New Zealand. • New Zealand residents do not get a franking credit on Australian dividends, so the exemption should not be extended to Australia. Comment There are three main reasons for treating investment in Australian-resident listed companies differently. First, Australian companies pay out a high proportion of their earnings as dividends. (Dividend distribution is encouraged by the Australian tax system.) Second, New Zealand has a close economic relationship with Australia. Making a special case for Australia will help to move the two countries closer towards a single market for the purposes of investment and is therefore consistent with this relationship. Third, the New Zealand Inland Revenue has close contact with the Australian Tax Office and the Australian Treasury, which should allow the tax authorities to close down any tax loopholes that might arise. The proposed treatment for Australian companies reflects a simplification benefit – taxation on dividends – rather than a tax advantage. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. Issue: Exemption for Australian shares should be extended Submissions • All Australian entities should be exempted from the rules. • All Australian listed and unlisted companies should be exempted; otherwise there is an unfair advantage to larger and listed entities. • Companies that are not listed on the ASX should also be exempt. • Australian property trusts and funds and infrastructure funds should be exempt. • Australian-based international funds should be exempt. 29 • All companies listed on New Zealand and Australian exchanges should be exempt, even if based overseas. • Australian companies that trade on overseas exchanges should be exempt. • Australian-based intermediary funds should be exempt. • Managed funds listed on NZ and Australian exchanges should be exempt. • Index funds which invest in major indices on New Zealand and Australian exchanges should be exempt. Comment Officials consider that the exemption for Australian-resident companies should be restricted to companies listed on the official approved list of the ASX, which should cater for most of New Zealanders’ portfolio investment in Australia. This should provide some assurance that Australian companies will not be used as conduits to avoid the proposed offshore tax rules. It is less likely that such conduits could be established via companies listed on the ASX because to do so would be more difficult and costly. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. Issue: Stapled securities Submission The Australian exemption should extend to Australian-based stapled securities. Comment Officials consider that the Australian exemption should be limited to shares in Australian-resident listed companies without stapled rights in foreign companies. Stapled securities would be subject to the fair dividend rate method which is the appropriate treatment for such interests. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. The Australian exemption would be limited to shares in Australian-resident listed companies without stapled rights. 30 Issue: Australian unit trusts Submissions • Australian unit trusts should be included in the Australian exemption. • Both unlisted and listed Australian unit trusts should be included in the Australian exemption. Comment Investments in Australian unit trusts were excluded from the proposed exemption for investments in Australian-resident listed companies because they could be used as roll-up vehicles to invest outside Australia in companies that pay little or no dividends (and therefore avoid the new offshore tax rules). New Zealand investors could therefore invest in these vehicles and derive income in the form of capital gain, without a tax liability arising on this income in either Australia or New Zealand. However, officials agree that investments in certain Australian unit trusts should be included in the Australian exemption subject to certain criteria being met. These criteria are discussed in volume 3. Recommendation It should be noted that this issue is covered in volume 3 of the officials’ report. 31 FURTHER EXEMPTIONS Issue: Tax liability should be extinguished on death Submission A person’s tax liability should be extinguished on death. Comment Under the smoothed market value method, any excess gains that are carried forward are extinguished on the death of the investor. This is no longer an issue as the fair dividend rate does not target capital gains. Recommendation That the submission be noted. Issue: Exemption for retired individuals Submissions • The tax liability should be removed when the person reaches retirement (between the ages of 60 and 65). • The tax should not apply to people aged over 80. Comment Officials consider there is no justification for an age-based exemption from the offshore tax rules. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. 32 Issue: Exemption for gifted or inherited shares Submission Shares that are not bought but are acquired by bequest or gift should be exempt or given a period of relief because beneficiaries have not chosen to invest in these shares. Comment Officials consider there is no justification for exempting inherited shares from the FIF rules. Income from inherited offshore shares should be treated in the same way as income from other offshore shares. Recommendation That the submission be declined. Issue: Tax liability extinguished on shares held for more than five years Submission Deferred capital gains should be extinguished on investments held for longer than five years. Comment The issue does not arise under the recommended fair dividend rate method as excess gains would not be carried forward. Recommendation That the submission be declined. 33 Issue: Shares in overseas companies with New Zealand subsidiaries Submission Shareholders in overseas companies with New Zealand subsidiaries should be exempt as these countries contribute to the New Zealand economy. Comment The issue of the double taxation of New Zealand shareholders of foreign companies with New Zealand subsidiaries currently exists. This is because tax can be paid in New Zealand on its business operations but the foreign parent cannot flow through imputation credits to its New Zealand shareholders on its resulting dividends. A solution to this problem may seem to be to allow the foreign company to maintain an imputation credit account. The policy reason that only New Zealand-resident companies can maintain imputation credit accounts is to ensure that there remains an incentive for a current New Zealand-resident company to remain resident in New Zealand. A New Zealand-resident company is liable to New Zealand tax on its worldwide income, whereas a non-resident company is liable to New Zealand tax only on its New Zealand-sourced income. If a non-resident company was allowed to maintain an imputation credit account for the benefit of its New Zealand shareholders this could provide an incentive for a New Zealand-resident company to migrate to escape tax on its foreign source income while still passing on the benefit of New Zealand tax on its New Zealand-sourced income to its New Zealand shareholders. Investments in companies such as these would be subject to the fair dividend rate method, which is an appropriate treatment for such interests. Recommendation That the submission be declined. Issue: Overseas retirement funds should be exempt Submissions • Retirement funds in overseas countries should have exemptions or, alternatively, be deferred until the gains are realised. • In particular, US retirement funds and UK pension funds should be exempt as they are locked in. 34 Comment Officials note that there are already extensive exemptions for employment-related superannuation interests contained in sections EX 36 and EX 37. These exemptions will typically exclude from the FIF rules the foreign pensions of persons who migrate to New Zealand. Officials do not consider that further exemptions are justified. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. Issue: Exemption for shares in South Africa Submission South African migrants require a special exemption for blocked capital assets that they are unable to repatriate because of South African restrictions. Comment Officials note that the current FIF rules already contain an exemption where exchange controls in a foreign country prevent a person from repatriating income from offshore interests. This exemption would continue under the new offshore rules. Therefore, no further amendment is necessary. Recommendation That the submission be declined. Issue: Exemption for recent migrants Submissions • Recent migrants with overseas shareholdings should be exempted from the rules, either permanently or temporarily. • Recent migrants or people who have recently returned to New Zealand should be given a temporary exemption from the rules to allow them time to repatriate their funds to New Zealand. 35 Comment Officials consider the recently enacted temporary exemption for new migrants is sufficient. A permanent exemption would not be fair vis-à-vis other New Zealanders. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. Issue: Exemption for shares purchased with funds that have been earned overseas Submission Shares purchased with funds that have been earned overseas should not be taxed. Comment Officials do not believe there is justification for exempting shares purchased with funds that have been earned overseas. Such an exemption would be virtually impossible to administer and would create an incentive for investing offshore, as other categories of return from overseas-earned capital would be taxable. Recommendation That the submission be declined. Issue: Temporary exemption for existing investors Submissions • Existing investors should have a ten-year exemption to rearrange their portfolio. • The rules should take account of losses made in previous years, because recovery of losses should not be taxed. To ensure that the recovery of losses made from the past few years is not taxed, there should be a five-year exemption for existing investors. 36 Comment There is no rationale to provide a time-limited exemption for existing investors. It would favour those who invested before the changes were enacted and could lead to investors retaining offshore investments when it would make economic sense to sell the investment (if not for the exemption). It is possible to argue for some limited grandfathering if the rules being introduced are particularly harsh or complex. However, this is not the case under the fair dividend method, which would tax in essence a reasonable dividend yield. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. Issue: Temporary exemption for UK trust shares where market value at transition date is less than original cost Submission There should be a five-year exemption for holders of UK trust shares whose market value at 1 April 2007 is less than the original cost. Comment Officials do not consider that there is any policy rationale for treating investments in UK investment trusts differently to other offshore shares under the fair dividend rate method. Recommendation That the submission be declined. 37 ALTERNATIVES SUGGESTED TO OFFSHORE RULES Issue: Redefinition of capital/revenue boundary Submission Several submissions argued that shares held for over one year should not be taxed, or taxed at a lower rate, and that shares held for less than one year should be taxed as income, or taxed at a higher rate (as in the US). Comment Officials note that adopting this alternative proposal would mean that all gains on shares (New Zealand and offshore) held for more than 12 months by all New Zealand investors would be exempt from New Zealand income tax because New Zealand does not have a general capital gains tax. The United States treatment is not comparable as the United States has a comprehensive capital gains tax. Implementation would have a huge revenue cost and the submission is effectively outside the scope of the bill. Recommendation That the submission be declined. Issue: Increasing discount on long-term investment Submission There should be a sliding scale whereby the shares are taxed at a higher rate if they are held for a shorter period. Comment Under the proposed fair dividend rate, taxable income would be capped at 5% of the opening market value of an investment. The level of discount is not relevant to the fair dividend rate method. Recommendation Officials have recommended that the smoothed market value method be replaced with the fair dividend rate method. If this recommendation is accepted the issue in this submission will no longer be applicable. 38 Issue: Alternative FIF calculation methods Submissions • A deemed rate of return method on all offshore shares would be preferable because it would be much simpler to apply. • A deemed rate of return should apply to all offshore shares, including Australia, as this would be fairer. • There should be a deemed rate of return based on a figure that equates to the average dividend yield of Australian ASX 200 shares. • There should be a deemed rate of return of 2 to 3% upon all overseas shares and property investments as a simple compliance cost alternative. • The deemed rate of return should be a simple calculation based on the average actual rate of all shares listed on the NZX. • There should be a standard rate of return calculated at 5% of the cost of the share. • The tax should be a deemed dividend on investments outside New Zealand and Australia, being the greater of actual income received or deemed dividend income of 3% of the value of the investment at 1 April each year. Comment Officials note that these submissions have been taken into account as part of the government’s decision to recommend consideration of the fair dividend rate method by the Finance and Expenditure Committee. Recommendation That the submissions to replace the market value methods with a deemed rate of return method be noted. 39 OUTSIDE SCOPE OF THE BILL Some submissions on the offshore proposals also suggested changes that were outside the scope of the bill: • A tax on realised gains should apply to all assets (for example, at a rate of 30%). Personal income tax rates should be correspondingly reduced. Owner-occupied housing could be excluded from the tax. The first $10,000 in gains could be excluded from the tax. Some submissions further suggested that this tax should be independent of the taxpayer’s marginal rate, and some suggested it should be an inflation-indexed tax. • Imputation credits should be given for foreign dividends. • Company tax and income tax should be reduced. • Company tax rates should be higher than individual tax rates. • Income tax on low levels of income should be abolished or minimised and replaced with a capital gains tax and higher GST on alcohol, high-fat foods and TV to modify New Zealanders’ behaviour. • Healthy food should be exempt from GST. • GST should be increased, which means a larger number of people contribute to the tax take, including overseas visitors. • Personal tax should be abolished to give greater incentives to work longer hours and to an older age. • The requirement for returning New Zealanders to have been absent for at least ten years to get the exemption on their foreign income should be lowered to five years. • There should be a stamp duty on property, with a limited threshold for owner- occupied housing. Comment Some of these submissions, such as those relating to the company tax rate, will be addressed by other government initiatives such as the Business Tax Review. Other measures, such as the temporary exemption from tax on overseas income for new migrants, relate to previously enacted legislation. However, all these submissions are outside the scope of this bill. Recommendation That the submissions be declined. 40 APPENDIX OF SUBMISSIONS No. Name 1W Earle Williamson 2W Peter Schmuck-Poeschl 3W Robert Fong 4W Dave Sedcole 5W Robin Grant 6W Ronald (Leo)Leader 7W Magnus Wright 8W Linda Smallwood 9W Thomas Cloher 10W Grant McPherson 11W David Bradding 13W A Revington 14W Rick Page 15 Roger Cane 16W, 16aW Leigh Douglas 17W, 17W replacement Robert Sweet 18W Marc de Boer 19W Garth Lawrence 20W Jonathan Manson 21W, 21aW Burkhard Wuensche 22W John/Christine Rofe 23W Tony Goddard 24W Rosalind Ramsay 25W James Hill 26W, 26aW Shaun Wilkinson 27W, 27aW Leigh Mair 28W Ian Breeze 29W M G Bradshaw 30W Matthew Goodson 31W Rosemary Weber 32W Stephanie Watson 33W Geoff Wilson 34W Susan Goodall 35W David Addis 41 No. Name 36W Mary Stanton 37W Donanne Bowman 38W Jerry Bowman 39W, 39aW Rolf E Booker 40W Adrian Gray 41W Bernard Ivory 42, 42a John Clark 43W, 43aW Don Hammond 44W Graham Astley 45W Neil McLachlan 46W Ruth Walker 47W Jeremy Collins 48W Malcolm Hope 49W Rex/Ann Billington 50W Garrath Cadness 51W Brett/Lynsie Austin 52 Peter Levin 53W Heather Wyse 54W Jacqueline Eathorne 55W Salim Aftimos 56W Sue/Garry Hawkins 57W Rosemarie Gough 58W G N Swift 59W Arthur Jolly 60W Andrew Wegener 61W John Herbert 62W Donald Malpas 64W, 64a-eW Jim Woods 65W Christopher B Malone 66W Karen Van Peursem 67W Richard Ellis 68W E Guy Abel 69W, 69aW Shane Moriarity 71W,71aW John Rowlandson 72W D Vance 73W,73aW Malcolm & Doreen McPhee 74W Alan Williams 42 No. Name 75W Laurie Lautmann 76W Judith Bennett 77W Michael McIntyre 78W Kirsten P Woods 79W Roger Brebner 80W Patrick A Frengley 81W Edmund J Boros-Gyevi 82W Malcolm Eves 83W James Twist 84W Walter Sheather 85 Desmond Hunt 86W Joe Woollaston 88W David Scoffham 89W Maurice & Anne O’Reilly 90W Bill Gibson 91 Jennifer Pitches 92W Bruce & Barbara Seaman 93W Gary Colhoun 94W Richard Watts 95W Mr and Mrs B Davies 96W Beverley Wilson Donald 97W Peter Dudfield 98W Ping Wah Ho 98aW Gloriena Leung 99W Tom Davies 100W P M Grundy 101W Bronwyn Smits 102W Helen Glyde 103W Christopher Mitchell 104W Robert and Rolande Jones 105W Des and Jan Adams 106W Guy Ensor 107W Michael Grace 108W Bruce and Noeline Adams 109W Simon Mark-Brown 110W Jim Guyson 111W R B Niven 43 No. Name 112W C N Wilson 113W M J Selby 114W Rosamund Scoffman 115W P R Parry 116W Jennifer Ann Thorpe 117W Peter Gibbons 118W Ross McIntyre 119W Graham Hogg 120W James Hoskins 121W Steve Gross 122W Alan and Barbara Bolam 123W Sue Cassells 124W Ian Long 125W, 125aW Julia Finnigan 126W Martin Spencer 127 Tim Cole 127W replacement Rick Fala 128W Andrew Rouppe van der Voort 129W Andrew Tseumng 130W Dorothy Mutton 131W Fraser Pease 132 W E Flack 133W Bryan & Sharon Evans 134W Roy Wilson 135W Grahame Joyce 136W Jaap & Sue van Dorsser 137W Michael Benjamin 138W T J M Johnston 139W B D & K L McMath 140W John Stagg 141 Ian & Patricia Ramsay 142W David R Meldrum 143W Dr Frank Binns 144W Ronald Richards 145 Nigel J Andrews 146W John F Clifford 147, 147a B R Sheppard, NZ Shareholders Association 44 No. Name 148W Samford L Maier Jr 149W Graeme & Jennifer McGowan 150W Alan West 151W J & M H Wallace 151W replacement Lynn Dunn 152W John R Cole 153W John Bishop 154W Margaret Zube 155W, 155a-hW Ian and Linda Rogerson 156W Michael John Dunn 157 Iain Macfarlane 158W Nicholas L & Don Stewart, Stewart Financial Group Ltd 159W Dr Paul Hughes & Dr T Alexi 160W Donald Cordes & Charlene Lutes 161W Tim Vogel 161W replacement John & Rosemary Cotman 162W Brian Field 163W, 163aW Gilbert A Hay 164W Steve Ward 165W Mr J N Plaistowe 166W Ian H Jenkinson 167W Alan Grove, The Grove Family Trust 168W G D Norcliffe 169W Steve Napier 170W Shona Spencer 171W Michael Mellsop 172W B J Meadowcroft 173W Clare Collins 174W Brian Barraclough 175W Michael Andrew 176W Keith Davis 177W E R Harrisson 178W Geoffrey C Hubbard 179W Jennifer Barraclough 180W Stewart Hawkins 181W Betty Hawkins 182W Delia Hudec 45 No. Name 183W Jacqui Simpkinson 184W Andrea Richards and family 185 Alexander Mair Cowie 186W Alan F & Margaret Harris 187W O R Gilbert 187W replacement Clark McLeod 188W Peter & Sarah Brocklebank 189W Lesley Adriaens 190W Iris & Russell Brown 191W Rodney Baldwin 192W, 192aW Andrew Marshall 193W John & Therese van Loon 194W Philippa Williams 195W David & Hamish Reid 196W Mike Newton, Select Asset Management Ltd 197W Patricia Rouse 198W Alan Robinson 199W John Barber 200W Norman Hawkins 201W Victor & Jane Lenting 202W Peter J Knight 203W Denis Lander 204W S M Frengley 205W Kerry P O’Neill 206W Trevor Baron 207W Mick Burdon 208W John Davies 209W Richard Cathie 210W Tim Silcock 211W Alison Cook 212W Fenton Peterken 213 Pauline Robb 214 Shaun Auger 215W Allen Smith 216W Ian Arkle 217W Grant Short 218W No name 46 No. Name 219W Jonathan Ludgater 220W Beryl Ludgater 221W Wayne Gardner 222W Tom Lanigan 223W Kathryn Bayliss 224W Warren & Shirley Yardley 225W Mike Allen 225W replacement Christine Colman 226W James Clague Pacific Wealth Creators Ltd 227W Paul Phillips 228W George Horsburgh 229W Claude Moffat 230W John Wilson 231W G P Carson 232W L E Ogden 233W Mike Panther 234W Miles King 235W Rachel Doughty 236W Marion & Kevin Brooks 237W Euan Macduff 238W Jenny Staite 239 Keith L Muir 240 Bryan Trenwith 241W Wayne Pincott 242W David Rorke 243W Hilary Monteith 244W David M Marsden 245W John Rowan 246W Julian Aaron 247W John Bowater 248W Paula Anderson 249W Peer Louw 250W David Dalton 251W Sadesh Natali 252W James Stringer 253W Peter M Hill 254W Irene Tan 47 No. Name 255W Terry Beaumont 256W, 256a-cW John Giblin 257W Kath Cherney 258 Graeme Meyers 259W Geoffrey Earl 260W Gerardus Tacken 260W replacement Elizabeth Kelt 261W R A & M R Greenfield 262W Linda Wright 263W Darryl Schick 264W Gordon Holmes 265W Brenda Chawner & John Rankin 266W Donald E Cole 267W, 267aW Sue Stewart 268W Keith Winstone 269W Ian Milligan Financial Success Group 270W Lannes Johnson 271W John Logan 272W Ivan Stott 273W Elizabeth Barrowman 274W Neil & Lynette Trotter 275W Kevin Beesley 276W Barry Wah Lee 277 John & Paula Garwood 278W Nancy Peterson 279W Brendan Vallings 280W Lee A Sinclair 281W Hamish Coleman 282W Chris Hopper 283W Alfred Memelink 284W Robin Whalley 285W Maurice & Diana Lubbock 286W Julie & Dimitri Tretchikoff 286W replacement No name 287W Grant Harris 288W John Pearce 289W Ian Barnes 48 No. Name 290W Jennifer Gibb 291W Julius Spencer 292W Bridget Hodgkinson 293W Graham D Hunt 294W William J Kaulback 295W Ronald L Griffiths 296W Walter & Sue Schultz 297W Max Tarr, Max Tarr Electrical Ltd 298W Michael J Newsome 299W Keith Ferguson 300W M L Newman 302W Jonathan Olsen 303W Frank Stewart 304W Marshall Gray 305W Terry Pike 306 David Lawton 307W Peter Scott & Graham Lawrence, KPMG 308W K A Rainey, Sothertons Ltd 309W Henry Michael Horton 310W J T Ward 311W H N Goddard 312W Lesley Airey 312W replacement Graeme Wickham 313W Bill and Joy Rea 313W replacement Mary Symmans 315W Ian & Lynette Carson 316W Dr Jeremy O Cooper 317W Neil Harvey 317aW Neil Harvey 318W Chris Hopper 319W John Peet 320W J M & N V Bell 321W (unable to read name) & Ronald Hill 322W Peter Kusabs 323W Joan Crabtree 323W replacement David Broughton 324W K M Giffney 49 No. Name 325W P R W Ellis 326W John Seton, Claymore 327W J P Bissett 328W L D Chabra 329W Don Capper 330W H J Tuck 331W Barry E Ward 331W replacement Pamela Batten 332W Andrew McLean 333W Guy Malthus 334W Keith Malcolm Howie 334W replacement Diana Crombie 335W G Hansard 336W S Pearce 337W Phil & Pam Hansen 338, 338a Richard Barker 339W David Cheape 340W Deryk & Nancy Lawrence 341W Jane Gertrude (Trudie) Wagstaff 342W Tony Sullivan 343W Peter & Vicki Hyde 344W J E Bennett 345W J L H Williams 346W S A Williams 347W John & Mirabel Sievers 348W No name 349W, 349a-bW Mrs S M Stevens 350W Peter & Jenny Alison 351W No name 352W Eion Edgar, Forsyth Barr Group Ltd 353W Alistair Edmond 354W Paul Tindill 355 Hugh Perrett 355a Hugh Perrett 356W Robert & Doris Bilton 357W Duncan Balmer, FMG Investment Advisors 358W John & Anne Barry 50 No. Name 359W Drs Ian& Joanna McKinnon 360W Pete Thomas 361W Dr Michael Ashby 362W Dr Greg Day 363W Dr Andrew Miller 364W Greg Stump 365W Patrick T Holmes 366W Susan Riddell 367W Michael Rowarth 368 Greg van Schaardenburg 369W Mark & Carol Stevenson 370W Robyn Boocock 371W Stephen Golledge 372W Edwina Charlett-Green 373W Ian Coppins 374W Adrian Meys 375W Peter Milner 376W Doug Leighton 377W Hugh A Mawson 378W John Charlett-Green 379W Trevor L Freeman 380W No name 381W David Paulin 382W Anonymous 383W No name 384W Dorothy Toogood 385W Michael Walshe 386W Graeme & Deborah Ballantyne 387W David Meys 388W K W McCook 389W David Murphy 390W Dr Michael Hurley 391W Kay Panther 392W Philip de Lisle, Axiome Consultants Ltd 394W Philippa Dyer 395W Karin Won 396W Ken Baldock 51 No. Name 397W Donald Roxburgh 398W Kent MacLachlan 399W Simon Ritchie 400W Rob & Jenny Gill, Tresco Ltd 401W Ben Saunders 402W Timothy Ross 403W Antony & Margaret Morris 404W Donald MacFarlan 405W John Fraser 406W John & Marian O’Connell 407W Hugh Morgan 408W Peter Kennerley 409W John Hall 410W Drew Parsons 411W Marion & Bryan Merriman 412W Pilar Heffernan 413 Arthur Jacobson 414W Amanda & Paul Day 416W H H & Y C Jardine 417W David Weikart 418W Alan Kemp 419W Dr David Innes 420W Kurian Verghese 421W Sheryl Setter 422W Chris Hatton 423W Bruce & Joanna Blomfield 424W Michael & Margaret Sommerville 425W Dr Janek S Januszkiewicz 426W John Hartley 427W John Stewart 428W Fiona Gray 429W Tim Gorton 430W David Clegg 431W Ronda Rickman 432W Heather Wagstaff 433W Neil Wagstaff 434W Kavita Deobhakta 52 No. Name 435W Frank Burns 436W Bruce Sanderson 437W No Name 438W Cameron Watson, ABN AMRO Craigs 439W Jasmine Archer 440, 440a Mark Houghton, Saxe-Coburg Ltd 441W M S & B M Haslett 442W Philip Bunker 443W James Bell Donald & Beverley Ann Wilson-Donald 444W Scott Bready 445W John Feringa 446W Ron Speirs 447W John & Hannah van der Vegte 448W Andrew J Skokandich, AJS Chartered Accountants Ltd 449W Don McNicoll 450W Linda Stansfield 451W John & Jill Ronald 452W R S W Skinner 453W Bryan Johnson 454W John Newsham 455W Richard Procter 456W Mark Winter, Oyster Property Group Ltd 457 Alan Reid 458W Mike Byrnes, Vivo Ltd 459W Kerry Coulton 461W Alison Barr 463W No name 464 John A Russell 465W John Anthony Butler 466W Dr Rob Ebert 469W Stephen & Robyn Cox 470W P Edward 472W Neville Miller 473W Robyn & Michael Oliver 474W Robert B Armstrong 475W Dorothy H Ogilvie 476W Tony Barr 53 No. Name 477 Karen Barrett 478Wa Dr GA & Mrs ML Nicholls 480W H C Hare 481W N E G (Gain) Zohrab 482W Graham Still 483W No name 484W Dr Geoffrey Pritchard 485W Brian Alexander McNamara 486W Annette Jean McNamara 487W Trevor Denis Nugent 488W C A Yandle 489W Brian Setter 490 Dr David Cole 491W, 491aW Dr Brian M Thomson 493, 493a Lloyd J Christie 495 Andrew Harmos 497W Gerald Bruce-Smith 498W H A Goddard 499W Derek Donald Robison 500 D J T Kinnell 501 Michael Bullen 502 Howard & Dorothy McHattie 504W Graeme Scrivener 505, 505a Mr Allen H Smith, on behalf of The NZ Shareholders Assoc (BOP Branch) 506W David R Wood 507W Rob L F Snoep 508W No name 509 David Wensley 509A David Wensley 511W Rachel John 512W Russell Comber 513 David Barton 514W R J Hutson 515W Name on covering letter – not attached 516W R D Walls 517W D A Bilkey 518W J A Bilkey 54 No. Name 519W Greg Daulton 520W Bruce A & Judith A Cunningham 521W JM Wilson & MT Macdonald 522W Sarah Taylor 523W James & Sophie Rofe 524W Brian Otto 525W Basil Gimblett 526W No name 527W No name 528W SimonTyler 529W D W Frengley 530W Murray Hill 531W R K Norman 532W Adrian Abraham & Cory Hope 533W John Parker 534W, 534aW Antony Ogilvie 535W JL & VE Meijer 536W Ian Parton 537W WR & FM Wilkinson 538 James Connell 539 Alan & Sue Upritchard 540W Kevin Such 541W Andrzej Tomecki 542W Anonymous 543W No name 544W No name 545W Anonymous 546W, 546aW, 546bW Anonymous 547W Graham Hull 548W Anonymous 549W Laurie Williams 550W RJ & \_\_Watson 561 W Verhoeven 562 G E O’Connor, New Zealand Policy Association 570a Richard Entwistle 589a Greg Knowles, KPMG 593 Westpac Banking Corporation New Zealand Division, BT Funds 55 No. Name Management NZ Limited 596, 596b Investment Savings & Insurance Association of NZ Inc 597 John Shewan, Paul Mersi, PricewaterhouseCoopers 597a Teresa Farac, PricewaterhouseCoopers 597b G J Palmer, PricewaterhouseCoopers 598 Trustees Executors Limited 599 Kingfish Limited 600 Fisher Funds Management Limited 601 Petroleum Exploration and Production Association of NZ 602W Deborah Marris, ANZ National Bank Ltd 603 Lance Jenkins, Goldman Sachs JBWere 604W BL Mason, Meat Industry Superannuation Scheme 605 Chris Horton 606 Edgar Brooker 607 Rodney Jones, Wigram Capital Advisors Ltd 608 ING 609W AMA Capital Management 610 Murray Lazelle, Lazelle Associates Ltd 611 Simon Tompkins, New Zealand Assets Management Ltd 612, 612b Maunsell Ltd 613W Alastair McBeth, Lynette Smith, Phillips Fox 614W Li Mae Loke, Plan B Financial Services Ltd 615W Business NZ 616W Christine Low, Heather Smith, National Council of Women 617W Ian Millard 618W Gillian Robertson, The Retire Funds 619W John Cheese 620W Garry Carleton 621W WMG Yovich 622W Graham Hammond 623W Audrey Williamson 624W J G Crane, DFA Australia Limited (Dimensional) 625W Richard Ridout 626W JF & LM Stewart 627W Millennium Super Scheme 628W Eric & Susan Scharpf 629W H C Holmes 56 No. Name 630 John Lockie, Lockie & Associates Ltd 631, 631a R P Deeble 632W Jocelyn Stott 633W Traudi Stott 634W Margaret Cooper, George Slade 635W Matthew Mimms, The Investment Store Ltd 636W EE & SM Ogier 637W Catherine Pritchard 638W PS Quaid, Gabites Limited 639W John Galt 640W State Street Global Advisors 641W DL Somers-Edgar, Money Managers 642W Linnet Stott 643W Murray Wratt 644W Alan & Mary Cubie 645W D D Fergusson 646W MJ & JL Kenna 647W George Cheavin 648 Susan McCarthy 649W Francis Stott 650W Alan Norcott 651W Suzanne Norcott 652W Carl Julius 653W Lyle Dodds 654W Graeme Upritchard 655W MJH Hermans 656W Adrian Hare 657W DJ Studholme, Sothertons 658 ID MacGregor 659, 659a Bernard Gresham, Rutherford Rede (Wgtn) Ltd 660 Dirk Hudig 661 Tom Reynolds 662 Simon Wilkinson, Virionyx Corporation Ltd 663, 663a JB & MJ Cooke 664 Richard Francis Locke, Virionyx Corporation 665 Peter & Lauris Roberts 666 Ed Crampton 57 No. Name 667 David Castle 668 Oliver Saint 669 Lloyd Greenfield 670 Gary Swift 671 Peter Taylor 672 Pat Sheehan, PSBG 673 Colin Clarke 674W Waterfront Industry Superannuation Fund 675W Gerald Fitzgerald 676W Julie Woolner 677W Ted Montague 678W Tony Gray, Mighty River Power 679W Michael Jeffs, JBWere Transtasman Equity Unit Trust 680W Simon Cairncross 681W DR & EJ Hopwood 682W John Williamson, Private Trust Company Ltd 683W Jeremy Thompson, Financial Strategies 684W Joanne Willet 685W Andrea Wildes 686W Peter Austwick 687W Janet John 688W Wayne Thomas 689W Mark Holdsworth 690W Robert John 691W Stephen Hansen 692W Lyon Family Trust 693W Oscar Grant 694W WJ & MK Grant 695W K Campbell 696W Peter Diessl 697W JM & JM Scott 698W Barbara Mace 699W Richard Mace 700W Beverley Wallis 701W Marilyn Powell 702W Don & Heather Wallace 703W Georgina Ellis-Williams 58 No. Name 704W Thomas O’Donnell 705W David Sharman 706W Diana Stronach 707W Steve Joffe 708W John White 709W WA & J Fraser 710W Julia Gardiner 711W C Rimmer 712W Craig Leishman 713W Keith Carley 714W JJK Spiers 715W BH & PA Croft 716W No name 717W Brian Nelson 718W Judith Van Geest 719W Max Saunders 720W Rod Omnet 721W JI Grant 722W Jon & Sue Monk 723W GJ & TJE Palma 724W Jock Schoeller 725W Anthony Ingle 726W MJ Payne 727W Vincent Maffey 728W Olive Weddell 729W Geof Nightingale, Ernst & Young Ltd 730W Patricia Langford 731W KR & C Rivers 732W RAJ Britton 733W Graeme Stokes 734W The Todd Corporation Limited 735W No name 736W Jacqueline Valentine 737W Eric & Raewyn Shiels 738W Douglas Martin 739W Martin Watt 740W A J Fairbairn 59 No. Name 741W N R Barlow 742W G J Donkin 743W David Carter 744W Clive Roberts 745W John McDaniel 746W Clare Hart 747W Craig Hart 748W DJ & MA Hamilton 749W Ivan James 750W Denis Smith 751W Paul Dobosn 752W Barry Pearson 753W JL Valentine 754W Nicholas Olson 755W R G Tallon 756W Richard Nelson, Taylor Investment Ltd 757W Alan & Wendy Plucke 758W Gerald Gibbard 759W T A Jones 760W L C Challis 761W A K Curran 762W John Garland 763W Ian Gardiner 764W Philip Wrigley 765W Jeff Penno 766W Amanda Martin 767W Robert Lawford 768W A R Martin 769W Bruce Webster, Webster & Company Ltd 770W Maurice Walsh 771W Susan Iorns 772W Brian & Maureen Connor 773W Robin Scoular 774W Laraine Hughes 775W John Hayes 776W Caroline Sheppherd 777W Margaret Hudspith 60 No. Name 778W J C Burdon 779W Humphrey Nisbet 780W David Spokes 781W Brett Flintoff, Flintoffs Chartered Accountants Ltd 782W A Finlayson 783W C J Colbert 784W Barbara Waller 785W Brian & Margaret Green 786W Monica & Christopher Cotter 787W Paul Muir 788W Donald Foster 789W No name 790W J G Stevens 791W Ian Greaves 792W Adrian Rickards 793W R P Stevens 794W Colleen Johnson 795W Barry & Lai Thornton 796W Nigel Barak 797W F G Grover 798W Syd & Ellen Phipps 799W R J Galloway 800W Michael & Margaret Tomlinson 801W M A Walsh 802W S & R Cope 803W T A Bliss 804W Ralph Samuelson 805W Richard Lamb 806W Bret Jackson 807W James Porteous 808W Joanna Bason 809W Barbara & Tony Johnson 810 D Cope 811W Nigel Harwood 812W Barbara & Jim Steele 813W David Emanuel 814W Garry Moore 61 No. Name 815W David Kingston 816 Martin Dowse 817W Patricia Northey 818W William Stevens 819W Penny Sawyer 820W Janet Hayden, Goodman Fielder,(NZ) Retirement Plan 821W Deryk, & Nancy Lawrence 822W W E Cadwallader 823W Andrew McLean 824W Neil Ockwell 825W Richard & Mary Talbot 826W Jean & Don Reeve 827W A M Geddes 828W VM & RG Clarke 829W Michael Brockman 830W Eric Millar 831W MC & EA Willis 832W John Walker 833W ST Gribbon 834W Jacqueline Beder 835W Jaimes Wood 836W Jean Mulvay 837W Doug & Helen Gilbert 838W Bruce & Joanna Blomfield 838W replacement No name 839W Bruce Sanderson 840W Oliver Roberts 841W RG & B Brown 842W Ray Hall 843W Michael Sidey 844W Mark Etheridge 845W John Millar 846W Michelle Haycock 847W Peter Mancell, Asset Class Investors Association 848, 848aW Judith Graykowski 849W CW Archibald 850W H & EE Turton 62 No. Name 851W John France 852W Jonathan Simcock 853W CJ Ingram 854W Michael Hay 855W Pip Irwin, Northplan Investment Specialists 855aW Mark K Forsyth, Northplan Investments 856W Alan Wood 857W Richard & Healther Kells 858W Graham Hall 859W R L Scott 860W Sheila Emslie 861W Sally Hansen 862W Judy Breward 863W Warwick Hay 864W Michael Adler 865W FG Thompson 866W Christine Mora 867W Gerry Williams 868W Patrick Barnes 869W JFG Ball 870W Stanley Halliwell 871W Graeme Samson 872W Warren Austad 873W DG Hamer 874W Mark Alford 875W Philip Jordan 876W Simon Myhre 877W Simon Lynskey 878 John Street 879 John & Barbara Jillett 880 First NZ Capital 881 Perpetual Trust Limited 882W Lee Stevens 883W Ian Holm 884W John Gordon 885W Paul Drury 886W Mary Foster 63 No. Name 887W Malcolm Brown 888W James Domett 889W Warren West 890W Adam Currey 891W Adrian Steves 892W Barbara Dyer 893W Anthony Hopkins 894W Bevan Murphy 895W Bill Currey, Currey Financial Services Ltd 896W Bill Forster 897W Robert Strevens 898W David Roke 899W David Speight 900W Rex Pearson 901W Robin Dowie 902W Diana & Kerry Drumm 903W Beryl Carr 904W Don McCormack 905W DB Scott 906W Dougal Rillstone 907W Erik Olssen 908W Ian Billings 909W Robert Fowler 910W Fraser Boddy 911W Ian and Linda Rogerson 911W replacement Olwyn Musgrove 912W Ian Diamond 913W Joan Gilchrist 914W Jaimes Wood 914W replacement Niels Campbell, Bell Gully for Dominion Funds Group 915W Margaret Mollison 916W James Makaweo 917W Private 918W John Ewins 919W Jordan Cornes 920W John Giblin 921W John Hill, Apex Financials Services Group 64 No. Name 922W Greg Barclay, Claymore 923W Kevin Youngman 924W Capital Investment Planning Ltd 925W Keith Carley 926 Martin Young & Lawrence Rose 927 Frances Lee 928W RKJ Lee 929W Mike Stanbridge 930W No name 931W Robin & B R Mann 932W Nancy Gordon 933W Robert Gordon 934W Dean Carroll 935W Margaret Bird 936 Frank Aldridge, William Stevens, Cameron Watson, ABN AMRO Craigs 937W Mike Beal Missing 939W Barry Murphy 940W Nancy Synnestvedt 941W Alistair Setter 942W Margaret Coogan 943W Pearces 944W RS Jebson 945W Roger Browne 946W Ross Taylor 947W John Hill 948W Shelley Hanna 949W Stan Andis, SJ & PA Andis Family Trust 950W Peter Taylor 951W Peter Wilson 952W Paul Quinn 953W Richard Mace 954W Richard Browning 955W Richard Hancock 956W AV Steele 957W Stephen Mills 958W Roger White 65 No. Name 959W Vincent Pooch, key Business Partners Limited 960W David Seton 961W Ken Wilson 962W RW Hughes 963W Annelies, Johhn, Mark, Paul Campbell 964W Kevin Prince & Susan Enticott 965W Greg Haddon, Deloitte 966 David Stevens, New Zealand Harbours Superannuation Plan 967W Warren Roper 968W Murray Finch 969W, 969aW, 969bW Alan Kirk 970W Martin & Vanya Crocker 971W Susan Peacock 972W Jas Laird 973W Colin Hooker 974W Clyde Smith 975W Andrew Smith 976 William Stevens, ABN Amro Craigs 977W Niels Campbell, Bell Gully 978W Eugen Trombitas, PricewaterhouseCoopers, The World Swim From Malaria Foundation 979W John Gordon 980W No name 981W Andrew Jeffs 982W John Jackson 983W Rod Stichbury 984W Grant & Marie McDonald 985W Bruce Beath 986W Ian & Barbara Murray 987W Lisa Marusich, HSBC 988W Michael Stanley, American Chamber of Commerce in New Zealand 989W Richard & Sarah Mayes 990W Kim Manson 991W Brian Dodds, Shand, Thomson Ltd 992W MDH Fish 993W Adrian Bodley 994W George Wood 995W Tony Waygood 66 No. Name 996W Claire Bruell 997W RA Davidson 998W Harry Thompson 999W Noel Thompson 1000W John Fisher 1001W James Stevens 1002W DM & SE Carden 1003 Bradely Nuttall Ltd 1004W JWW, EM & PC Sloggett 1005W Jane Pilkington 1006W Greg Marr 1007W Michelle Sims & Andrew Graham 1008W Michelle Perkins 1009W Lindsay & Catherine Maw 1010W Vagn Klubien 1011W Can’t read name 1012W Tom Jackson & Robyn Reid 1013W GR & SC Naish 1014W John Gordon 1015W Susan Drew 1016W John Denton 1017W Julian Thompson 1018W Simon and Janet Pay 1019W Shona Bigham 1020W John Judge 1021W PE Bond Smith 1022W DN MacLeod 1023W KM Laird 1024W JE Fletcher 1025W Fernanda Twidle 1026W Adrian Doyle 1027W EH & BL Lucas 1028W WL Wright 1029W Kevin Davison 1030W Cameron Watson 1030W replacement Dillon O’Sullivan, Northplan Investments 1031W Brenda Halliday 67 No. Name 1032W P Somerville 1033W SV & AS Mayadeo 1034W Anthony Ogilvie 1035W Matthew Smith 1036W DRW Hall 1037W RG Myers 1038W W S & AL Bond-Smith 1039W Michelle Hull 1040W RH Taylor, Taylor Grant Tesiram 1041W David McConnochie, Northplan Investment Specialists 1042W Ken & Heather Lawn 1043W Shannon Walsh 1044W Christopher Allen 1045W John & Kirsty Reeves 1046W Alan Foster 1047W Rex Frye 1048W Martin Kinder 1049W L Evans 1050W AH Stuart Bridgman 1051 Anthony Keeper 1052W Geoffrey Lamb 1053W No name 1054W Stephen Mills 1054W replacement Andrea Booker 1055W JM Richardson 1056W Robert Kyle 1057W Anonymous 1057W replacement J Crabtree 1058W Neil Carter 1059W RE Webber 1060W Tony Wallace 1061W Gavin Dann 1062W Ian & Patricia Abbott 1063W RJ Lodge 1064W JD Lynch 1065W Martin Kinder, Te Tahuna Trust 1066W Janet Milne 68 No. Name 1067W AI Boddy 1068W AA Cooper 1069W Rob Buckett 1070W Lynette Keeper 1071W Timothy Fletcher 1072W AW Bayliss 1073W Brian Blackford 1074W No name 1075W RT & EA Young 1076W Kerryn Downey 1077W Can’t read name 1078W Jhn Jackson 1079W Wendy Brackstone 1080W Gregory Marshall 1081W Warwick Smith 1082W MPD Bonifant 1083W WR Grieve 1084W Kevin O’Connor 1085W IS Frame, Rangatira 1086W BD Wilkinson, Capital Economics Ltd 1087W Robert Todd 1087W replacement Barbara Gatley 1088W Max Smith, Ritchie Mein, Robin Harrison, Barbara Duff, Peter Heffernan, Henk van Lier, NZ Shareholders Association Inc 1089W Guy Mahony 1090W BJ Wheeler 1091W Peter Coltman 1092W Helen Cox 1093W Colin Crombie 1094W Sandra Kyle 1095W Vivian Mack 1096W Roger Hynd 1097W Diana Power 1098W Kenneth Ovenden 1099W Alistair Setter 1100W AA Bolton 1101W Michael Power 1102W RA Scampton 69 No. Name 1103W Pamela Williams 1104W JR Lowe 1105W Anthony Mulcock 1106W BA Beard 1107A Ann Martin, Age Concern New Zealand 1108W Alan Best 1109W Allan Bigham 1110W Paul Tuckey 1111W B Upton 1112W No name 1113W David & Margaret Harrop 1114W Graeme Clark 1115W Jerry Stockdale 1116W Peter & Marget Brown 1117W Bill Forster 1118W CG Lever 1119W Paul Elwell-Sutton 1120W Bruce Fraser 1121W David Pearce 1122W Shaun Gallagher, Financial Wisdom 1123W Murray Butts 1124W Donald Johnston 1125W No name 1126W Nancy Synnestvedt 1127W G J Horne 1128W Sarah Britton 1129W No name 1130W Stuart McNicoll 1131 David Patterson 1132 David Sawtell 1133 Deborah Carlyon & Susanna Stuart, Stuart & Carlyon Ltd 1134 Paul Devereux 1135 Robert Meikle 1136 John Cliffe, Cliffe Consulting 1137 PricewaterhouseCoopers 1138 Charles Goodwin, Perpetual Trust Limited 1139W Graham Evans 70 No. Name 1140 Missing 1141, 1141a MCA NZ Limited 1142, 1142a Carter Hold Harvey Employee Benefits Plan & Carter Holt Harvey Retirement Plan 1143, 1143a-b Dr Susan St John, Michael Littlewood, University of Auckland 1144, 1144a-c & 1144e Warren Head, Head Consultants Ltd 1145 Bruce Bernacchi, General Electric 1147 Chip Dawson, Software New Zealand 1148 Frank Aldridge, ABN AMRO Craigs 1149, 1149a Helen & David Meale 1150W David Scott 1151W David Franks 1152W David Haywood 1153W Don Broad, Broadbase Otago 1154W Donald Armstrong 1155W Doree Gerold 1156W Edith Eaton 1157W Elaine Mildren 1158W Elizabeth Jones 1159W Mr & Mrs Shehan 1160W DM & JM O’Meara 1161W Gail Mosey 1162W Gary Morgan, Morgan Taylor Limited 1163W Gavin Ellis 1164W Ian Bell, Pita Alexander, Paul Alexander, Wealth Management Services Ltd 1165W Ian & Julie Vickers 1166W, 1166aW Lesley Dudding 1167W New Zealand Investment Trust 1168W JMT Wells Missing 1170W Kenn Butler 1171W Kevin Brewer 1172 KW & CL Watkins 1173W Michael & Esther Radlinski 1174W Chris Taylor 1175W Suzanne Kinnaird 1176W Terry Baucher, Baucher Consulting Limited 71 No. Name 1177W Terry Mansfield 1178W Tim & Elizabeth Jelleyman 1179W Thomas Gaskell 1180W Tim McLean & Tania McNae 1181W Trevor Oliver 1182W, 1182Wa Trevor Smith 1183W Vicki Watson, Aspen Investments 1184 Missing 1185W Wallace & Elizabeth Gracewood 1186W Craig Rickit 1187W Warwick Marriott 1188W Wayne Petersen 1189W Wendy Dykes 1190 Diversified Investment Strategies Ltd 1191W Stephen Styants 1192W Alistair Tod 1193W Allister Mora 1194W Andrew Burn 1195 Missing 1196W Andrew Jones 1197W AD McEwen 1198W Arthur Northcote 1199W, 1199aW Barry Kirkland 1200W W McKinlay 1201 Name in letter – not attached 1202W Sir Ronald Trotter 1203W Brian Sole 1204W Gwen & Chris Bossley 1205W Joan Barry 1206W Colin Christian 1207W Daniel Pearce 1208W Dennis Dowie 1209 Derek Olphert 1210 Li Wolf 1211 Name in letter – not attached 1212W Rob Earles 1213W No name 72 No. Name 1214W G J Powell 1215W Kevin Beck & Lyn Howe 1216W Leigh Overton 1217W Elizabeth & Campbell Mitchell 1218 Louis Boulanger, Now Limited 1219W Mr GV & Mrs BM Mutch 1220W Wallace & Annaliese Gilbert 1221 Ernst & Young 1222W Graham Hammond 1223W Graham Johnson 1224W Robert Nicoll 1225W Steven Darnold 1226W Greg Haddon, Deloitte 1227W Alan Grove, The Grove Family Trust 1228W Honor Hurly 1229W Charles Hutton 1230W Ian & Linda Rogerson 1231W John Robson 1232W David & Deborah Crowe 1233W Malcolm & Doreen McPhee 1234 Bill Roberts 1235W Marian Carter 1236W Mark Bathurst & Libby Harrison 1237W Mark Lister 1238W Max Stevenson 1239W Michael Roberts, Blackmore Virtue & Owens 1240 John Crawford 1241 Missing 1242 Missing 1243 Missing 1244W Chas & Gay Thorburn 1245W Michael Nudds 1246W Clair A Jewell & Simon C Mowbray 1247W Neil Carter 1247W replacement Darryn Crothall 1248W Neville & Bronwyn Bell 1249W Neville Horne 73 No. Name 1250W Nick & Marg Webb 1251W Okke Hansen 1252W F Owen Cleave 1253W Patrick & Jean Klemp 1254W Paul Davidson 1255W Paul Tudor & Teresa Seux 1256W Peter Rea 1257W Christine & Phillip Dooney 1258W Karen O’Connor 1259W Richard 1260W Regan Carey 1261W Janet Myers 1262W Bill and Lee Burdon 1263W Robert Black 1264W Robert Wynne 1265W Selwyn Parker, Broadbase Tauranga Ltd 1266W Stephen Barnes 1267W Stephen Fitzjohn, Thrive & Survive Ltd, Think Money 1268W Stephen Parr 1269W Glenis Marsden 1270W Mark Alford 1270W replacement Stan Martin 1271W Richard Ridout 1272W EH & BL Lucas 1272W replacement Brian Johnston, Greerton Bible Church 1273W David Gregg 1274W Richard Boon, Artefact Partners 1275W William Burton 1275W replacement Shiu Chun Ho 1276W Bill Hurlstone 1277W Graeme & Deborah Ballantyne 1278W T & M Hodgson 1279, 1279WA Thomas Pippos, Deloitte 1279A Thomas Pippos, Mike Shaw Deloitte 1280W Matthew Underwood 1281W Alison Barr 1282W Joanne Hodge, Bell Gully 74 No. Name 1283W Details to be confidential 1284W Evelyn Seewald 1285W Gavin Treadgold 1286W Ross Weenink 1287W Patricia Shiel 1288W Stephen Martin 1289W Steve Tunnicliffe, Hydro & General Engineering Ltd 1290W S Macdonald 1291W Keith Morrison 1292W Lew Truscott 1293W MR & MRS W S Couper 1294W Wendy K Brackstone 1295W Ray Hill 1296W Michael Harris & William Bailey 1297W Richard Butler 1298W Roger & Valerie Green 1299W Brian Bain 1300W Richard Fisher, Apex Financial Services Group 1301W Robert & Valerie Kelly 1302W L Rosemary Everett 1303W Stephen Adam 1304W Scott Teviotdale 1305W Shona & David Garry 1306W Paul Gitmans 1307W W P Judd 1308W PJ Schmuck-Poeschl, A H Poeschl 1309W Rachel Welsh 1310W Noel Jamieson 1311W Jeffrey Hamilton 1312W Mervyn Huxford 1313W Fiona Winchester 1314W Neil & Glenys McGill 1315W Marcus Henry 1316W No name 1317W Margaret Vennell 1318W Mark Howard 1319W Matt, Trace & Elena Abbott 75 No. Name 1320W Maureen Tunnicliffe 1321W Max Fairhall 1322W Michael Keehan 1323W W David Whitney 1324W Leigh Benfield 1325W Lesley Fredericksen 1326W John C Levy Jr 1327W Louis Alfeld 1328W Malcolm Don 1329W Lynette & Bill Louston 1330W DN MacLeod 1331W Susan Fredericksen 1332W Graham Waters 1333 John Street 1333P replacement Private evidence 1334W John Rowlandson 1334W replacement Keith Howie 1335W Graham Jones 1336W Hamish Selby 1337W Ian & Linda Rogerson 1337W replacement Paul Van Koningsveld 1338W Ian Gibbs 1339W Lesley Dudding 1339W Donna & Gary London 1340W James Graham 1341W Jan Power 1342W Name on letter – not attached 1343W Angela Clark 1344W John Bent 1345W John Cheese 1346W John Commins 1347W Kelvin Syms, Northplan, John Perris, Northplan, John Price, Swains 1348W John Giblin 1348W replacement Barry Ward 1349W Graham Johnson 1350W Joy Ladyman 1351W Julian Thompson 76 No. Name 1352W Rodney Jones, Wigram Capital Advisors Ltd 1353 Kathryn Jones 1354W Keith Rogerson 1355W Terry Hibbitt, James Keat 1356W Stephen Anderson 1357W No name 1358W Details to be confidential 1359W Roger Turner 1360W No name 1361W Neil Taylor 1362W Name in letter- not attached 1363W No name 1364W Details confidential 1365W No name 1366W Ruth Galloway 1367W No name 1368W Jenny Williams 1369W Tony Johnston 1370W Name on letter – not attached 1371W Sue Piercey 1372W Anonymous 1373W Anonymous 1374W Matthew Underwood 1374W replacement O R Gilbert 1375 W David McGiven 1376W Lynette Scott 1377 Missing 1378W Robert & Esther Joe 1379W Denis Trotman 1380W Neville & Margaret Hay 1381W Colin Strang, Colin Strang Financial Services Ltd 1382W Equity Investment Advisers & Sharebrokers Ltd 1383W Fady Mishriki 1384W Gabrielle Wilson, Gabrielle Wilson Ltd 1385W Adrian Januszkiewicz 1386W Janine Lee 1387W Lindsay Brown 77 No. Name 1388W Korbinian Poschl 1389 Kim Bennett 1390 Missing 1391 Anthony Conroy 1392 John Galvin, JGFP Ltd 1393W Susan Brodziak 1394W Nick Williams, First NZ Capital 1395W Graham Thiele 1396W H C Ford 1397W PJ King 1398W Tony Rigby 1399W Robert Loosley 1400W Mark Dunwoodie 1401W Barry & Mary McDonald 1402W Ian Riley 1403W Jan Solbak 1404W Jim Marshall 1405W RE Henstock 1406W Peter & Deidre McCrea 1407W R & M Evans 1408W Neil Dowsett 1409W Rex Ward 1410W Joan Hall 1411W Linda Biggs 1412W Paul Hicks 1413W Brent Neal 1414W Jim & Diane Haimes 1415W Gary Ballinger 1416W Brian Steele, Shoreline Partners 1417W Ruth Hall 1418W Duncan Ingram 1419W Wayne Leahy 1420W Alastair Swan 1421W Andrew Williams 1422W Barrie Townsend 1423W Joanna Ewing 1424W Scott Gilmour 78 No. Name 1425W Brian & Anne Davis 1426W Bonni Wilde 1427W Tiffany Bower 1428W Ewen & Ngaire McDonald 1429W Megan Young 1430W Michelle Panther 1431W John Mallinson 1432W Alastair Stark 1433W Terry &Barbara Cass 1434W Patrick Conor 1435W Tony Hogg 1436W Leah McCann 1437W John Musgrove 1438W Robert Good 1439W Anne Carter 1440W Peter Turner 1441W Scott Newman 1442W Peter & Cleone Blomfield 1443W Claire Jenkinson-Johns 1444W Lauren Maser 1445W Jonathan Spink 1446W Bernard O’Neill 1447W Barry Poole, Hardwood Management 1448W Caroline Kirkpatrick 1449W Sandy Grove for Dave & Sunita Finney 1450W Details confidential 1451W Sandy Grove for Ganesh & Raewyn Mahadevan 1452W Trevor Knopp 1453W Edward Stockley 1454W Details confidential 1455W IS Frame, Rangatira Ltd 1455W replacement Frances Lawrence 1456W Christine McIntosh 1457W Dean Coutts 1458W Craig Empson 1459W Darren Klemp 1460W Details confidential 79 No. Name 1461W Christopher Lynskey 1462W Details confidential 1463W David Lont 1464W Anonymous 1465W Details confidential 1466W Details confidential 1467W Details confidential 1468W Details confidential 1469W Details confidential 1470W Details confidential 1471W Details confidential 1472W Details confidential 1473W Details confidential 1474W Neil Carter 1474 replacement P R W Ellis 1475W Brian & Brenda Parker 1476W John Gallaher 1477W Details confidential 1478 Mercer Investment Consulting 1479W Details confidential 1480W Hamish McPhail, the Wealthcare Group 1481W Bruce Mckay 1482 Brian Dodds 1482W replacement Robert Nicoll 1483W Alan Caudwell 1484 replacement Alexander Wilson 1484W replacement Cheryll Hopping 1485W Derek Brewster 1485W replacement R A Davidson 1486W Mike Allen