Page 1 20 March 2009 Government Tax Policy Work Programme 2009–10 High Priority Projects Project Description Tax rate alignment at 30 percent Support alignment of personal, company and trustee tax rates at a maximum of 30% as a desirable medium term goal. Income splitting The confidence and supply agreement between National and United Future includes the development of this policy and its support to first reading. Completion of post-election action plan The Government included tax and student loan measures in its post-election action plan. Most of the tax issues were addressed in the Taxation (Urgent Measures and Annual Rates) Act 2008. Taxation (Business Tax Measures) Bill The bill gives effect to tax changes announced as part of the Government’s package of ass istance measures for small and medium businesses. Taxation (International Taxation, Life Insurance and Remedial Matters) Bill The omnibus taxation bill introduced in July 2008 is with the Finance and Expenditure Committee. Approved Issuer Levy (AIL) and non- resident withholding tax (NRWT) Design a possible exemption from AIL and NRWT for New Zealand bonds issued to non-residents. Base maintenance and broadening Various items in the work programme relate to base maintenance issues. Further base maintenanc e and base broadening issues will continue to arise an d be considered by tax policy officials. Capital Market Development Task Force, Job Summit and other forums Support the work of the Capital Market Development Task Force, the Job Summit and other forums that cover tax issues. Charitable giving Continue work on a range of further tax incentives to encourage a culture of charitable giving in New Zealan d. Child support – shared care Continue work on the better recognition of shared care in the child support formula and work with t he Families Commission on patterns of parenting and costs of children. Double taxation agreements Negotiate a number of doub le tax agreements and updates with various countries. Page 2 Project Description Imputation Review current rules on the use of imputation credits and whether companies should be able to stream imputation credits. The review also covers refundability of imputation credits, particularly to charities. International tax review Phase II is progressing proposals such as extending the active income exemption to non-portfolio FIFs, branches and financial institutions, and relieving NRWT on dividends paid to non-residents from offshore active income. Mutual recognition and the Australian tax review Responding to the invitation from the Australian Treasurer, tax policy officia ls made a submission in October 2008 to the review, “Australia’s Future Tax Sy stem”, making a case for mutual recognition of imputation/franking credits. Transforming Inland Revenue Operational projects that require policy support. Other Projects Project Description Annuities and home equity Consider possible alternative treatments for annuities and home equity release products. Anti-money laundering (AML) and Countering the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) An inter-agency group, led by the Ministry of Justi ce, is working on establishing an AML/CFT regulatory framework. The framework will help to improve New Zealand’s ability to detect and deter financial crime and tax evasion and avoidance. Bank liquidity Consider the tax implications associated with bank liquidity. Banks – regulatory changes Consider changes to the regulatory ru les for banks operating in New Zealand where there are possible tax implications. Binding rulings Consider a number of remedial issues that have been identified. Cross-agency projects Liaise w ith a number of government agencies to prog ress policy where there are tax implications. Capital loss deductions Project currently being scoped to develop options to address business concerns about the lack of deduct ibility of capital losses in certain circumstances. This may incl ude considering depreciation deductions for dealers in land, deductibility of losses on buildings and black hole expenditure. Disputes Consider representations by NZICA and the Law Society relating to the dispute resolution and challenge procedures. Page 3 Project Description Emissions trading scheme (ETS) The ETS introduced by the previ ous government is being reviewed by a special select committee ( expected report due in April 2009). Official s are monitoring the tax consequences. Finance leases Develop proposals to remove ga ps in the rules relating to finance leases. Further issues arising from the recent tax cuts Following enactm ent of the Taxation (Urgent Measur es and Annual Rates) Act 2008 , there is further work on aligning resident withholding tax and PIE rates with the new personal tax rate structure. Gift Duty A number of requests for legislative exemptions to gift duty are being considered. GST – Business to business transactions A further consultative document will be issued, with proposals aimed at protecting the tax base and improving the GST rules. Hybrid financial arrangements The extent of the project is being scoped. International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) – tax consequences The advent of IFRS raises tax consequences for businesse s where tax rules rely on accounting rules. Officials will continue to monitor and assess issues as they arise. Key remedial matters This covers remedial changes across a range of policy, including KiwiSaver, share lending and compliance a nd penalties. Mutuality and non-profit bodies Review the tr ansaction rules between an association an d members and an association and non-memb ers. Parental tax credit The parental tax cred it level is reviewed every three years. Personal tax summaries Potential simpli fication options are being considered. R&D tax credit There are a number of amendments to the R&D tax credit rules that are still to be made. Review of secrecy provisions Develop a more coherent approach to secrecy rules. Review of UOMI and provisional tax rules Undertake wider review of the UOMI and provisional tax rules. Also provide certainty on deductibility of UOMI. Rewrite Advisory Panel Continue with remedial changes. Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) – Phase 2 Develop further tax simplification policies. Trans-Tasman retirement savings portability with Australia Enter a memorandum of understanding with Australia on the portability of retirement savings and make necessary tax changes. Social policy integrity Consider options to address behaviour th at undermines the government’s social assistance programmes.