'Regulatory Impact Statement Makin g KiwiS aver more cost-effective Agency Disclosure Statement This Regulatory Impact Statement has been prepared by Inland Revenue and the Treasury. It provides an analysis of options for changes to KiwiSaver, to boost national savings. These are scheduled to be announced as part ofBudget 201 1. The Government has signalled its desire to focus Budget 2011 on measures which will boost national savings as this will help to address economiclmbalances and reduce New Zealand,s indebtedness, either by enabling current debt to be paid down or by reducing the need for borrowing in the future. As the quickest way for the Govemment to improve national saving and reduce economic imbalances would be to improve its own saving position,l the identifióation and development of options quickly nanowed to those most ü\[ely to reduce Government spending without undermining the primary purpose of KiwiSaver. A key asSumption is that any changes should be directed towards altering the balance of contributions made by each of the contributing parties (the member, their Jmployer and the Çrown) away from public flrnding and towards private saving. Any Crown incãntives to save through KiwiSaver should be directed appropriately. This papei also analyses options for increasing the numbers en¡olled in KiwiSavà, \*d/or increãsing the amo;nt of members, contributions, again with the aim of boosting national savings, and encouraging private savings behaviour that is focused on the long term retum-and specificall| individual retirement. The impacts of each option cannot be easily modelled using historical data, given the relative newness of the KiwiSaver savings model, nor is international comparison ul\*uyr appropriate, given many of KiwiSaver's unique features and New Zealand's TTE model otiaxationi. Our analysis of the options i"s therefore dependent on behavioural assumptions, for which there is minimal empirical evidence, about individuals' and employ"rr' i"rponses to changes in savings incentives and other regulatory requirements, In-módelling the effects on the Net Intemational Investment Position (NIIP), the assumption has been made that additional national savings reduces the cunent account deficit iather than increases overall domestic investment. To the extent that these changes instead boost domestic invsstment, the impact on the NIIP will be smaller. These assumptions are consistent throughout, so \*, huu" greater confidence in the relativity between the varíous results than in their absolute levels. I SavÍng ín New Zeølancl - Icsues øncl Optrbas (The Treasury, September 2 Tu\*". are often classified accordíng to whether income is taxed (T), ta di when income is first earned, secondly when ìnvest ís when income is spent, New Zealand''s TTE appro m come (T), tax is paid on ínvestment income arising from the contributions (T) and withdrawals from te exempt (E). Many other countries have specíal retirement saving vehicles ì¡ât ur" taxed on an EEi basis; so money placed in these vehicles is not taxed when first earned, nor as it compãunds, but it is when it is withdrawn from the fund. We have reconciled, as far as possible, each option for change with the primary pu¡pose for which Kiwisaver was designed, whioh was to provide an easy-access, work-based low-risk produot, which would enable individuals and households who might not be saving enough for their retirement to do so. KiwiSaver was not explicitly designed as an instrument to boost national savings and so, although it can make a positivo contribution, its effectiveness towards this objective is likely to be more limited. We have also recognised that KiwiSaver is less than five years old. Since its launch in July 2007, there have been several significant changes to contribution requirements, which have mostly affected employees and their employers, as well as new providers entering into the KiwiSaver market. The KiwiSaver industry has not experienced any period of stability in which to establish its core products, and this uncertainty and unpredictability is not helpful to either the industry or savers. Any changes made at this point in time should therefore be sustainable and, where possible, use pre-existing features of KiwiSaver rather than introduce new features, Our analysis draws on matters identified by other interestcd agencies, including the Retirement Commissioner and the Govemment Actuary. As the need for Budget secrecy has limited opportunities for formal public consultation in the usual manner under the Generic Tax Policy Process, we have also drawn on the considerations of the Savings Working Group3, which was commissioned by the Minister of Finance in August 2010 to provide a point of referÞnce for the Government in developing its medium-teün savings strategies. The proposals do not impair private property rights, restrict market competition, reduce the incentives on businesses to innovate and invest, or override fundamental common law principles. The proposal to increase the compulsory employer contribution rate at the same time as increasing the minimum employee contribution rate' will lead to some additional costs on businesses that employ staft by increasing labour costs; ìn the short term thís may reduce firm profitability. The additional cost for employers is likely eventually to be reflected in wage settlements for all employees, although this impact should be limited as the economy and nominal wage growth ate expected to strengthen from the end of 2011. "á\*.øø Steve Mack Principal Advisor, Tax Strategy The Treasury 6 April 20l l 3 The SWG comprised seven independent experts in frelds such as taxation law, economics and accounting fl'om the private sector and academia, assisted by policy oftìoials from the Treasury and Inland Revenue. It wos established in August 20 I 0, and províded íts final reporl to the Covernment on 3l January 201 l. Dr Craig Latham Group Manager, Policy Inland Revenue 6 April2011 INTRODUCTION l. This RIS summarises off,rcials' analysis of various changes to I(iwisaver that havebeen considered in order to deliver two objectives: o to help return the Crown to surplus sooner by reducing the fiscal costs of l(iwiSaver; and o to continue to encourage increased levels of private household savings, and a long- term savings habit and asset accumulation, in order to increase well-being and fìnancial independence in retirement. 2. Analysis of each of the key options for change is summarised in the table at paragraph 16. STATUS QUO AND PROBLEM DEFINITION Economic Growth ønd Savìng Levels 3. The Government is concetned that, in recent years, New Zealancl's economic growth perfotmance has been poor by developed country standards, ancl our relative position in the OECD is well below average. In addition, as the Savings Working Group (SWG) noted, New Zealand's low rate of saving has created a dependency on foreign capital to fulfill clomestic investment clemancl. This has created a large and persistent gap between New Zealand's investment attcl saving levels, as reflected in the current account clef,rcit over several decacles. The SWG agreecl with the analysis set out in the Treasury's discussion document4 that this presents two serious economic problems: firstly it makes the New Zealand economy too vulnerable to market shocks; secondly, it has an adverse impact on economic performance, especially growths. 4. In adclition, the Governrnent has signalled its desire to move quickly to recluce Government debt and return to fiscal surplus. Lifting the level of national savings would help to address economic imbalances, recluce New Zealand's indebteclness and thus possibly contribute to improved economic growth. The Govemment has indicated that the focus of Budget 2011 will be on national savings and investment. As noted by the SWG, returning towards fiscal surplus, as well as encouraging private inclividuals to save more, is an important component of irnproving the national savings position. KìwíSuver 5. The objective of I(wiSaver, as set out in the l(iwiSaver Act 2006,is"to encoLtrctge ct long-term savings habit ond qsset accumulation by individuuls who ctre not in a position to enioy stondards o.f litting in retirement similctr to those in pre-retirement". It was not explicitly designed as an instrument to boost national savings per se, but instead to increase individuals' well-being and frnancial independence in retirernent, as a complement to New Zealand Superannuation for those who wish to have more than a basic stanclard of living in retirement. 4 Th" Tr"nrr.y,"Soving in New Zeolanrl", op, cit. s"Saring Ne¡v Zeuktntl: Retlucing I/ulnerabilities ctncl But'riers to Crowllt anrl Prosperiry", Savings Working Croup Final Report to the M inister of Finance, January 20 I I , Section 2. 6, I(iwiSaver was clesigned with features intenclecl to encourage long-term savings, by making it easy and attractive to join, plovicling relatively limitecl opportunities to access savings once enrolled, and providing incliviclual savers with opportunities to exercise as much or as little choice over their savings as they wish to or are able to. Although membership is available to all eligible New Zealand residents, many of the key features of Kiwisaver are those of a work-based superannuation scherne, such as the automatic enrohnent of employees, decluctions at source and (cornpulsory) employer contributions. 7. The numbers enrolling in I(iwiSaver have consistently outstrippecl initial forecasts, and the present membership is double that forecast in 2007. The latest I(iwisaver Evaluation report6 concluded that I(wiSaver's features are working as intended, pafticularly in attracting people into a savings product. It also concluclecl that I(wiSaver has generated some level of uew savings, over and above what would have been saved in the absence of KiwiSaver. 8. KiwiSaver therefore has a potentially significant role to play in increasing national savings, both through the savings contributions made by members, and in promoting awareness about savings and inculcating a savings habit among a large rnajority of the population, However, the cost to the Government is signifìcant and this restricts the benefits to national savings; a recent Cohnar Brunton survey indicates that the percentage of contributions that were "new" savings (as opposecl to cliverted from other forms of saving) at approximately 29Yo7. This is partly because some of the private funcls going into KiwiSaver accounts are being diverted from other savings rather than being aclditional saving, and partly because the Govemment's contribution rneans that inclividuals clo not have to save as much themselves to achieve the same eventual outcornes. OBJECTIVES 9. One of the Governrnent's key goals for 2011 is to build the foundations for a stronger economy. The Government has therefore outlined several objectives, inclucling building savings and investment in New Zealancl. The Prime Minister has signalled the intention to focus Budget 20l l on measures which will boost national saving, by encouraging additional saving from private individuals and through Government efficiency savings. Further information on these objectives was providecl in the Prirne Minister's Statement to Parliament on 8 February 201 t8: Building Scntings and \[nvestment: \[n order to reduce our clependence on .foreign lenders, Nevv Zealctnd neecls to build up the pool o.f Kiwi-owned savings and int¡estment, held by both the Government ctnd everyday New Zeulctnders. Thctt yvill be the J'ocus o.f this year's Budget...The Government yvill olso consicler ways in t'vhich vve can encourage New Zealctnders to increase their prittctte scntings ctnd inttestments. Last year vve aslced the Savings lVorlcing Group to considet' policy options to increcLse nøtionctl savings, and it presented its report last weelc. The Government will consicler this report very carefùlly. We expect to annotmce resulting policy decisions in the 201 I Budget. 6 K¡tvisctver Ewtlttcttir¡n Annttctl repot't, ,/ul.y 2009 -,/utte 2010 prepztrecl by Evaluation Selvices, f nlancl Revenue tbr f trlancl Revetlue, Ministty of Econotnic Developrnent, Housing Ne'uv Zcalancl Corporation, Septernber' 20 t0 7 Col,no, Blutrtou Kiwisrtver Ewtlttcttion: Survey r¿/'lndivicluul.s, Finrrl report,2t July 20 10, section 2.3.t. Kiwisaver tnetnbers wet'e askecl "vlrat they woulcl have clone rvith their contributions if they had not ¡rut thern into Kirvisaver. Tlre estitnate has been rveightecl by incotne to rctlect the fhct that higher incornc inclivicluals who had higlrer rates of substitution contribute a larger proportion of fir¡rds to I(ii,visavcr accot-n.tts. 8Forthefull text olthestctlentenltoParliutnelrt,see!vww.beehive.govt.nzspeech/staternent-parliatneut-l. 4 10. The objectives for any changes to l(wiSaver are: o to help retum the Crown to surplus sooner by reducing the fiscal costs of I(iwiSavere, and o to continue to encourage increased levels of private household savings, and a long- term savings habit and asset accumulation, in order to increase well-being and financial independence in retirement. I 1' Each of the options for change that could meet one or more of these objectives was assessed against a matrix of criteria: o impact on national savings, which was measured as the effect on the Net International Investment Position (NIIP) over ten years o fiscal costs/fiscal savings . economic impacts, such as the likely effect on labour costs ancl hence employer costs and profitability o social welfare and clistributional impacts on those on the lowest income . alignment with the broader l(iwiSaver framework and objective. 12' In making this assessment, the strongest weight was given to measures which reduced fiscal costs, in light of earlier advice from the Treasury that reducing the defrcit sooner is the most impoftant contributor to national saving. Actditional weight was also given to options that did not threaten other aspects of the economic well-being, such as employment, or the social welfare of those on the lowest income. Further analysis of each option, including variations and dependencies between the options, is cliscussed below. 13. On a practical level, attention was also quickly directed towarcls options for change that could be developed in the immediate and short term, given the tight time-frames for delivery in Budget 2011, Certain options were therefore not taken forward, or further consideration within a longer time-frame was recommended, as the necessary consultation and irnplementation work coulcl not be clelivered within the timescale of this Budget. REGULATORY IMPACT ANALYSIS 14, Each of the key options for change that were analysed are sumrtarisecl in the table below, Paragraph options in larger, bold text are recommencled as part of the Budget 20ll savings and investment package: 9 Fiscal costs inclucle both revenuc t'olegone (ESCT cxernption) ancl through Crown contr.ibutions to incliviclual KiwiSaver. accounts (MTC ancl kick-star.t). 0.4-09% The individual effect of lowering the maximum MTC 1,600 The individual effect of lowering the maximum MTC o Will make KiwiSaver less attractive, but may encourage private contribution to raise final accumulations to replace govemment contributions . May mean fewer savings directed from other forms of savings if these become relatively more attractive. o Main impact on those contributing >S52L.43lyear . In conjunction with other changes, consistent with KiwiSaver obiectives. Lowering the maximum member tax credits (MTC) to $521.43 e Level of private contribution required to maxrmrse Government contribution unchanged at $ 1 042. 8 6. . No change to enrployer costs. o Lower as well as higher level contributors affected. o In conjunction with other changes, consistent with KiwiSaver obiectives. 0.3- The individual 0.1%. effect of lowering the matching rate 1,300 The individual effect of lowering the matching rate Lowering the rate of matching payment (to 50c per $1 contribution) 0.5-l%. Combined effect of these two optionslo Combined effect of 2'ooo these two options o Higher rate taxpayers lose more than lower rate tax payers compared to present setting. o Marginal increase of cost to employers. o In conjunction with other changes, consistent with Removing the employer superannuation contrib ution tax (ESCT) exemption . Cost of kick-start expected to decline anyway. o Same absolute impact across income levels. o No change to employer costs. o Inconsistent with KiwiSaver Not modelled separately Reducing or removing the kick- start payment Not modelled separately o Increase in employer costs likely to lead to reduced business profitability in short term, and lower wages over the longer term. ¡ Encourage savings and increased private contributions. o Consistent with KiwiSaver objectives. Increasing compulsory employer contribution rate up to 4% (matching employees' contributions) l0 No,. that the options of lowering rhe maxir¡um MTC and lowering the mte of the MTC rnatching palment are not additive when considered together I I M\*i,r,u,r, MTC of $521.43, and rnatching rate of 5002. Rernoval of ESCT exetnption Increase minimum compulsory employer contribution to 30 Existing Subsidies 0.35-0\_5% o Increase in employer costs likely to lead to reduced business profitability in short term, and lower wages Pa¡a 55 - 59 Reduced Subsidies 1.5-2Y"2700 over the longer terrn. o Makes membership more attractive o Consistent with KiwiSaver objectives Increased default contribution rate for employees to 4Yr Existing subsidies 0.|Yo (30) o No change to employer costs. o Consistent with KiwiSaver obiectives. Encourages Para 53 - 54 Reduced subsidies 1.2-1.8% 2650 individuals who can afford to do so to contribute at higher rates Introducing an intermediate 37u employee contribution rate Not modelled separately Not modelled separately o Provide greater flexibility for KiwiSaver members to choose most appropriate contribution rate o Increases complexity. Inertia meâns take up likely to be low Para62 KiwiSaver membership compulsory Existing subsidies 04.7% (2700) o "Portfolio" costs of mandating savings in funds. o Timing of savings may not suit individual's present clrcumstances. o Significant increase in employer costs. o Inconsistent with KiwiSaver objectives of ..gIIç9¡¡¡-¿ggq1ga1.,, Para40 - 47 Reduced subsidies 2.2% 900 One-off en¡olrnent exercise (4olo default) Existing subsidies 0.14.5% (1500) o Inc¡ease in employer costs. o Consistent with KiwiSaver objectives. Pa¡a48- 52 Reduced subsidies tßo-z.r% 1900 Increasing Íummum employee contribution rate to 3o/o Existing subsidies 0.r4.2% (1 15) o Increases contributions and final accumulations for individual members o A small number may stop contributing, thereby nussmg out on employer and govemment contribution. o Consistent with KiwiSaver obiectives. Para 60 - 63 Reduced subsidies t.4-t.9y" 2600 Lowering minimrrm employee contribution rate (considered in conjunction with compulsion) 1 2 Not modelled separately Not modelled separately . Misapprehension about appropriate level ot retirement s¿yings. . May encourage participation. o Inconsistent with KiwiSave¡ obiectives. Para 64 I 2This olro assumes a l)Yu fall in new and current rnembership. l5' As notecl previously, the Governrnent cornmissionecl the indepenclalnt Savi¡rgs Wor.king Group (SWG) to review mediurn-tenn savings strategies; theil rernit i,ncluded a review of I(wiSaver's contribution to this strategy. Treasury and Inlancl Revenuue officiials providecl support to the SWG. Other policy reports were received by Ministers regarding KiwiSaver's role in the overall savings package. 16. A large number of potential changes to l(wiSaver have been discussed iin the public arena over the last five months because of the SWG review, such as thre KiwiSiaver clefault provider arrangements, managernent of funds, consulner financial literæcy, and provicler fee sttuctures. Some potential options for change were considered by the S\\l/G and are discussed in their interim and final report. Some of their recommenclations are witlhin the remit of other Govemment clepartments; for example, the Ministry of Economic Dexøelopmentt3 recently issuecl a discussion document regarding periodic reporting. l7' This RIS does not replicate all of the discussions about potential oprtions forr changes to I(iwiSaver that have been considered. Insteacl, it summarises officjials' aclvice on the developmeut of a preferred package of feasible changes, assessecl againsü the criteria outlined in paragraph 11, to cleliver the Governrnent's objectives for Budget z0ll. t 8. The options considered in more cletail in cleveloping this preferrecl parckage !v,,€re: Key objective: Recluce the fiscal costs of KiwiSaver . Changing KiwiSaver incentives and entitlement rules: memben'tax creclits (MTCs), initial Crown contribution ("kick-stafi"), ancl employer supemlÌnuationr contribution tax (ESCT) exemption. Seconclary objective: Encourage increasecl levels of private hou¡sehold saving . Increasing membership of l(wiSaver, including some form of curmpulsiton . Increasing contributions frorn existing members . Increasing contributions from employers. 19' In exploring the options uncler each objective, the clirectional'effect on the other objective hacl to be considered. For example, an increase in l(iwiSaver r.rrembership woulcl, in the short term, increase the atnount of "kick-start" payments macle ancl, in the longel term, increase the numbers clairning MTC, An increase in members' contribtution levels coulcl also lead to increased MTC payments; so although both changes might inclrease pri,vate savings, they would move against the objective of reducing the fiscal costs of I(iw¿iSaver. 20. For most optious, there were a number of potential variations. S'onle options were inter- clepenclent, while others were consiclered as cornplementary but indepøndent. Mar-ry of the options consiclered had several sub-variations; for example, varying cnntributlion rates per contributor, or re-sttucturing incentives such as the kick-start ancl memli,,er tax creclit amounts and entitlernent/payment mechanisrns. The rnain variations that were explored are cliscussed uncler each option below. t3ivtEODiscussion Paper,PeriotlicReportingRegulutions.forRetuil KiwisuverScherrzes,re\[easrr:d 0Il\]2l2tl0. KiwiSaver options explorecl Reducing Jìscul costs by chungìng KíwíSuver subsidìes: Generctl 21. One of the biggest impacts the Govemment can have on national savings is by returning to a budget surplus as quickly as is reasonably possible. An effective way to achieve this is by cutting low-value frscal spencling. Under the curent I(iwiSaver settings, there are opportunities to achieve lower fiscal costs while having minimum impact on encouraging household saving. In order to recluce the fiscal costs of I(iwiSaver, the various subsidies must either be reduced or removecl, whether for all members or through more direct targeting of subsidies to particular member groups. 22. Government contributious to KiwiSaver through direct subsidies (kick-start and MTCs) and forgone tax (ESCT exemption) total over $1 billion per annum; this is estimatecl at about 40o/o of total contributions in 2009/10. The current settings mean that Govemment contributions will make up a significant ptoportion of individual I(iwiSaver balances at retirement. Empirical evidence suggests that this expenditure is clelivering poor value in tenns of leveraging additional savings. Some of the savings going into l(iwiSaver accounts are being divertecl from other forms of saving rather than additional saving. Also those individuals saving towarcls a target level of income in retirement may reduce their own level of saving in response to Government contdbutions, since they can achieve the sarne f,rnal accumulations at less expense to themselves. Genuine additional private saving may therefore be as little as $29 for each $100 contributed by Government. 23. Although two thirds of members in the Cohnar Brunton survey citecl Govetnment subsiclies as one of the reasons why they joined l(iwiSaver, other features such as auto- enrolment, ease of contribution (cleductions from pay) ancl employer contributions were also importantta. The ESCT exemption, being relatively hidden, clid not feature in the survey responses. Clrangíng KiwíSaver subsìdíes: ùIember tøx credits 24. The Government cumently pays a member tax credit (MTC), up to a maximum of $1,042.86 ayear) into the account of members agecl over 18, which matches contributions rnade by the individual during the year. MTC payments for the year to 30 June 2010 totalled about $665 million. 25. Reducing the maximum annual MTC payment alone (i.e. without changing the matching rate) would provide imrnediate frscal savings. It woulcl also recluce the total accumulation in inclividual I(iwiSaver accounts, compared to leaving the MTC maxirnum atnount unchanged. However, other changes, such as increasing the matching rate or, notably, incteasecl ernployer contributions, will work in the opposite clirection to raise total accumulations. 26, The MTC is clesigned to encourage and rewarcl the clevelopment of a regulal pattern of savings once members have joined I(iwiSaver. However, the cument $ t to $ t matching rate is particularly generous by comparison with other savings options; it cloubtes the amount of contributions made (up to $1,042), effectively provicling a minimum 100% return on these contributions, l4 Col,nur Blunton Ki¡visrtver Evaltrcttiorr,op. cit, page 57. 27. MTCs are sirnple ancl relatively easy to aclminister because they are linkecl to the level of a metnber's contributions paid in a year rather than to the member's income. The cap ensutes that lower contributors, who tend to be lower income eamers, get a larger benefit proportionate to their contribution. The possibility of making a link between maximum entitlement, or matching rates, and a rnember's income (whether just active or active and passive income) was considered. However, the administrative reality is that any such link is not possible without prohibitively costly system changes, and even then woulcl take several years to implement. 28. The SWG suggested increasing MTC payrnents for those on lower incomes by increasing the matching rate to 52 MTC for each $1 member contribution, in order to increase the amounts received by those on lower incomes making lower contributions. However, as well as increasing the fiscal cost of the MTC this coulcl also have the effect of encouraging/enabling those on higher incomes to reduce their contributions, either by reducing their contribution rate or making fewer voluntary contributions (if self-employed) in order to maximise their MTC, 29. The converse matching position, f-or example 50c per $1 member contribution, should not lead to a reduction in contributions from those cumently contributing to the maximum MTC level, since they would still need to contribute the same to maximise the Government contribution. A reduction in the matching rate spreads the irnpact more broadly tl'ran reducing the cap alone, which would cleliver fiscal savings only in the case of KiwiSaver members contributir-rg above the level of the cap. The cap would fllean that the subsicly woulcl remain broaclly progressive, and still reflect a greater proportion of total I(iwiSaver inputs for low income earners than for highu income earners. Chunging IfiwíSaver íncentíves: Kìck-start 30. The $1,000 kick-start payment from the Crown is a highly successful o'recognition" feature for l(wiSaver; 92% of all responclents to the Colmar Brunton surveyts (both I(iwiSaver and non-l(iwiSaver rnembers) were aware of the kick-start. Fayments for the last 12 months to February 201 I totalled $354.6m. 31. With a projected increase in KiwiSaver membership of approximately 300,000 members over the next four years, there would be f,rscal savings to be rnade in removing or reducing the kick-start incentive. However, this could damage l(iwiSaver's attractiveness to uew members. There is a strong psychotogical boost attachecl with such an early initial increase in a tnember's tìnds ancl, on balance, the potential clamage to public perception and to the initial attractiveness of Kiwisaver outweighs the diminishing value of fiscal savings made by reducing or rernoving the iconic kick-star.t payment. 32' The Savings Working Group recommended a gradual 'clrip-feecl' of kick-start paytnents, to be matcl-red to members" contributions. However this would have minimal effect on costs, reduce the immecliate psychological boost of a $\[,000 incentive and woulcl effectively rnake this payment a duplication of MTCs, which are intencled to encourage regular contributions. t5 ibi,l, png" 3. ü0) 33. Removing or detaying payment of the kick-start to those uncler eighteen was also considered. The 2010 tîwisaver Evctlucttion, conducted by Inland Revenue's Evaluation Servicel6, identifiecl that among those parents who had enrolled their children, the Government kick-start contribution \\,vas the most colnmon reason providecl; 83 percent said this was a factor in enrolling their children, while 34 percent said this was the most impoftant factor in their decision. However, the value of accounts for most under eighteens is relatively low; a large numbers of children's accounts appear to holcl nothing more than the $1,000 kick-start, indicating that this practice is cloing little or nothing to raise private savings ancl encourage a savings habit via I(iwiSaver. 34. There are therefore potentially some fiscal savings from clelaying the payment of the kick-start for under-eighteens, for example, until their eighteenth birlhday. However, such a change would add to the complexity of l(iwiSaver, ancl yet the overall fiscal savings are likely to be minimal. Any I(wiSaver changes targeted at only this age group should form part of any wider consideration of how to boost savings levels for young people, and install good savings habits from a young age. Chunging IfiwiSaver íncentíves: Employer superøn,xuøtìon contríbution tax exemptíon 35. Ernployer contributions (cumently up to 2o/o of employee remuneration) to employee KiwiSaver accounts and complyir-rg superannuation funds are presently exernpt from ESCT. The exemption is estimated to cost the Government about $l75million a year in revenue forgone.36. The Savings Working Group recommencled that the existing exemption from ECST be removed; by its nature it is ahnost invisible to I(iwiSaver members, and so is the least-value of the incentives in terms of raising levels of private saving. It is also the rnost regressive of the I(iwiSaver subsidies, since those in higher tax bands get a proportionately greater benefit; 50 percent of the benefit goes to the top 15 percent of earners. Officials also recommend removing this exemption on similar grounds. 37, As part of removing the exemption, however, consideration should be given to how ESCT is computed on employers' contributions. The legislation currently gives two main methods to calculate ESCT. The default rnethocl allows ernployers to decluct ESCT at a flat rate of 33% from eligible superannuation contributions, while the "progressive scale" method allows lower ESCT rates to be appliecl to employers' superannuation contributions in relation to each inclividual's previous year's salary, wage ancl sLlperannuation contribution levels. 38. lnland Revenue's administrative clata is insufficient to iclentify which methods are usecl by ernployers. However, although it is recognisecl that the default rnethod is sirnpler for employers to apply ancl so reduces compliance costs, it does mean that lower-income employees who are affectecl will be more heavily taxecl than they woulcl be the case comparecl to the "progressive scale" methocl and compared to the rate at which their salary or wages are taxed. This results in less money going into their superalìnuation accounts. 39. It is tlierefore proposed to require alI ernployers to use the progressive scale systern at the same time as removing the ESCT exemption. This shoulcl not be a particularly difficult change for ernployers using commercial payroll systems that already have this functionality. l6 K¡tvisctvcr Evuluution Repon2010,\[nlanrl Rcveuue Evaluation Selviccs, t'or lnlanct Revenue, lvf inistryolEconornic Developrncnt ancl \[-\[ousirrg Ner.v Zealancl Cor¡ror.ation, Septernber 20 10, page 12. For ease, the timing of the change should be matchecl to the annual payroll cycle ( I April 2012). Employers prepaling rnanual payrolls will need to inclucle an additional calculation for ESCT when calculating KiwiSaver contribution amounts. Inland Revenue guidance, calculators and calculation tables will be available to assist with this. Encourage increased levels of private household saving Increasing membersltip: Compulsory versus voluntary 40. SWG and Government officials considered the impacts of KiwiSaver becorning a compulsory scheme. Variations included compulsion for employees only, with compulsory contributions deducted from pay; compulsion for all eligible adults; or compulsion for aclults over a ceftain age or fi'om a particular incorne level. This would also require changes to the cument settings for "contribution holiclays". The point of compulsion woulcl otherwise be negated by the ability of members to choose not to contribute. Issues regarding market fees and investment strategy would need to be fully resolved in advance of any element of compulsion being introducecl, 41. The present lGwiSaver model, although available to non-employees, is primarily rnarketed ancl designecl as a rvork-based voluntary superannuation savings scheme. For a universal enrolment, as well as new enrolment mechanisms for those outsicle the employed workforce, new contribution rnodels would neecl to be introducecl to require ancl collect savings contributions fi'om non-employecl persons. Sirnilar issues arose if compulsion was linked solely to age or income levels. 42. Cornpulsion for all employees, building on the existing I(wiSaver design, woulcl therefore be more ptactical than a univelsal enrolment. It is estimated that KiwiSaver membership would increase b1'an estirnated 730,000; the impact on national savings depends in part on other KiwiSaver serttings, such as the contribution rate and Crown incentives, but would be expected to be positive. 43. However Inland Revenua and officials frorn the Treasury consicler that these benefits I(iwiSaver need to be weighed against the welfare costs for people at the lower end of the income clistribution scale, who may be forced to recluce their spending on essential items in the present time in order to increase their income in retirement. The SWG considered the same point, and referrecl to thi,c in their report as "timing costs".t7 44. The SWG also noted that compulsion to save into l(iwiSaver has a "portfolio cost'\] in that it f'orces some people to invest in superannuation when they would rather invest in sornething else, such as housitrg, an enterprise business, or in a savings scheme that provides earlier access to funcls, such as for eclucation purposes. The Retirement Commission also recommended against compulsion. | 8 45. Treasury modelling also indicates that, following compulsion, 30 percent oî any new savings would be expectecl to come flrorn 60 percent of new mernbers, each earning less than $40,000. This suggests that the increase in national saving is unlikely to be justified by the negative irnpact ou present welfare for such low eamers, who are themselves unlikely to value the benefits in terms of increasecl consurnption later over decreasecl consumption now. l7 SWC' Suvitrg New Zertkutrl,op. cit. ¡rar.a 7.33. l8 http://ruw\*.retiretnent.org.nzlr'etilernent-incorne-resealoh/policy-review/20 l0-review. t2 46. Linking compulsion f'ot employees to wage levels or age were possible variations uncler this option that might have helpecl to alleviate some of the concerns over both "timing costs" and "portfolio costs" for savers. However, these variations would acld to the complexity of ICr,viSaver, and create additional compliance requirements for employers. 47. On balance, the modest increase in national savings that could be expected from introducing compulsion was outweighecl by the harmful welfare impacts on some groups of people, ancl the increase in fiscal costs if the l(iwiSaver subsidies were retained, even in a reduced form, Further, a move towards compulsion now was unlikely to be able to be readily reversed in future if it no longer aligned with the Government's longer term savings and investment plans. Increusing membershíp: enrolment exercìse (with optìon to opt out) 48. Some increase in I(iwiSaver membership could neveftheless still be delivered through existing mechanisms, if the increase is targeted to attract the people most likely to continue to contribute. Employees are the prime rnarket; behavioural analysis inclicates that there is a strong "inertia" factor for contributions by this group, which is assistecl by the automatic cleduction of contributions frorn source. 49. lnland Revenue comrnissioned Colmar Brunton to unclertake a survey to assess the outcomes of l(iwisaver for individuals. Colmar Brunton reported in July 2010'0. Inter alia, the survey asked respondents why they hacl not become members of l(wiSaver:28Yo had not got round to joining, while a fbrther 130lo wanted more information about I(iwisaver. This could indicate that, of the employecl population who are not alreacly members of l(iwisaver, over a third would not be averse to joining ancl so would be likely to remain a member if automatically enrollecl by their employer. 50. Officials therefore considered a one-off enrolment for all employees who are not already members of l(iwiSaver or a complying superannuation scheme. The exercise would provide employees the option to opt out before being enrollecl in l(wiSaver by their employer. Such an exercise was estimated to deliver up to 330,000 new members. This differs from the SWG recommendation of a one-off exercise using the current auto-enrolment process, by avoiding the significant compliance ancl administration costs for employers to rnake deductions from wages, which are later refunded by Inland Revenue where ernployees subsequently opt out. Even so, there would be costs to employers, both in running the exercise ancl in increased employer contributions for new mernbers. 51. Such an increase in I(iwisaver population would also significantly increase the fiscal costs, both in the short tetm through higher kick-start payrnents ($330 million in the f,rrst year) and ongoing through the MTC (arouncl $100 miltion per year), Given the key objective to recluce f,tscal costs, this was not regarcled as the appropriate time to consider running such an exercise. 52, The SWG suggested that the immediate irnpact of tl-re increased kick-start payments could by managed down by spreading payrnent over five years. However, this would have a limitecl effect on the overall ftscal cost and woulcl have negative incentive irnpacts, The $1,000 kick-start is highly successtul 'recognition' feature for l(iwiSaver; 92o/o of all respondents to the Cohnar Brunton survey20 (both I(wiSaver ancl non-KiwiSaver members) lt) Col,no, Brurrton Kiwisrtver Evctluutictn, op. ci: 20 ibi,l. png" 3 l3 were aware of kick-start, cornpared to only 58% who knew about member tax credits (MTCs). The spreacling method would have to be applied to all new rnernbers, not just those enrollecl as part of the exercise; it would therefore reduce the attractiveness of the kick-start payrnent in encouraging members to join in future, Increasìng contríbutíons: íncreusing deføult contributíon røte for uuto-enrolled employees 53. The "default contribution ratd' is the rate at which employees who are automatically enrollecl into I(iwiSaver by their employers will start contributing, unless they actively choose a rate. The default rate now stancls atZYo of wages. However, of those joining before 1 April 2009, when the default employee contribution rate was 4o/o,75 percent of members are still contributing at least 4o/o; that is, they did not take advantage of the introduction of the 2o/o miuimum rate from 1 April 2009. Only 20 percent of members joining on or after 1 April 2009, when the default rate',vas se| aIT%o, have actively chosen a higher rate. 54. Thus, for many rnembers, the default rate at which they start making I(iwisaver contributions governs the level of on-going contributions ("set and forget"). However, those employees who have chosen to move to a lower contribution late have tended to be lower- income. This suggests that affordability does have some influence, since the cap on Government contributions means that incentives are already stronger for low income members to contribute at above-minimum levels; and that 4Yo may be too high for some members. Increøsing contributíons: ìncreasìng compulsory employer contríbtttíon rute 55. Cornpulsory ernployer contributions both increase individual final accumulations ancl, especially if rnatched to employee contributions, are a strong way to encourage individuals to save towards retirernent, Witli the exception of higher-paicl executives where retirement contributions are a key part of a total remuneration package, rnany employees clo not traditionally regard their ernployerso contributions as deductions tiom "their" wages, even though the additional cost to employers fi'om making contributions is likely eventually to find its way through to lower wages (ir-rcluding for those not members of KiwiSaver). 56. At present, the minimum employer contribution is ZYo of employee wages. The rate was originally set at lo/o with the intention that this should increase by I percentage point each yeal until it reached 4o/o, bur. it lvas capped at 2o/o in 2008. Internationally, employers traclitionally contribute at much higher levels; for example, the Australian scheme involves an employer oontribution rate of 9%, 57. \[u contrast to ernployee contributions, where many employees are contributing above the 2o/o minimum rate, 90 percent of ernployer contributions are macle at 2o/o. A requirement for ernployers to raise their minimurn contribution woulcl therefore make a fairly signif,rcant impact on total Kir,viSaver accumulations. 58. Higl-rer employer contributions would increase labour costs in the short term. A delayed or staged introcluction of an iucreasecl minimurn rate for employer aontributions (either with or without an etnployee matchiLrg requirernent) would better enable employers to prepare for and manage these changes alongsicle other business costs. In the longer term higher contributions are likely to be reflected in lower wage settlements, hut this impact should be limited as the labour market ancl nominal wage growth are expected to strengther-r fi'om the encl of 201 I . l4 59. tf the requirement were that ernployets should raise their own contributions only where ernployees contribute above the minimum rate, it would reinforce the incentive for ernployees to raise, or maintain, their own contribution rates. However, the well-clocumented power of inertia raises the risk that many employees woulcl still take no action and leave contribution rates unchanged even though they could afford and woulcl derive greater benefits from a higher rate. Where subsidies are reduced as set out above, such employees, who are most likely to be in the lower income bracket, would see reductions in both their ernployer contributions (because of removal of the ESCT exemption) and in the Govemrnent's MTC contribution. Making the increased employer contributions dependent on voluntary action by individual members may therefore mean that rnany lower-income members see no inclividual benefit. \[ncreusìng co ntributío ns : íncreasìng mìnim ttm employee co ntrìb utío n rüte 60. Increasing the curent minimum employee contribution rate would increase the amounts of employee savings. It would also move some way to address the risk that the current 2o/o minimum and clefault rate setting sencls the wrong message regarcling the appropriate level of savings that individuals shoulcl be making in order to provicle an adequate retirement income. 61. Tl-ris must be weighed against the "timing costs" for people at the lower end of the income distribution scale. A higher minimum contribution effectively increases the price of contributing to l(wiSaver. People who cannot afford to contribute a revisecl minimum would be forcecl onto contributions holidays or never join in the first place, thus missing out on Government and employer contributions. So a very sharp inclease in the minirnum contribution rate may not deliver very much by way of additional householcl savings. 62. Allowing an adclitional 3Yo employee contribution rate, between the existing 2% minimum and the next optional contribution rate of 4Yo could be a helpful option for some members. Matching employer conttibutions at higher rates would reinforce the incentive for employees to contribute more where they can, and help to ensure that there is little rnovernent frorn employees the other way (that is, downwards to 3%). However, the risk of down- shifting may not actually be very high, given that employees on 4o/o akeady have the option to reduce their contribution rates, and the adclitional cost to employers may not tl'rerefore be justifiable. The additional costs to both Inland Revenue and ernployers of introducing this fuither option would be very moclest, as woulcl be the introcluction of furthel contribution rates, f'or example 5Yo,6Yo etc. 63. Nevertheless, from the point of view of the individual l(iwiSaver member there is a strong ir-rterest in keeping the scheme as sirnple and clear as possible; and in serving the interests of those who take no action. The adclition of further options which require active clecision making on the part of members and which many are likely to ignore anyway, even though they could benefrt from them, woulcl work against that objective. Members who are keen to engage rnore fully can always make voluntary contributions to increase their final accumulations ancl (for those on lower incomes) Member Tax Credit receipts. l5 \[ncreusirtg contributiotts: ntinor chutge optiorts 64, Other more minor change options tl-rat were consiclered but not recommendecl f'or the Buclget 201 I package are summarised below: Option Lowering rninimurncontribution rate to lo/, Comment Consideled alongside cornpulsion. Would reduce the arnount employees rvould be required to save, but could overcome "timing" coucerns in rnandating savings. Auto-enrolment extended to ernployees under 18 Recommended by the SWG, along ."vith extendi ng cornpulsory emp loyer cr-'¡ntributions ancl lvtTCs in order to incLease patticipation in I(irviSaver'. Reducing non- contributory periods ("contributionholiclays") ConclusionNot recornrnended: potentiaI negative effect on national savings. From a retirement savings perspective, this is an runreasonably low late oÊsavings t'ol all but the lowest-incorne families (frorn rvhorn NZ superannuation alone ah'eady provides a reasonable pre and post income rnatch). lvlay increase misperceptious about the appropriate rate ofsavings. Af'ter the fì: st year of rnembership contlibtrtiolts holiclays may be taken t-or a¡ly reasolt, arld they rnay be taken successively, effectively atlowing erlployees not to coutribute to l(iwiSaver. They do not receive any ernployer contributiorts during this Lirne. CONSULTATTON65. Due to tl-re need for 13uclget secrecy, and the short time-fi'ames involved in developing a I(iwiSaver-relatecl savings package t'or Budget 2011, the ability to consult in the usual manner uncler the Generic Tax Policy Process \[-ras been constrainecl. 66. Hovvevet', tnany of the issues noted in this paper have already been considerecl by the SWG which, iu cliscussing New Zealancl's medium-term savings strategies, \\,vas particularly asked to consider the role <¡f l(wiSaver in improving national saving outcornes, inclucling the operatiou and outcotnes of Kir,viSaver, ancl the fairness and effectiveness of current I(ilviSaver subsidies. The SWG tnade several recommenclations in tliis regard, which have been discussed above. 67. The SWG received consiclerable public feedback during the process; the submissions it receivecl ancl its interim anci final reports are available on the Treasury website. Officials have been able to view these subrnissions and listen to specifìc concerns r?ìised by interested groups cluring the SWG process, albeit that there has been no aotive consultation by oFficials. 68. Tl-re Retiremeut Cotnmissioner also releasecl her triennial review of retirement incorne policy on 7 December 2010, which cliscLrssecl KiwiSaver, costs, and the effectiveness of incentives, as well as makirlg I(iwiSaver compulsory, Not recommended; retirernent savings not high pliority lor this age-group. Estirnatecl arnounts saved into I(wiSaver would be relatively \[olv. lucreased member tax credits would increase fìscal costs. Negative iurpact on short-tertn ernployel costs ancl consequently on youth ernployment outweighs potential savings increases. FLrrtlrer work recornrnendecl, Ability to cease contdbutions is a useñl\[ "safety valve" for ernployees at ditïcult points in their \[iFe, Reducing holiclay periods or imposing stricter criteria rnight lead to some increase in savings fr'onl existing rnembers, althougl'r a tbw may simply choose not to .join t(iwiSaver at all. 69. Thus, sotne of the clebate about l(ir,viSaver reforms, ancl in particulaluvhether I(iwiSaver should remaiu a voluntary scheme, have been in the public clomain fbr some tirne, with the ability for the public to provicle comrnent. This provides solne alignrnent with the Generic Tax Policy Process. 70. Some irnplernentation decisions, such as the stagecl increase in the cornpulsory employer contribution rates, and the possible one-off enrolment exercise fol existing employees, have been cleferred until after the Budget. This will enable detailed consultation to take place, and any specific technical issues to be iclentifiecl ancl acldressed at the cletaited design stage, CONCLUSTONS AND RECOIVINIENDAT TONS TL The I(wiSaver change package recomrnencled for Buclget 20ll mostly aims to recluce hscal costs by transtèming the costs of l(iwiSaver fiorn the public to the pdvate sector, by reclucing the Governrnent subsiclies. The proposecl measures coulcl also encourage higher private contributions. However, further public eclucation ancl ar,vareness about the continuing importance of incliviclual saving, to ensure resources al'e over ancl above New Zealancl Superanuuation irr retirement, are lrighly clesirable. The prornotion of eclucational resources, suclr as the Retilement Commission's Sorted website, is strongly recommended to encourage inclividuals to take an active interest in considering their own longer terrn needs ancl how best to provicle for these, 72.The table below shows a summary of recommenclations ancl cumulative impacts: The additional effect oI each recommenrlecl change l-Ialve rnatching rate (50c per $ 1) and rnaxirnunl arÌrount ($521.42) of rnernber's tax credits Adclitional effect ol ernp \[oyer superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) exemotion Impact ou NIIP (over 10 years) Aclditional etfect ol ir.rcleasing urinimuru contribution rate t'or eurployees to 3oZ +0.5 - tyo Fiscal savings (costs) over 4 years ($million) r\\clclitional e\[fèct oI coL.r-rpulsoly ernployer coutlibt¡tior.rs to rnatch employees (up to 3%) +0.6 -0.1% \* This does not include any additional cost to the crown as an employer from higher employer contributions 1,998 -r0.201t 'fot¿rl Large tìscal savings. lvlember stilI contributes $ 1042.86 to rnaxirnise MTC; encoulages private savings 678 Comment +0.35 - 0.5o1' Large fìscal savings. 'Ihe ESCT represents the least- value, and most regressive, of all the subsiclies. (60) 1.85 - 2.25u1, Shoulcl be aflolclable For most ancl deliver greater fìnal accurnulations tlran the preseltt rninirnuur lucLeases absolute amonnt oI contributions. 2,616 73. The frgures below iilustrate the irnpact of the proposed changes, as a package, on the I(wiSaver funcl of an employee who opts in at 30 years olcl, for clifferent contribution rates. Figure 1 shows that an employee who is contributin g2%o under the current policy settings and contributes 3Yo after the policy change would have a significantly higher balance at retirement, despite the sizable clecrease in Govemment contribution. Figure 2 shows that if an employee is contributing 4% under the cument policy settings and continues contributing 4vo after the policy change, he would have a slightly lower balance at retirement than under present settings. Figure 1. Forecast composition of a KiwiSaver fund at retÍrement for an employee lvho opts in at age 30\* (comparing minimum employee contribution rates) 350000300000 250000200000150000100000 50000 0 g o E o ît o cl U g o l¡ 0)l! tn 3 oo3 ñ Current policy minimum (2%) I Governmantcontribution I ErnployeecontribLrtion r Emplovercontribt¡tion Note: Entployee contributicn rotes in purentheses. \* Assumes real wage growth of L5o/o per annurn, that funds earn a real return of %oper annum ancl that PtE and ESCT thresholds are indexecl to inflation frlew policy nninimum land defaultl f3%) Current policy minimum (2%) 50000 Annual income after tax (S) New policy nninimum (ancl default)(3%) Current policy minimum (2%) Ncw ¡roliay minimum (armdl default) {}".'í,) l8 Figure 2. Forecast composition of a Kilvisaver funcl at retirement for an employee lvho opts in at age 30\* (comparing 4o/o contribution rates) 400000 g 350000 4 o ! g 300000 o ! o .S 250000 o \* 2ooooo It oà rsoooo !4 I E 100000 o I soooo Current policy defat¡lt (4%) Note: Employee contribution rates in purentheses. \* Assumes real wage growth of 1,5% per annum, that funcls earn a real return of 4% per annum and that PIE ancl ESCT thresholcls arc indexed to inflation New policy (4'/ù r Government corr tribution Current pol¡cy clcfault (4%) r Em plover contribution 19 INTPLEIVIENTATION74. Officials have recommended that the proposed changes to the ESCT and the Member. Tax Credit should be included in Budget night legislation which will go through all the stages in the House in a single Parliamentary day. This is to allow suffìcient time for implernentation, both for employers ancl Inland Revenue. 75. The removal of both the ESCT exemption and the 33%:o flaI-rate calculation method would come into effect on 1 April 2012. This is to tie in with the starl of the tax year and so take advantage of the various updates to payroll systems and employer information leaflets that are alreacly schecluled to be macle at that date. 76. The proposed changes to reducing the MTC matching rate to 50c per $l mernber contribution, and reclucing the maximum annual MTC payment to $52 L43 (half of the present level), would take place with effect from I July 2011, being the 20l1lI2MTC claim year. Most MTC claims are macle after the year-end, which gives providers and Inland Revenue ovet 12 mouths to prepare for the changes before the bulk of the 20l|ll2 payments are macle. As the proposed changes clo not directly affect the claims process, the cornpliance costs would be expected to be relatively minirnal. 77 . The proposed increase to 3Yo for the compulsory ernployer contribution rate and for the default and minimum employee contribution rates would come into effect on 1 April 2013. Tl-re delayed start of this change means that it can be inclucled within a normal taxation bill, enabling interested parties to be consulted on design aspects, 78. The proposals fot a one-off enrolment exercise would be cliscussed with employers, payroll providers and other interestecl pafties. This would explore both the expected costs and benefits to each party, ancl possible design rnoclels for such an exercise. TVIONITORING, EVALUATTON AND REVIEW 79. Both lnland Revenue and the Government Actuary2l currently receive and collate KiwiSaver rnembership and scheme clata. Inland Revenue prepares regular monthly statistical reports and an annual evaluation repoft, which focuses largely on enrolment, contribution and incentive payments clata. The Government Actuary's report is presented to the House of Representatives put'suant to section 194 of the I(wiSaver Act 2006, and reports on the Government Actuary's regulatory role in the management and operation of individual KiwiSaver schemes and funds, ar-rcl the cluties ancl obligations of trusts and managers in relation to those schemes. These annual repofts will form the main basis fbr the collection and monitoling of the impacts of each l(iwiSaver change over the next 12-24 months. 2 The Governrncnt Actuary's t'u nctions will be rnovecl to the Financial lvlarkets Authority fiorn I April 20 I I ; his t(iwiSa ve r revielv anrl leporting obligations rvill thll to the new Autlrority to clischarge. 20