¿a- I Regulatory Impact Statement Greater information sharing between I¡rland Revenue and the Ministry of Social Development Agency Disclosure Statement This regulatory impact statement has been prepared by Inland Revenue. It provides an analysis of options that would enable krland Revenue to more quickly and proactively share information with the Ministry of Social Development. The information would be shared to improve the accr:racy of social assistance payments, and enable Inland Revenue to proactively advise the Minishy of Social Development of suspected benefit fraud. Extensive public consultation was undertaken as part of the legislative process for the Taxation (Tax Administration and Remedial Matters) Act20l1. The consultation specifically included coverage of Inland Revenue sharing information with the Ministry of Social Development. ln addition, an anon5mrcus sample of 4,000 cases, independent research and consultation with agencies across the public sector were undertaken. The sample, consultation and research were taken into account in developing the approach to information sharing and provide support for the proposal in this regulatory impact statement. Lr sharing infomration in this way, there is a trade-off between the privacy rights of individuals and the need for govemment agencies to provide efficien! high quality services. However, the recomrnended design of the approach would provide considerable efficiencies for the govemment, whilst having a minimal effect on an individual's right to privacy. This is because the Ministry of Social Development would only receive inforrnation that it is lawfrrþ entitled to collect in its own rigþt and hland Revenue would not collect additional information on behalf of the Ministry of Social Development. 'We have not identified any other significant gaps, assumptions, dependencies, constraints, caveats or uncertainties. The preferred option in this statement does not impose additional costs on businesses, impair private property rights, restrict market competition, or reduce the incentives on businesses to innovate and invest or override firnda:nental common law principles. Dr Craig Latham Group Manager, Policy Inland Revenue j 1 27 February 2012 'â STATUS QUO AND PROBLEM DEFINITION l. One of the main policy objectives underlying the Governrnent's Making TÐ( Easier discussion document, released in July 2010, was to bring about efficiencies across govemment agencies that interact with the tax systøn. A key part of this is to enable greater sharing of information across govemment agencies. The ability to share information is subject to the limitations set by privacy and secrecy laws. 2. The social assistance system relies on accvrate information to ensure that recipients receive the correct benefits. Recipients of benefits are required to report any changes in their income, and their benefit entitlements are adjusted accordingly. ln practice, people tend to report their wages after they receive them. This means that there may be a time lag from when wages are received to when the benefit is reduced, which may result in a benefit overpayment. Accurate information also means that benefit fraud can be detected and prevented. 3. In the last financial year, there were $217 million in overpayments, $22 million of which was fraud. In addition, Inland Revenue and the Ministry of Social Development completed an anonymous sarnple of 4000 cases. The data sampling exercise showed that information that Inland Revenue holds would be of use to the Minishy of Social Development to better manage benefit entitlements, increase compliance (and reduce fraud), reduce overpayments (and their value) and assist in the recovery of Crown debt. For example, there were a number of people in the sample who had crurent overpayments with the Ministry of Social Development and were not making repayments, but were receiving income at a level that would require debt repa¡rrnent. 4, Inland Revenue currently shares information with the Ministry of Social Development via the information matching provísions in section S1(a) of the Tax Administration Act. These agreements are expensive and cumbersome to develop and operate. The data matches take a considerable time and the shared data may be out of date by the time the information is received. Also, the Ministry of Social Development is required to initiate the data match, which means that I¡land Revenue is unable to proactively share personal information to assist in the detection of fraud and deter fraudulent behaviours. 5. This regulatory impact statement addresses the problem of how hland Revenue may more quickly and proactively sha¡e information with the Ministry of Social Development in order to improve the accuracy of social assistance payments, and enable krland Revenue to proactively advise the Ministry of Social Development of suspected benefit fraud. 6. The information to be shared would be limited to beneficiaries and those with benefit debt known to Inland Revenue. It would consist of: income details; family details; personal details; parental income for those under the age of 24 applytng for a student allowance; and information krland Revenue has regarding suspected cases of benefit fraud. 2 OBJECTTVE 7. The objective is to provide faster and proactive information sharing from Inland Revenue to the Ministry of Social Development in order to: . improve the accuracy and timeliness of social assistance payments and adjustrnents, and therefore lower debt levels (as beneficiaries with over or under-payments would be identified earlier); and ¡ allow for the proactive sharing of information to increase the detection and prevention ofbenefit fraud. REGULATORY IMPACT ANALYSIS 8. Inland Revenue has identified th¡ee possible options to meet the objectives: Optíon f.' Use the new information sharing framework in section SIBA of the Ta:r Administration Act. Optíon 2.' Use the information matching provisions in section Sl(a) of the Tax Administration Act. Optíon 3.' Wait for information sharing amendments to be made to the Privacy Act t993. Option 1: Use the new information sharing framework in section 81BA of the Tax AdministratÍon Act 9. Under Option l, an Order in Council under section 81BA of the Tax Administration Act would be made to enable Inland Revenue to proactively communicate information to the Ministry of Social Development. 10. The recently enacted Taxation (Tax Administration and Rernedial Matters) Act 2011 includes a new information sharing framework to facilitate Inland Revenue sharing information with another Government agency. Under the framework, sharing information requires legislative approval by an Order in Council, and is limited to information that the agency already has the legal authority to collect. 11. The advantages of using this new information sharing framework are the proactive nature of the sharing, flexibility, speed and accuracy. Inland Revenue is able to proactively provide information to the Ministry of Social Development without the need for the Ministy to first initiate a request for a data match. 12. Under this option, the impact on privacy is minimised since the Ministry of Social Development would only receive information that it is lawfi¡lly entitled to collect in its own right. Also, Inland Revenue would not collect additional information on behalf of the Ministry of Social Development. 13. Under the proposed arrangement, people providing information to hland Revenue would be notified that their information may be shared with the Ministry of Social Development. The Ministry of Social Development would also advise its clients that it can souroe tax information from Inland Revenue. 14. Option 1 is the preferred option, as officials consider that it provides the greatest opportunity for improvements to government efficiency and the integrity of the tax and benefit systems, while also offering safeguards to protect individuals' privacy rights. ) 3 Oþtion 2: Use the information matching provisions in section 81(4) of the Tax Admínistration Act 15. Under option 2, information matching would be used. Information matching, however, is ill-suited to proactive, timely information sharing between agencies. 16. This is because information matching is designed to identify errors :.ather than to identiff and correct inaccurate benefit payments in a timely way. 17. Further, because information matching requires the Ministy of Social Development to initiate the request, the Ministry must be first aware that the infonnation is required. In a number of cases (as the statistical match highlighted), it is the information that krland Revenue holds that provides the Ministry of Social Development with that initiat awareness. 18. Information matching is also slow and expensive, taking 12 to 18 months to implement. 19. As a result, option 2 does not provide the desired efficiency improvements and is not recommended. ) Option 3: Wait for the Information sharing amendments to the Privacy Act 20. The Privacy (Infonnation Sharing) Bill 2011 is an omnibus bill that amends the Privacy Act and the Tax Administration Act. This bill was introduced in August 2}ll,but at the time of writing has not had its first reading. 21. As option 3 relies on the bill receiving Royal assent, there is potential for considerable delay. 22. Officials therefore do not recommend this option. CONST\]LTATION 23. Public consultation on the concept of greater information sharing between govemment agencies, and specifically Inland Revenue sharing its data with a range of govenrment agencies, was previously undertaken as part of the legislative process for the Taxation (Tax Administration and Remedial Matters) Act 2011. 24. A discussion document sought submissions on the proposal of Inland Revenue sharing data with the Ministry of Social Development, An online public forum was established for the public to discuss options and vote on proposals. The majority of submitters were in favour of the proposal. Submitters commented that it could increase efficiency and eliminate the need for individuals to provide complex and duplicated infonnation to multiple agencies. Business NZ commented that feedback from their members: "consistently tells us that they view various government departments as 'the Government', so any sharing of information for government purposes is often assumed to take place anyway." 25, A number of submitters saw merit in greater sharing between government agencies but also felt that, in order to protect individual privacy rights, sharing should occur only with the informed consent of the individuals involved. ln response to this, Inland Revenue and the Ministry of Social Development will ensure that the proposed information sharing is well publicised and those applytng for benefits are made aware of the proposed information sharing. 26. Some submitters also wanted to ensure that only relevant information is shared. The requirements of the Order in Council (and related Memorandum of Understanding) under ì r 4 Option I would ensure that the information shared is relevant to the purpose of informatlon sharing. 27. Qualitative research has been undertaken by Victoria University of Wetlington on public attitudes to sharing personal information in the course of online public service provision.l In general, reseaich participants had abenign view of public \*""tã, information sharing intentions and practices. There is a high level of trust in the New Zealand Government sector, a¡rd a perception that the Government is working in the best interests of its residents. In general, participants were'þrivacy pragmatists", that is, they were prepared to provide personal information in return for enhanced public service provision, or other personal or collective benefits. However, they were not unconcerned about their privacy, and clearly pointed to the need for public service agencies to "play privacy by the rules". 28. Inland Revenue has also commissioned independent research2 to investigate the impact of a range of changes on the integrity of the tax system. The research focused on changes such as: developing an all-oÈgovemment approach and providing joined up services; changes to ICT (Information and Communications Technology) and how these might deliver govemment services; and increased information sharing as proposed by the Privacy Act amendments. This research concluded: 'oAs a general rule the public sees potential changes as a positive method of enhancing the way in which Inland Revenue operates in its role of collecting taxes and distributing benefits within the scope of its current role. It will provide a means of improving the status quo. In so doing this will improve the integrity of the tor system." 29. The independent research and public consultation indicate that there is little risk of the proposed Order in Council having a detimental influence on the integrity of the tax systøn or voluntary compliance rates. In general, submitters to the public consultation were in favour of the proposal, and noted that it could increase efficiency and eliminate the need for individuals to provide complex and duplicated information to multiple agencies. 30. Consultation within the public sector has also been undertaken. Officials have consulted with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Ministry of Justice and Treasury. The Office of the Privacy Commissioner supported the aims of increasing the speed, accuracy and administrative efficiency of information exchanges from Inland Revenue to the Ministry of Social Development. The Office of the Privacy Commissioner is broadly comfortable with the proposed information sharing betwee,n Inland Revenue and the Ministry of Social Development. The Of,ficer of the Privacy Commissioner agtees that the initiative would improve the efficiency of an important public service, and should produce significant public benefits. 31. During consultation, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner raised concems regarding limiting the amount of information shared so that only relevant information is shared. This will be resolved through the addition of schedules to that effect within the Memorandum of Understanding between Inland Revenue and the Ministry of Social Development. The Office of the Privacy Commissioner raised two further operational issues which the agencies are working through - undertaking an assessment of privacy risks across the entire process, and developing a monitoring and reporting framework. The framework and the outcome of the risk assessment will also be incorporated into the Mernorandum of Understanding. I Lips, Eppel, Cunningham & Hopkins -Flnms, Pubtîc attítuder ro the sharing of personall inþrmatíon ìn the course of online publíc semice provision: Fìnal report (2010), Victoria University of Wellington(Retrieved from htþ://e- govemrent.vuw.ac.nzlresearch\_¡rojects\_20 I 0ÆINAL\_IRD\_Report.pdf . 2 Litt\*, Impact olChange on the Integrity of the New 7¿øland Tax System (August 201l),rrrrynblished paper, lnland Revenue. ) 5 ) 32. The Minisûry of Social Development has worked in partnership with Inland Revenue in developing the proposed information sharing and is fully supportive of the proposal. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 33. Officials recommend making an Order in Council to support information sharing under Option 1. V/e consider that this option would enable faster, more proactive information sharing from hland Revenue to the Ministry of Social Development, is consistent with the intent of the new section 81BA of the Tax Administration Act and is consistent with the Government's policy driver of better public services. IMPLEMENTATION 34. The preferred information sharing option (Option 1) does not require Inland Revenue to alter its current information collection practices (other than to inform taxpayers of its ability to share tax information with the Ministry of Social Development). As noted, Inland Revenue would not collect additional information on behalf of the other agency. Inland Revenue would also continue to ensure that the data collected is accurate and secure, and that it remains so once shared. Inland Revenue would establish processes to monitor and audit the use of its databy the Ministry of Social Development, and ensure that Inland Revenue's tax secrecy obligations are maintained. 35. Also, as noted, under the proposed a:rangement the Minisbry of Social Development would only receive information that it is lawfully entitled to collect in its own right. People providing information to Inland Revenue would be notified that their information may be shared with the Ministry of Social Development. The Minisbry of Social Development would also advise its clients that it can source tax information from Inland Revenue. 36. The Ministry of Social Development currently provides beneficiaries with l0 days' notice for most adverse actions that result from an authorised information match (with the exception of the Deparhnent of Corections prison roster match, where benefits are immediately suspended but reinstated if a challenge is made). The Ministry of Social Development will continue to ensrue that information received from hland Revenue is verified with the individual before any adverse action is taken unless verification would prejudice any investigation. This will continue to ensure that information acted on is accurate and certain. 37. It is proposed to take a phased approach to sharing information between the agencies. This will enable continued refinement of the information shared and ensure that the information continues to provide the Ministry of Social Development with the greatest value. At the outset, Inland Revenue will share information for which there is strong evidence of suspected fraud, and income details of beneficiaries who are receiving social assistance and some form of inc¡me. MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REVIEW 38. The new information sharing framework is subject to the review provision in the Tax Administuation Act. The proposed review would be carried out after the new framework has been in operation for five years, and would be tabled in the House of Representatives by the Minister of Revenue, after consultation with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner. Such a review would allow for consideration of whether the objectives of the new framework have been achieved. Since the review would be made publig it should be transparent as to how the new fra:nework is being applied. l 6