~ Inland Revenue ~ 1-' Te Tari Taake Policy Advice Division THE TREASURY Kaitohutohu Kaupapa Rawa Joint Report: Taxation of Savings and Investment Income Date: 27 September 2012 Report No: T2012/2470 PAD 2012/206 Action Sought Action Sought Deadline Minister of Finance Note contents of the report Joint Ministers' meeting on 16 (Hon Bill English) Agree to recommendations October 2012 Refer the report to the Minister for Economic Development Minister of Revenue Note contents of the report Joint Ministers' meeting on 16 (Hon Peter Dunne) Agree to recommendations October 2012 Contact for Telephone Discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Matthew Gilbert Senior Analyst, Tax Strategy, Treasury \[Withheld\] - Matt Benge Assistant Deputy Commissioner, Policy, Inland Revenue I Enclosure: Yes: Annex 2 -savings and investment joint report (Treasury:2366671 v1 0) Treasury:2432807v12 T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 2 Joint Report: Taxation of Saving s and I nvestmen t I ncome Executive Summary This report responds t o t he Minister of Finance’s question as t o whe the r changing t ax sett ing s could lead t o a material improvemen t in economic pe rforman ce. It provides a high - level ass ess men t of a nu mber of po ten tial reforms t o t he t axation of savings and investmen t, based on whe the r reforms cou ld improve eff icien cy , incentives t o save and invest, and reduce macroeconomic vulnerabili ties. These are importan t in contributing t o t he ultimate goals of increa sing economic performan ce and improving economic welfare in New Zea land. This ha s clea r li nks t o t he Business Growth Agenda: work in t his space is urgent, so it is importan t Ministers consider what t ax reforms cou ld off er. We ha ve complemen ted existing analys is by using a computable general equili brium model tha t ha s been adapted t o reflect t he New Zea land economy (the DZ model). Overall we t hink the model is useful f or drawing general observation s/insights t o use as part of a broader ass ess ment into diff eren t t ax reforms, but does no t off er t he level of con fidence t o rely on quantified results. For cap ital ga ins t ax on ly, we ha ve used a simpler general equili brium model f ocused on housing and t axation in New Zea land (the And rew Coleman model). The analys es do no t examine practical aspe cts of designing and implemen ting reforms in de tail , which would need t o be con sidered more f ull y if such reforms were pursued. The modelli ng work ha s suggested t ha t personal i ncome tax cuts may have greater economic benefit than corporate i ncome tax cuts i n New Zealand. This is primaril y because most of t he benefits of personal t ax cuts would acc rue t o residents, whe rea s a larger proportion of t he benefits of corpo rate income t ax cuts ’lea k’ oversea s t o non-r esidents given New Zealand’s high level of f oreign cap ital ownership; and t ha t a pe rsonal income t ax cut would increa se incentives f or both saving s and investmen t, and labour supply. It also suggests t hat reforms which cut corporate i ncome tax may res ult i n a net welfare loss. This is be cau se t he country may lose more f rom giving up t ax revenue t o non-r esidents than it gains f rom improved investmen t incen tives generall y (due t o impu tation , a corporate income t ax cut is expe cted t o have li tt le impa ct on investment incentives f or residents, li miting economic welfare gains, bu t does increa se f oreign investmen t). This welfare result may at f irst be surprising given economic li terature suggests cuts t o t he corporate t ax rate tend t o be be st f or economic growth. 1 However such studies t end t o f ocus on ly on t he eff ects of lower t ax rates on GDP rather t han on economic welfare, so do no t pick up t he f act tha t some of t he economic benefits of a t ax cut may acc rue t o non-r esidents (which is importan t f or New Zea land given our relatively high levels of f oreign capital ownership). This will act t o reduce economic welfare benefits compa red t o impacts on GDP. I n addition studies oft en do no t acc ount f or t he general equili brium eff ect of t he t ax cut (which is captured in t he DZ model) – so whil e residents only enjoy some of t he benefits of t he t ax cut, they bear t he en tire burden of t he revenue off set t o f und t he t ax cut, which will f urthe r reduce economic welfare. There are also li kely t o be dynamic growth benefits f rom reducing corpo rate t axes (e.g. higher productivity growth and spill overs f rom FDI), which are no t cap tured by t he model. Personal t ax cuts will also li kely have wide r growth benefits, which are also not cap tured in the results (e.g., increa sed investmen t in hu man capital and spill overs f rom t his investmen t), 1 Such as Tax and Economic Growth, Economics Departmen t Working Paper No. 620, OECD (2008), although this is ba sed on cross -country “average” results, so does no t pick up impo rtan t variation s be tween countries (such as t he relatively high level of f oreign cap ital owne rship and presen ce of an impu tation system no ted above). and this is not expected to change the earlier insight that personal tax cuts are more favourable than corporate tax cuts Overall, we think the welfare result suggests caution in considering a further corporate income tax reduction at this stage-but that it is only one factor. Corporate tax rates have been falling in other countries (although there has been some slowing of the rate of these reductions with the Global Financial Crisis) and it is important to make sure that our company rate is not too far out of line with rate in other countries to minimise the risk of profit-shifting pressures (using transfer pricing). This may lead to an increased case for company rate cuts in the future. It is important that New Zealand remains an open dynamic economy and an attractive destination for FOI, given the benefits foreign investment can bring. The following table summarises some of the main conclusions from our analysis. The various reforms are modelled at a fiscal cost of $1 billion to aid comparability (with the exception of the Allowance for Corporate Equity}, 2 with the cost offset by reduced government transfers. Reform National savings Cut in corporate 0 income tax Cut in all personal 0 income tax rates Cut in tax on 0 interest income Dual income tax 0 Allowance for 0 corporate equity Key: 'Lr =significant positive impact, ~ = some negative impact, These indicate: Steady state impacts GOP Economic Macro Equity~ Complexity welfare vulnerability of change 0 ~ • Small-ve Low impact 0 lJ 0 Depends on Low design 0 0 w Worsens Medium 0 ~ w Worsens High • • • Worsens High 'Lr =some positive impact, ¢:::> = negligible impact or unclear, ...... = significant negative impact • The tax reform option that appears most effective in boosting economic welfare and reducing macroeconomic vulnerability is a personal income tax reduction. This also boosts GOP and increases national savings. The other tax reform which also boosts economic welfare but has a negligible effect on macroeconomic vulnerability is a cut in personal capital income tax restricted to residents (such as reducing tax on interest income). This has the biggest effect in promoting savings. • A reduction in corporate income tax offers a more limited increase in national savings compared to other reforms, and also leads to an increase in macro vulnerability. The result that this reform may reduce economic welfare also suggests caution around considering a further corporate income tax reduction at this time. 4 As noted earlier wider factors, such as the competitiveness of our corporate tax rate, may increase the case for a further corporate rate reduction in the future. • A dual income tax is likely to increase national savings and GOP, but reduce economic welfare. However, while there are economic gains from a dual income tax, greater gains can be realised from simpler cuts to personal tax rates as shown above. 2 Given the high cost of an ACE, part of the fiscal impact is met through increasing remaining income tax rates as well as reducing government transfers. 3 Based on current equity impacts. Assessing equity impacts on a lifetime basis has not been possible given lack of longitudinal data. However, such assessments would tend to dampen the impacts noted above. 4 This may suggest that an increase in the corporate tax rate will be welfare-enhancing for New Zealand. However such a tax change might not be sustainable given our corporate tax rate is already above the OECD average. It would be a negative signal for business, impacting New Zealand's ability to attract FDI, and would increase incentives for firms to shift profits overseas, eroding the corporate tax base. T2012/2470 :Taxation of Savings and Investment Income Page 3 T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 4 A dual income t ax wou ld be complex t o implemen t given curr ent I R systems capabili ty. We t he refore do no t recommend prioritising f urthe r work on a dual income t ax in t he medium t erm. • The negative f isc al and economic impa cts of an All owance for Corporate Equity (ACE) outweigh t he benefits of any additional savings and investmen t. It would also add sign ifican t complexity and wou ld be cha ll enging t o implemen t. For t he se reasons, we do no t recommend pu rsuing t his op tion . Treasury ha s reported previously on all ocative eff iciency iss ues cau sed by gaps in t he t ax base (primaril y no t t axing capital gains) and t he interaction of inflation and t he t ax system. 5 Treasury con tinues t o see a cap ital ga ins t ax as t he be st way of reducing t hese distortion s, although it is cognisan t t ha t a f ull y de veloped reg ime must be con side red be fore poli cy decision s can be made. I nland Revenue ack nowledges t ha t t his reform is consisten t with ou r BBLR f ramework bu t it con side rs t he de vil is in t he de tail - as well as additional complexity, it is not clea r t ha t a CGT t hat appli ed on reali sation and exempted t he f amil y home wou ld be more eff icien t t han no t ha ving one. Reduction s in pe rsonal capital income t ax, disc uss ed above as one of t he most beneficial reforms, may ha ve some second be st eff ects in reducing all ocative distortion s depending on how t he y are implemented . Options include: • Reducing tax on i nteres t i ncome which was modell ed and ind icated a strong increase in na tional saving s, simil ar t o a personal t ax reduction . The reform is also expe cted t o improve economic welfare (the mea sure of economic eff iciency in t he model). However, t he reduction in t ax on interest income may also cau se other distortions, no t cap tured in t he model (such as be tween debt and equity investmen ts), so overall eff icien cy impacts are un clea r. There are also f isc al risks f rom t ax arbitrage opportunities which wou ld ha ve t o be managed or address ed with new an ti-arbitrage rules, adding t o complexity of t he t ax system. • Reforming the PIE regime for example by extending PIE rates to portf oli o investmen ts directly held by t axpa yers (debt and equity). 6 This would en cou rage more domestic saving s. On ba lan ce, t he Trea sury con side r t ha t overall eff iciency would li kely be improved ; whe rea s I nland Revenue con siders t ha t t he opposite may be t rue . I nland Revenue con side rs t ha t f or coheren ce rea son s it may be preferable t o instead remove the cap on PIE t ax rates, as was suggested by t he Tax Working Group, and use t he revenue raised t o lower pe rsonal t ax rates. Both options will be con sidered as part of furthe r work on PIE reform. • Index ing the tax base for i nflation, which wou ld increase aft er- tax returns t o interest income and li kely result in a significan t increase in saving s (although t he level of foreign investmen t will li kely f all given only real interest expense would no w be deductible, which cou ld reduce macro vulne rab ili ties). I ndexation is also a very complex exercise due t o high ongoing compli an ce costs (espe ciall y f or SMEs), meaning overall ne t benefits are unclear, and it would be chall enging t o implemen t given curr en t I R systems capabili ty. We do no t recommend t ha t it be pu rsued as a medium-term reform. 5 Sho wn by t he diff eren ces in rea l eff ective t ax rates f or diff eren t f orms of cap ital investmen t – see Briefing t o t he Incoming Minister of Finance: I ncrea sing Economic Growth and Resili en ce (2011), p. 16 (Figu re 15 ) 6 An alterna tive PIE exten sion wou ld be t o lower PIE rates, as recommended by t he Saving s Working Group. The t ype of impa cts of such a reform are li kely t o be simil ar t o t he reduction in t ax on interest income, modell ed above, given it involves reducing t he t ax rate on spe cific f orms of cap ital investmen t. T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 5 Next steps Tax po li cy resources will con tinue t o f ocus primaril y on de li vering t he Governmen t’s t ax poli cy work prog ramme, and supporting I R’s busine ss t ran sformation prog ramme. We are also reporting separately t o Ministers on po ss ible pack ages t o consider f or Budget 2013, balan cing revenue raising and wide r economic ob jectives. Beyond t his, we recommend focusing f urther “investmen t” work on: • Conside ring reforms t o cap ital income t axes t hat apply t o resident individuals. As noted above t his could include reforms t o t he PIE regime or reducing t he t ax rate on interest income. Off icials will report on t hese option s as pa rt of work on PIE reform on the curr en t t ax poli cy work programme. • Conside ring po ss ible changes t o t he pe rsonal t ax structure, includ ing ad justing f or fisc al drag. A simple change t o curr en t t hresholds in 2015, t o corr ect f or f ive yea rs of fisc al drag since t he 2010 t ax reform, is estimated t o cost around $1 .5 billi on per annum. You may wish t o con side r such a change beyond Budget 2013 as t he impa ct of f isc al drag increa ses and t he f isc al po sition improves. Many of t he se po ten tial reforms wou ld have a f isc al cost. Given t he t igh t f isc al position in t he next f ew yea rs t he re may be merit in a ‘pa ck age’ approach, as was done in Budget 2010, with t ax reductions being off set eithe r by increa sing other rates (such as GST) or by base broadening (for instance, Treasury’s ad vice is t his could include a CGT and/or a land t ax). Recommended Action We recommend t hat you : a. note t he report responds t o t he Minister of Finance’s question as t o whe the r changing tax sett ings cou ld lead t o a material improvemen t in economic pe rformance. Noted Noted b. note t ha t, in preparing t his report, off icials have analys ed whe the r reforms cou ld improve eff iciency , incen tives t o save and invest, and reduce macroeconomic vulnerabili ties, which are impo rtan t in con tribu ting t o t he ultimate goals of increasing economic performance and improving economic welfare in New Zea land. Noted Noted c. agree /note t he recommendation s made f or ea ch t ax reform be low: Reform Rec ommendation Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue Cut in corpo rate income t ax • Note some po sitive impa ct on saving s and GDP bu t no t macro vulne rab ili ty • Note t he f ind ing t ha t t his reform may reduce economic welfare bu t t ha t othe r f actors may enhance t he case for a f uture cut in t he t ax rate. Noted Noted Noted Noted Cut in all pe rsonal income t ax rates • Note tha t t his reform is li kely t o off er t he biggest ga ins overall f or GDP and welfare, strong ga ins f or saving s, and improvemen ts in macro vulne rab ili ty • Agree t ha t off icials do f urthe r work on op tion s t o reduce pe rsonal t ax such as address f isc al drag Noted Y / N Noted Y / N T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 6 Cut in t ax on interest income • Note t his reform off ers t he biggest ga ins f or saving s and t he cap ital stock bu t its impa ct on economic eff icien cy is un clea r • Agree tha t off icials con side r a reduction in t ax on interest income as pa rt of t he PIE reform work, curr en tly on t he t ax po li cy work prog ramme Noted Y / N Noted Y / N PIE reform • Note tha t off icials will report later on op tion s related t o PIE reform Noted Noted Dua l income tax • Note t his reform is li kely t o off er some additional saving s and investmen t, and ga ins t o GDP, bu t t he se are small er t han ga ins f rom cutt ing pe rsonal t ax rates, and t ha t a dual income is more complex t o implemen t • Agree t ha t off icials do no t prioritise f urthe r work on a dual income t ax in t he med ium t erm Noted Noted Y / N Noted Noted Y / N All owan ce f or corpo rate equity • Note t ha t whil e t he re are additional saving s and investmen t, complexity, f isc al cost, and welfare loss are li kely t o be high • Agree no t t o pu rsue an all owan ce f or corpo rate equity as a med ium-term t ax reform Noted Y / N Noted Y / N Indexation of the t ax system • Note t ha t whil e t he re are additional saving s f rom indexation , it will increa se f inance costs f or some firms, and will be complex t o implemen t and ha ve high ongoing compli an ce costs • Agree no t t o pu rsue indexing t he t ax ba se f or inflation as a med ium-term t ax reform Noted Y / N Noted Y / N d. note t ha t off icials are no t curr en tly do ing work on a cap ital ga ins t ax or a land t ax, bu t tha t f urthe r work could be necess ary on t hese or other op tion s if revenue-r aising reforms are needed t o off set revenue-negative reforms; Noted Noted e. refer a copy of t his report t o t he Minister f or Economic Developmen t. Agree /disagree. Matt hew Gil bert Matt Benge Senior Analys t, Tax Strategy Ass istan t Deputy Commiss ioner, Poli cy The Treasury Inland Revenue Hon Bill Engli sh Hon Peter Dunne Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 7 Joint Report: Taxation of Saving s and I nvestmen t I ncome Purpose of Report 1. This report provide s a high-level ass ess men t of a numbe r of po ten tial t ax reforms t o the t axation of saving s and investment, as ag reed in Treasury’s 2011/12 ou tpu t plan and t he Governmen t’s Tax Poli cy Work Prog ramme. I n doing so, t he report responds to t he Minister of Finance’s question as t o whe the r changing t ax sett ing s could lead t o a material improvemen t in economic performance. We wou ld li ke t o disc uss t he report with you at t he joint Ministers’ mee ting on 16 October 2012 and get you r ag ree men t on medium-term reform priorities. Back ground 2. There ha ve been a nu mber of New Zealand t ax and other poli cy reviews t ha t ha ve examined po ten tial reforms around t he t axation of saving s and investmen t income. These include t he Tax Working Group (2009-10) and t he Saving s Working Group (2010-11 ), alongside Australi a’s Hen ry Tax Review and t he UK’s Mirr lees Tax Review. Back ground t o t hese reviews ha s been provided in Annex 1. I n pa rticular t he Saving s Working Group raised con cerns t hat New Zealand’s low level of na tional savings increased its vulnerabili ty due t o high levels of external debt and low levels of do mestic saving . Treasury’s interest in t his project ha s also been motivated by concerns about low productivity growth (underpinned by cap ital sha ll owne ss ), which is f orecast t o continue. The se iss ue s ha ve clea r li nks t o t he Business Growth Agenda: work in t his space is urgent, so it is impo rtan t Ministers con side r wha t t ax reforms could off er. Aims and objective of the work 3. Drawing on t he se recen t reviews, Trea sury and I nland Revenue off icials have been ass ess ing t he merits of a number of major and minor t ax reforms t o understand t heir impact f rom a New Zealand context be tt er, estab li sh whe ther t here is a prima f acie case f or t he ir implemen tation , and t o identify med ium-term reform priorities. 4. In addition t o economic welfare, key iss ue s have been ho w diff erent reforms wou ld aff ect t he : • Overall eff icien cy of t he all ocation of savings and investmen t in t he economy; and • Total level of saving s and investmen t, along with t he po ten tial t o reduce macroeconomic vulnerabili ties in t he economy. 5. These are impo rtan t in con tribu ting t o t he ultimate goals of increa sing economic performance and improving economic welfare in New Zea land. The diff eren t iss ue s are motivated by a number of consideration s: • Eff icien cy is t he standard benchmark f or determining how well a t ax system contribu tes t o economic performan ce. It generall y t ries t o ass ess ho w li tt le a t ax system crea tes distortions, f or example t o investment and labour supply decision s; • Treasury ha s express ed con cern t hat t here are low levels of na tional saving s in New Zea land. It con side rs t hat t he re may be po ten tial f or t ax reform (in combina tion with po li cies in othe r areas) t o improve savings pe rforman ce and all ocation of investmen ts even if t he t ax system is not t he f undamen tal cause of the prob lem; and T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 8 • Concern about t he vulne rabili ty po sed by New Zea land’s high ne t external li abili ty position has ga ined increa sed impo rtan ce in t he wake of t he global f inancial crisis. All else equal, increa ses in national saving s relative t o investment, changes in t he mix of external li abili ties (from debt t o equity) and increasing GDP growth f or a given supply of cap ital reduces vulnerabili ty or mitiga tes t he impa ct of an increa se in net externa l li abili ties. But ass ess ing t he impa ct of poli cy changes on vulne rab ili ty is complex and requires consideration of economic variables such as t he curr en t acc ount and gross and ne t levels of national debt, as well as debt servicing capacity f actors such as national savings, expo rts and off shore investmen ts. 6. This analys is is intended t o inform us and Ministers as t o whethe r an y t ax reforms ha ve the po ten tial t o improve economic performance, and t he refore whether off icials should do any sign ifican t f urthe r analys is of t hem. The analys is presented he re does not examine practical aspects of designing and implementing reforms in de tail , which would need t o be considered more f ull y be fore f orming a f ina l judgemen t on whe the r such reforms should be pu rsued. 7. This work may ha ve li tt le immediate poli cy impli cations given t ha t t he Government recen tly completed a major t ax reform, bu t is impo rtant go ing f orward given t he Governmen t’s strateg ic priority of bu il ding a more productive and competitive economy, and t he Business Growth Agenda. It also helps en sure off icials are well placed t o provide ad vice on f uture economic and f isc al chall enges (for example, t his work will also be used t o inform t he disc uss ion of t ax in t he Long Term Fisc al Statement). Analys is 8. We ha ve drawn on a nu mbe r of analys es t o inform our ass ess men ts. The se include: • Standard f irst principles analys is including drawing f rom analys es we ha ve done for t he Tax Working Group and t he Saving s Working Group; • A computable general equili brium model de veloped by US academics John Diamond and George Zodrow and modified by Trea sury and I R off icials (kno wn as t he DZ model), which all ows us t o examine ho w t ax reforms migh t aff ect t he all ocation of cap ital in New Zea land, and impact key variables such as GDP, economic welfare (the mea sure of economic eff iciency in t he model) 7 and t he level of saving s; • A model designed by And rew Coleman t o provide insigh ts into how a capital gains t ax cou ld impact investmen t in housing in New Zea land; and • High-level analys es of t he li kely impa cts on equity, t ax system integrity (arbitrage poten tial), complexity, compli an ce, and ad ministration costs (which is importan t given I R systems capabili ty f or sub stan tial t ax reform in t he short t erm). These ass ess ments do not con side r de tail ed de sign iss ue s f or t he specific t ax reforms. 9. The general equili brium modelli ng is a step f orward in buil ding ou r analytical capabili ty, consisten t with I nland Revenue and Trea sury work on quantifying t he eff ects of t ax poli cy changes and as pa rt of t he wider Treasury work on quantifying our key poli cies. It has been cali brated t o include specific f actors relevan t t o New Zea land (e.g. high levels of f oreign capital owne rship and li kely location-spe cific economic rents) t o he lp us understand ho w t hese make t he analys is diff erent f rom standard results. Overall we 7 Economic welfare is impo rtan t t o con side r as a rise in GDP may no t ne cess aril y mean t ha t New Zea landers are be tt er off given some benefits f rom t he t ax change and higher GDP may acc rue to f oreign investors. T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 9 think t he model is useful f or drawing general ob servation s/insights t ha t can he lp as part of a broader ass ess men t into each of t he modell ed t ax reforms, but does no t off er t he level of precision t o use quantified results. The DZ model ha s its li mitation s, particularly as it does no t pick up dynamic growth impacts or distribu tional impa cts. We have att empted t o address t he se t hrough additional ass ess men t ou tside of t he model to help us reach conclusion s. 10. Furthe r disc uss ion and results f rom t he analytical work can be f ound in Annex 2. No one method of analys is is determina tive bu t con sidered t ogether t he y provide gu idance as t o which t ax reforms have t he grea test po ten tial economic benefits. 11. Reforms considered in t he analytical work include major changes t o ou r curr en t BBLR system (all owan ce f or corporate equity, dual income t ax, and t he indexation of t ax bases). Alongside t his we ha ve con side red incremental changes t o existing t ax rates within t he BBLR system. This ha s broadened our understanding of t he margina l economic impa ct of reducing t ax rates of diff eren t t ax bases (corporate income, personal income, and interest income). Reforms are modell ed on a f isc all y neutral basis with reduction in lump-sum go vernmen t pa yments t o off set t he f isc al cost of t he reforms, which isolates t he impa ct of t he change be ing modell ed . 8 This is most closely proxied by a reduction in go vernmen t spending or by introducing a well -de signed land tax. If tax cuts are f inanced by t ax increases t ha t are not completely eff icien t, t his will obviou sly reduce t he benefits of t he t ax reforms no ted here. 12. We ha ve also commen ted on revenue-r aising t ax reforms we ha ve con side red previou sly (such as land t ax and a risk -free return method f or t axing housing investments) and have undertaken f urthe r analys is of cap ital gains t ax using t he Andrew Coleman model. Findings 13. The analytical work has provided t he f oll owing high -level insigh ts: • Personal income t ax cuts may have greater economic benefit t han company income t ax cuts in New Zealand. This is primaril y because: o Most of t he benefits of personal t ax cuts would acc rue t o residents, wherea s some benefit of company income t ax cuts would acc rue t o non- residents given New Zea land’s high level of f oreign cap ital ownership; and o A pe rsonal income t ax cut wou ld increa se incentives f or both savings and investment by residents, and labour supply. • General company income t ax cuts may result in a net welfare loss . This is because t he country may lose more f rom a reduction in t ax revenue t o non- residents t han it ga ins f rom improved investment incen tives generall y (company income t ax cut is expe cted t o have li tt le impa ct on investment incentives f or residents, be cau se t he impu tation system claws ba ck t he benefit f or resident shareholders when income is distributed , bu t does increa se levels of f oreign investment). Examples of t hese are a general company t ax cut and an all owan ce for corporate equity (ACE); and • Capital income t ax cuts t ha t apply t o resident individuals may have some ne t benefits, although t he se will have eff ects t ha t are not ab le t o be cap tured in t he modelli ng (such as t he t ax reductions will no t apply t o all t ypes of cap ital) and t he eff ects are no t as great as f or a personal t ax rate cut. Examples of t hese include 8 Reforms (with t he exc ep tion of ACE) are modell ed at a f isc al cost of $1 billi on t o aid compa rab ili ty, with t he cost off set by reduced go vernmen t t ran sfers. See Tab le 1 f or f urthe r de tail s. T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 10 a reduced t ax rate on interest income which we ha ve modell ed and an extended PIE regime which ha s not been modell ed . 14. Whil e t he modelli ng work suggests t hat t he re may be a ne t economic welfare loss f rom corporate income t ax cuts t ha t increa se f oreign direct investmen t (FDI), t his does no t mean other poli cies (such as regulatory changes) which encourage additional FDI may not be de sirab le. New Zealand curr en tly has a very large stock of FDI and corpo rate income t ax cuts also apply t o non-r esident owne rs of t he stock of existing FDI. It is giving up revenue on existing FDI which con tributes t o t he ne t welfare reduction. Furthe r work, such as t he work on location-spe cific rents, may he lp us get more con fidence in understanding how much of t he t ax reduction s are en joyed by non- resident shareholders. I n addition t here may be other f actors, such as profit-shift ing press ures and t he question of whe the r ou r corporate t ax rate is t oo f ar ou t of li ne with othe r countries, which aff ect t he decision around f uture changes t o corporate t ax sett ing s. All ocation of ca pital 15. The DZ and Coleman models do give some insigh ts into t he con sequences of how changing t he t ax sett ing s would change t he all ocation of cap ital, and how t his aff ects GDP and economic welfare. I n f ocusing t he iss ue of capital all ocation on amounts invested in housing versus other investments, t he Coleman model of t ax and housing (which is simpler t han t he DZ model bu t more informative about t he impa cts on housing) suggests t ha t t axing housing more heavil y (by t axing capital ga ins, even when the t ax is li mited t o investmen t housing only) does t end t o: • reduce t he t otal amount invested in housing ; • increase t he amount invested in interest-bearing ass ets; • reduce t he price of housing and increa se aff ordabili ty of owne r- occ up ied housing ; • increase ren ts and reduce t he aff ordabili ty of ren tal housing ; • increase economic welfare; and • reduce t he level of f oreign bo rr owing compared t o t he status quo. Key conclusions 16. A summary of ou r ass ess men ts is presen ted in Tab le 1 at t he end of t he report (with a more de tail ed disc uss ion of results in Annex 2). At t his stage, t he f ind ing s f rom t he se ass ess ments lead us t o t he f oll owing conclusions on medium-term reform priorities. Potential medium-t erm reform priorities • Personal i ncome tax reduction – This reform reduces all personal income t ax rates and appears strongly beneficial. It provides higher GDP and economic welfare, increa sed saving s (because lower pe rsonal rates also reduce t he taxation of interest income) and reduced macroe conomic vulne rab ili ty. The model does no t pick up dyna mic growth benefits f rom reducing personal t ax rates, (e.g. higher productivity and en trepreneurship), which will f urther improve the benefits of t his reform. It is also relatively easy t o implemen t given t he f airly simple structure of t he curr en t t ax system and wou ld help with overall coherence of t he t ax system if t he t op rate is lowered ; T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 11 • Capital i ncome tax reduction accruing to res idents – Ano the r area of poten tial reform is a cap ital t ax reduction t argeted t owards residents. The reform modell ed above which does t his is a cut in t ax on interest income. I n t he model this increases GDP, welfare, and ha s t he biggest impact on savings. The increase in economic welfare in t he DZ model suggests some ga in in economic eff icien cy . However, t he re are other eff ects on economic eff iciency which are no t captured in t he model so t he impa ct on t he all ocative eff icien cy of investmen t is unclea r. On one hand, a disc ounted t ax rate on interest may reduce t he eff ective tax rate on interest t o be closer t o t he eff ective t ax rate on housing and other rea l property investmen ts, where cap ital gains are not t axed . On t he other hand, an arbitrary disc ount amount could also increase eff ective t ax rate diff eren tials with othe r investmen ts. Two othe r reforms which also reduce capital t axes on residents are extended PIE and indexing t he t ax ba se f or inflation. These are: o Reforming the PIE regime for example by extending PIE rates t o portf oli o investments directly he ld by t axpayers (debt and equity) – i.e. removing t he requirement t hat t he investmen t be held in a managed f und. 9 This would encourage more do mestic saving s. Although direct investmen ts would be taxed at t he no rmal rates, Treasury considers t his boundary is more sustainable t han t he curr ent boundary. On ba lan ce, Trea sury con side rs tha t overall eff icien cy would li kely be improved; wherea s I nland Revenue considers t ha t t he opposite may be t rue . I nland Revenue conside rs t ha t f or coherence reasons it may be preferable t o instead remove t he cap on PIE tax rates, as was suggested by t he Tax Working Group, and use t he revenue raised t o lower pe rsonal t ax rates. Off icials will report later on bo th options t he se as pa rt of t he curr en t t ax poli cy work prog ramme. o Index ing the tax base for i nflation – Although no t specificall y modell ed , this reform is also a capital t ax reduction t ha t is restricted t o residents. Inflation ad justmen ts t o interest income would be expe cted t o increa se saving s sign ifican tly given it will increase aft er- tax returns. However by all owing t he deduction of on ly rea l interest expense t he cost of cap ital borr owed f rom non-r esidents may increase, po ss ibly reducing t he overall level of investment (although in itself t his cou ld improve macro vulnerabili ty). I ndexation is also a very complex exercise given t he inflation adjustmen t f actor is li kely t o be imprecise, which will dampen overall benefits, and due t o high ongoing compli ance costs (espe ciall y f or SMEs). 10 Overall net benefits are un clear, and would be cha ll enging t o implemen t given curr en t I R systems capabili ty. We do no t recommend it be pu rsued as a med ium-term reform. 17. Many of t he se po ten tial reforms would ha ve a f isc al cost. Given t he t igh t f isc al position in t he next f ew yea rs, t he re may be merit in conside ring a ‘pa ck age’ approach, as was done in Budget 2010, with reduction s in t axes be ing off set either by increasing other tax rates or by ba se broadening . Spe cific ba se broadening options con side red at t he time of Budget 2010 11 include: 9 An alterna tive PIE exten sion wou ld be t o lower PIE rates, as recommended by t he Saving s Working Group. The t ype of impa cts of such a reform are li kely t o be simil ar t o t he reduction in t ax on interest income, modell ed above, given it involves reducing t he t ax rate on spe cific f orms of cap ital investmen t. 10 It may be po ss ible t o mitiga te compli an ce costs f or small er t axpa yers without sophisticated systems by all owing t he m t o “elect ou t”, ho wever t his also ha s some compli cation s and may also be cha ll enging f or t he I R t o ad minister with its curr en t systems li mitation s 11 Risk -free return t ax on ren tal property (taxing ren tal housing on a deemed return ba sis) is also revenue po sitive. However, t he need f or such a t ax may be less no w t ha t depreciation f or bu il ding s ha s been removed , and t he revenue po ten tial f or t his t ax is mino r compa red t o a cap ital ga ins t ax and a land t ax and is no t suff icien t t o f und a reduction in pe rsonal t ax rates or cap ital t ax. T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 12 • Capital gains tax (CGT) – Trea sury con siders a capital ga ins t ax should improve all ocative eff iciency on a f irst principles ba sis. The Andrew Coleman model suggests it would t end t o reduce investment in ren tal housing and increa se investment in debt investmen ts (although increa se investmen t in owne r- occ upied housing if t ha t is exempt f rom t he t ax). The Coleman analys is also suggests a reduction in f oreign bo rr owing (due t o t he impact of t he t ax lowering t he cost of housing) and t ha t eff ect could all ow sustainable economic growth f or a longer period be fore macro imba lan ces be come t oo grea t. A cap ital ga ins t ax ha s some complexities in operation (although it can he lp with complexity t oo given t he curr ent un clea r cap ital/revenue boundary may be come irr elevan t in some cases) and a lot depends on design f ea tures which would have t o be con side red in an overall ass ess men t of t he merits of t he t ax. • Land tax – A t ax on t he value of unimproved land should be eff icien t on a f irst principles ba sis provided t he re are no exemptions, f or example, f or owne r- occ up ied housing . It is li kely t o be f airly simple t o implemen t with low compli an ce costs. The main downside t o a land t ax is t ha t it would cau se a wind fall loss t o existing land owne rs and no t t o t axpayers who own wea lth in a diff erent f orm. There would also li kely be sign ifican t press ures f or exemption s which, if included, would significan tly reduce t he eff icien cy of t he t ax. 18. Treasury con tinues t o see merit in a general capital ga ins t ax or a land t ax as po ss ible revenue-r aising reforms, and con siders t ha t a capital ga ins t ax off ers t he be st way of improving all ocative eff icien cy by reducing economic distortions cau sed by gaps in t he tax base. I nland Revenue ack nowledges t ha t t he se reform op tion s are consisten t with our BBLR f ramework bu t it con side rs t ha t a land t ax wou ld impose an unacc ep table loss on t hose who hold wea lth in land. Espe ciall y f or cap ital gains t axes, all t he devil is in t he detail . Working t hrough t he f ull de tail s of ho w best t o de sign a cap ital ga ins t ax in practice and evaluating whe the r t he pros of t he best po ss ible cap ital ga ins t ax would outweigh t he con s wou ld be a very substan tial exercise. I nland Revenue’s view remains t ha t t he practical disad van tages of a cap ital ga ins t ax are li kely t o ou tweigh its advantages. For example, roll over reli ef may be required so t ha t t axpa yers do no t f ace a disincen tive t o move t o a large r bu il ding or large r f arm, f or example, when it makes economic sense t o do so. However, roll over reli ef may mean t ha t a f armer who sell s a farm wou ld f ace no capital ga ins t ax if he or she pu rchases another f arm, but wou ld be taxed if t he y bought a diff erent t ype of bu siness . I nland Revenue is concerned t ha t t his can be qu ite distorting . Tha t t he practical disad van tages of a cap ital gains t ax outweigh its advan tages was also t he on-ba lan ce view of t he Tax Working Group. 19. In addition anothe r revenue raising op tion may be t o raise t he GST rate. 12 This would not change t he t ax base as curr ently de fined. However, raising GST cou ld increa se trends f or do mestic labour t o emigrate (as t he value of local wages in t erms of consumption would f all ) and it cou ld also disad van tage domestic retail ers when alterna tive direct impo rts are avail ab le (although reducing t he de minimis be low t he curr ent $400 in value , and having an eff icien t way t o en force t his may mitiga te against this). Raising GST wou ld also cau se a wind fall loss on existing savings as its value in terms of f uture con sumption would f all . Reforms not to consider i n the medium term 20. Based on overall ass ess ment, off icials con sider t he f oll owing t ax reforms should not be actively con side red as po ss ible medium-term t ax reforms. However, t he y may be revisited at a later stage in response t o f uture economic and f isc al cha ll enges. 12 The DZ model sho wed t ha t a $1 billi on reduction in GST, compa rab le t o t he size of t he othe r modell ed reforms, had t he small est change in GDP and GNP. This is no t surprising since con sumption is generall y con side red a more eff icien t t ax ba se t han income (so t he impa ct of cutt ing the rate should be small er) , and New Zea land ha s a high ly eff icien t GST. T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 13 • ACE – The analys is shows t he re t his would att ract saving s and investment, bu t any economic benefits are ou tweighed by t he ad verse labour supply impa cts from mee ting t he high cost of t he reform t hrough higher income t axes (unli ke othe r reforms, t he ACE reform is no t sc alab le and is estimated t o cost about $9 billi on per year given t he magnitude of t he t ax changes). This is shown by t he negative GDP and welfare results. It wou ld add significant complexity t o t he t ax system and wou ld be cha ll enging t o implemen t (e.g. given risks around t ax avoidance t hrough international arbitrage). We t he refore do no t recommend t his option be t aken f orward in t he medium t erm. • Dual i ncome tax – Whil e t he analys is sho ws a dual income t ax would att ract some additional saving s and investment (which in t urn increa ses GDP), t he se gains are small er t han f or simple rate changes t o personal income t axes or interest income t ax. It wou ld also no t increa se economic welfare because t he benefits of t he additional investmen t are outweighed by t he loss of t ax revenue on existing investmen ts. The overall impa ct on macro vulne rabili ty is un clea r bu t li kely t o be small . It would also add sign ifican t complexity t o t he t ax system and would be cha ll enging t o implemen t given curr en t I R systems capabili ty. Given the complexity of implemen ting t he reform, and t ha t t he analys is suggests grea ter economic gains can be achieved t hrough other rate changes f or t he same f isc al cost, we do no t recommend prioritising f urthe r work on a dual income t ax in t he medium t erm. • Further corporate tax rate reduction – A company t ax reduction results in some increase in savings and GDP, although t his is lower t han f or pe rsonal t ax reduction s. This is predomina tely f rom increa sing f oreign investmen t (as imputation claws ba ck t he benefit f or residents), which acts t o increa se macro vulnerabili ty. The analys is also suggests a corporate t ax reduction may reduce economic welfare be cau se t he welfare loss f rom giving up t ax revenue t o non- resident owne rs exc eeds t he welfare gain f rom additional investment and GDP. This suggests cau tion in con side ring a f urther corporate t ax rate reduction at t his time. 13 There are also li kely t o be dynamic growth benefits (as a result of higher productivity growth and spill overs f rom additional FDI) f rom reducing corpo rate tax, which are no t captured in t he modelli ng results. At t he same t ime t here are li kely t o also be wide r benefits f rom personal t ax cuts such as increa sed investment in human cap ital and spill overs f rom t his investmen t which are also not cap tured so t his will no t ne cess aril y t il t t he ba lance in f avour of company rate cuts ahead of personal t ax cuts. But t here are othe r f actors, such as t he need t o make sure t ha t our corpo rate t ax rate is no t t oo f ar ou t of li ne with t ax rates in othe r countries. For example, New Zealand’s corporate t ax rate is higher t han the OECD average but curr en tly lower t han Australi a although Australi a is curr ently con side ring a t ax rate reduction. A compa rable corporate rate t o othe r countries is important t o minimise t he risk of profit-shift ing press ures (using transfer pricing ). The se con sideration s may increa se t he case f or a f urthe r reduction in t he corporate rate in t he f uture. It is importan t t ha t New Zea land remains an open dyna mic economy and an att ractive de stina tion f or FDI, given the benefits f oreign investmen t can bring . • Comprehensive i nflation adjustment of tax bases – For t he rea sons disc uss ed ea rli er under cap ital income t ax reduction t arge ted t owards residents, 13 The impli cation of t his result may suggest t ha t an increa se in t he corpo rate t ax rate will be welfare- enhancing f or New Zea land. However such a t ax change migh t no t be sustainable given ou r corpo rate t ax rate is already above t he OECD average. It wou ld be a negative signal f or bu sine ss , impa cting New Zea land’s ab ili ty t o att ract FDI, and t ha t it wou ld increa se incen tives f or f irms t o shift profits oversea s, erod ing t he corpo rate t ax ba se. T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 14 we do no t recommend t hat f ull inflation ad justmen t of t ax ba ses be pu rsued as a medium t erm t ax reform. Further work 21. Tax po li cy resources will con tinue t o f ocus primaril y on de li vering t he Governmen t’s t ax poli cy work prog ramme, in particular high priority projects such as on cha rities, t axation of intell ectua l property and supporting I R’s busine ss t ran sformation programme. We are also reporting separately t o Ministers on po ss ible pack ages t o consider f or Budget 2013, ba lan cing revenue raising and wider economic objectives. Beyond t his, we recommend f ocusing f urthe r “investmen t” work on : • Conside ring reforms t o cap ital income t axes t hat are restricted t o residents. As noted above t his could include extending t he PIE regime t o other f orms of capital income, removing t he PIE cap t o f und personal t ax reduction s, or reducing t he tax rate on interest income. Off icials will report on t he se op tion s as pa rt of work on PIE reform on t he curr en t t ax poli cy work programme. • Poss ible changes t o t he pe rsonal t ax structure, including adjusting f or f isc al drag . A simple change t o curr en t t hresholds in 2015, t o corr ect f or f ive years of f isc al drag since t he 2010 t ax reform, is estimated t o cost around $1.5 billi on per annum. You may wish t o con side r such a change beyond Budget 2013 as t he impact of f isc al drag increa ses and t he f isc al position improves. 22. We are curr en tly undertaking work looking at t he exten t of location-spe cific economic rents in New Zea land (impo rtan t given t he f ind ing of gains f rom corpo rate income t ax reduction s acc ruing t o non-r esidents), which is due t o report later t his yea r. 23. Whil e t he models are f ar f rom being de finitive, t he developmen t and use of economic modelli ng work ha s improved ou r po li cy analys is capabili ty and we will con tinue t o invest in t he models t o improve robustness and capabili ty. This analys is will also help inform Trea sury’s disc uss ion of t ax op tion s in t he long-term f isc al statemen t. Table 1: Summary assessments of tax reforms Key: 0 =significant positive impact, 0 =some positive impact, W =negligible impact (<±0.1% change) or unclear, ~=some negative impact, • =significant negative impact Reform Steady state impacts Fiscal Overall assessment National GOP Economic Macro Equity'" Complexity of impact savings welfare vulnerability change $1 billion While GOP increases (due to increased investment in corporate sectors, equates to and longer term productivity gains) welfare falls slightly due in the main - 4ppt part to the high level of foreign capital ownership in New Zealand-so reduction in only some of the tax reduction accrues to residents, but they bear the Cut in Small tax rate entire burden of the revenue offset. There is some small improvement in corporate 0 0 ~ • negative Low the level of savings. Macro vulnerability may also worsen due to the income tax increase in foreign capital, little domestic capital response and worsening impact of the current account (although dynamic growth benefits from the tax cut can help mitigate this through increased servicing capacity of external liabilities). Reducing the company rate would increase the possibility of companies being used to shelter personal income and reduce coherence. $1 billion This reform offers the largest gains in GOP and economic welfare equates to (including additional dynamic growth effects) compared to changing other - 1ppt tax rates. It also has a positive impact on savings. There is some reduction in reduction in macro vulnerability given that the domestic capital response average tax to the tax change is larger than the change in foreign capital, which is Cut in all rates also expected to improve the current account balance and net personal 0 0 0 0 Depends on Low indebtedness, and given higher savings will increase servicing capacity. income tax design This reform has been based on a proportionate cut across tax rate rates schedule to maintain progressivity-cutting certain rates more than others can have different equity impacts (and therefore expected economic impacts). By itself, cutting personal rates is likely to improve coherence of the tax system if the top rate is lowered, by closing the gap with the corporate tax rate. $1 billion This reform offers the greatest increase in savings compared to other tax Cut in tax equates to rate changes, but the impact on GOP and welfare is smaller than a on interest 0 0 0 w Worsens Medium - 4ppt personal income tax cut (which also reduces taxes on labour). The reduction in reform could reduce distortions between debt and housing investments income tax rate but could possibly increase distortions between debt and equity, not captured in the modelling, so benefits to the allocative efficiency of 14 This is based on current equity impacts. Assessing equity impacts on a lifetime basis has not been possible for the majority of tax reforms given lack of longitudinal data. However, such assessments would dampen the impacts on equity noted here. T2012/2470 :Taxation of Savings and Investment Income Page 15 Reform Steady state impacts Fiscal Overall assessment National GOP Economic Macro Equity Complexity of impact savings welfare vulnerability change investment are unclear. The impact on macro vulnerability is also mixed: while there is an increase in net indebtedness, there are higher national savings and capital stock, which may improve the economy's servicing capacity of external liabilities. The reform would be regressive given higher income households tend to earn more interest income. Complexity is higher than other rate changes given the need for anti-arbitrage rules. $1 billion A dual income tax would attract some additional savings and investment equates to although not as much as a personal income tax cut or discount on capped interest income alone. When adjusting for the differences in fiscal cost, capital rate the resulting GOP increase from a dual income tax is also lower than Dual 0 0 ~ of - 30% these two reforms. As with the corporate income tax change, economic income tax ~ Worsens High welfare falls given some of the benefit of reductions in tax rates accrues to non-residents while residents bear the entire burden of the revenue offset. It is difficult to gauge the overall impact on macro vulnerability, for the reasons explained above. Implementing a DIT would also add significant complexity to the tax system. Modelling Economic gains from reduced savings distortions outweighed by suggests adverse labour supply effects from increasing taxes to fund the ACE. 15 cost of a full This (along with some gains accruing to non-residents) also reduces ACE system welfare. There is a likely increase in macro vulnerability given a large Allowance would be increase in foreign investment and worsening of the current account, for 0 • • • Worsens High around although a change in the mix of external liabilities from debt to equity corporate $9 billion pa. (caused by the ACE) and higher national savings (increasing servicing equity capacity) will serve to mitigate this. The reform would be regressive given higher income households tend to earn more interest income. It would be complex to implement and rules would be needed to manage fiscal cost given arbitrage risks. 15 Given the high cost of an ACE, part of the fiscal impact is met through increasing remaining income tax rates as well as reducing government transfers. T2012/2470 :Taxation of Savings and Investment Income Page 16 T2012/2470 : Taxation of Savings and I nvestment I ncome Page 17 Annex 1: Back ground t o recent t ax reviews 24. In 2009 t he Tax Working Group conside red a nu mber of alterna tives t o New Zea land’s broad-ba se low-r ate t ax (BBLR) system. The se included: • A class ical company t ax system with a low company income t ax rate and a high tax rate on residents (as is done in I reland); • A dual income t ax (a low t ax rate on cap ital income t han on labour income, as is done in Norway); • An all owan ce f or corpo rate equity (ACE) (a deduction all owed f or a deemed return on company equity so t ha t a no rmal return earned by a company is no t taxed , bu t returns in exc ess of a no rmal return are t axed); and • A combina tion of a dual income t ax and an ACE system. 25. The Tax Working Group did no t recommend any of t he se alterna tives, no ting t he y would add complexity and arbitrage opportunities t o t he t ax system. 26. The Tax Working Group also con side red less comprehensive base broadening within the BBLR system. This was partly t o address pe rceived under- taxation in real property investments. It considered (bu t on ly a minority recommended) a comprehensive capital ga ins t ax, 16 and a majority recommended a risk -free return method of t axing residential investmen t property and a broad-based land t ax. It should be no ted t ha t, as part of Budget 2010, t he go vernmen t removed depreciation deduction s on ren tal housing (and other buil dings). This will have increa sed t he t ax pa yab le by landlords. The aggregate impa ct of t his change on t he level of t ax paid by landlords ha s no t yet been stud ied . 27. The Savings Working Group was establi shed t o conside r matt ers of private and national savings f rom a numbe r of pe rspe ctives. It did no t f ocus on t ax iss ues primaril y but it did examine t he t ax system f rom a perspective of improving t he eff icien cy of saving s and investmen t. In its 2010 report, it saw merit in a nu mbe r of po ss ible changes t o t he t ax system, such as making adjustments f or t he impa ct of inflation (either by comprehensively indexing t he t ax ba se f or inflation or providing a disc ounted tax rate on interest income t o adjust f or t he inflation component of interest) and reducing t he intermed iate (10 .5% and 17.5%) PIE t ax rates and extending PIE t ax rates t o directly he ld capital income, such as dividends and interest. 28. In addition , t he Mirr lees t ax review in t he UK con cluded t he re were poten tial economic benefits t o a combined ACE/RRA (r ate of return all owance) which wou ld impose no t ax on all f orms of cap ital income t o t he exten t t hey ea rn a normal return, and t ax only capital income in exc ess of a normal return and labour income. However t he review did not con side r t he practical implementation of t his reform, or att empt t o clarify ho w t he ‘normal’ rate should be de termined. Annex 2: Ana lytical annex Att ached as an additional paper: Annex 2 - saving s and investmen t joint report (Trea sury:2366671v10 ) 16 The Tax Working Group was con cerned t ha t a cap ital ga ins t ax may be come very complex on ce rea l-world de sign f ea tures are incorpo rated and an exemption f or owne r- occ up ied housing may undermine man y of its eff icien cy ad van tages. Trea sury:2366671v10 1 Annex 2: Ana lytical annex f or t axation of saving s and investmen t report Analytical approac h 1. We have drawn on several pieces of analytical work de veloped as pa rt of t his review of diff eren t t ax reforms. The primary model we ha ve used is a compu tab le general equili brium (CGE) model de veloped by t wo US academics , John Diamond and George Zod row (known as t he DZ model), t hen modified by Treasury and I R. This model has been cali brated t o New Zea land spe cific parameters (ba sed on 2007 da ta). It all ows us t o estimate how t ax reforms might aff ect t he all ocation of capital in New Zealand, and impa ct key variab les such as economic growth, individual economic welfare and t he level of savings. A more de tail ed desc ription and diagram of t he model can be f ound in Appendix A. 2. The DZ model ha s its li mitations. Clearly, as with an y model, t he DZ work is a necess ary simpli fication of t he real world so t he results are sub ject t o con straints of the methodology and quali ty of ass umption s used (see Appendix A f or f urther disc uss ion). I n pa rticular, t he model on ly conside rs changes t o levels of economic variables (e.g. GDP) and does no t pick up endogenous growth eff ects. Endogenous growth eff ects can be impo rtant given t he li nk be tween t ax reform and productivity growth, 1 so t he f ull exten t of economic impacts of t ax reform may no t be f ull y reflected in t he results. Given t hese li mitations, such models should no t be regarded as de finitive; t hey can only inform a wider analys is. We have t he refore complemented disc uss ion of DZ model results with a wider ass ess men t of t he li kely economic impacts of t ax reforms t hat are no t captured in t he model (such as dyna mic eff ects), ba sed on wider evidence and studies and also anecdo tal evidence f rom othe r countries on t he ir expe riences with specific t ax reforms. Ano the r weakness of t he model is t hat it does no t have an expli cit exc hange rate, and exports are calculated pu rely t o clear t he ba lance of paymen ts. This means tha t it is li kely t he model isn’t properly cap turing t he f ull impa cts of t ax changes on external ba lan ces. This, t ogethe r with t he f act t ha t it is diff icult t o ass ess t he impa ct of reforms on macro-vulnerab ili ty anyway, 2 means t hat we ha ve been cau tiou s in our ass ess men ts of impa cts on macro-vulne rabili ty. Finall y it is not poss ible t o use the model t o ass ess certain reform options, such as a land t ax or f ull indexation of the t ax ba se, as t he model does no t include land as a separate f orm of wea lth and does no t include inflation . 3. Overall we t hink t he model is useful f or drawing general ob servation s/insigh ts t ha t can help as part of a broader ass ess men t into ea ch of t he modell ed t ax reforms, but does no t off er t he level of con fidence t o rely on quantified results. 1 See , eg , Tax and Economic Growth, Economics Departmen t Working Paper No. 620, OECD (2008) 2 The impa cts of an y reform on macro-vulne rab ili ty depend no t on ly on t he impa ct on t he curr en t acc ount ba lan ce and level of ne t externa l li ab ili ties, bu t also on t he ir compo sition . All else equal, cap ital inflows of equity will t end t o crea te less vulne rab ili ty t han inflows of debt, and t he quali ty of addition s t o t he cap ital stock is an impo rtan t de terminant of debt servicing capabili ty. Rea l world ass ess men ts of macro-vulne rab ili ty are also dyna mic, conditioned by even ts, overall economic pe rforman ce, market att itude t o risk etc, and t he se f actors move over t ime. Trea sury:2366671v10 2 4. Separately, we have also con side red a simple t hree sector general equili brium model by Andrew Coleman loo king in more de tail at t he impa cts of introducing a CGT in New Zea land. This is a high ly styli sed , simpli stic model but we t hink it provide s additional insigh ts in ass ess ing t he impacts of a CGT. Unli ke t he DZ model, it all ows f or inflation and reflects t he li kely impact of a CGT on real property investments. Further detail s of t his work can be f ound in Appendix B and results are shown alongside DZ modelli ng work be low. 5. Finall y, we have included additional high -level ass ess men ts covering distribu tional impacts, 3 t ax system complexity and compli an ce costs and integrity (avoidance and arbitrage opportunities). More de tail ed analys is of t hese iss ue s wou ld of course depend on de tail ed de sign iss ue s of t he po ss ible reforms. 6. Overall , ass ess men ts require some sub jective weigh ting of t he diff eren t f actors considered , some of which are analys ed with more con fidence t han othe rs. Reform options will be analys ed in t he context of t he curr ent and li kely near- term world economic en viron men t. Some reforms which do not appear t o be worthwhil e in t he curr ent en viron men t could poten tiall y become more viab le if t he economic or f isc al environ men t were t o change in t he f uture. 7. The ass ess men ts con side r t he impact of po ten tial t ax reforms when in a steady state, con sistent with other such work. Generall y not disc uss ed are t he t ran sitional impacts, which may be significant and may include crea ting wind fall gains and loss es among diff eren t t axpa yers. Also no t con sidered in de tail are compli an ce and administrative iss ue s which are compli cated now by t he diff iculty in adding t o the I nland Revenue systems burdens un til new process ing capabili ty is in place. If any t ax change were t o be seriou sly con side red t he se matt ers wou ld have t o be considered in grea ter de tail . Assessment of potential tax reforms 8. We ha ve con sidered a numbe r of t ax reforms drawing on work f rom bo th t he Saving s and Tax Working Groups, and also recommendation s f rom recen t interna tional t ax reviews. The se are set out be low. A Reduction in corpo rate income t ax rate B Reduction in all pe rsonal income t ax rates C Reduced t ax on interest income (as recommended by Australi a’s Henry Review); D Dual income t ax, with a lower f lat rate f or all f orms of capital income E All owan ce f or corporate equity (ACE) system, with risk -free return on all capital income exempt f rom t ax (as recommended by t he UK’s Mirr lees Review) 9. These reforms (with t he exc ep tion of an ACE which is no t a sc alable reform) ha ve been modell ed at a cost of $1 billi on, off set by reducing lump-sum go vernmen t transfers in t he model, which is equivalen t t o levy ing lump-sum t axes. The se lump sum t axes are t heoreticall y non-distorting ways of ba lan cing t he go vernmen t’s 3 The se are ba sed on curr en t equity impa cts. Ass ess ing equity impa cts on a li fetime income ba sis ha s no t been po ss ible f or t he majority of t ax reforms given lack of longitud ina l da ta. However, such ass ess men ts wou ld t end t o reduce t he size of an y po sitive/negative impa ct on equity no ted he re. budget. The closest proxy for this is likely to be a well-designed land tax (of around 0.25% based on current revenue estimates). Scaling all reform options to the same fiscal cost has been done to allow better comparability of the different reform options. In reality these options should not be considered as complete reform packages, because to be a package the $1 billion fiscal cost must be offset by government spending reductions or the introduction of a non-distorting lump-sum tax such as a well-designed land tax. In the absence of lump sum alternatives or acceptable government expenditure reductions, any revenue shortfalls are likely to need to be made up by increasing other distorting taxes which will create additional costs and may reduce any economic benefits of the tax reforms explored here. 1 0. The remainder of this report sets out the results for the tax reforms listed above. Results for key economic variables from the DZ model are set out for each reform based on the colour-coded scale noted below. Additional assessments are provided alongside these results. {r = significant positive impact {r = some positive impact ¢:::> = negligible impact (<±0.1% change) or unclear ~= some negative impact ..... = significant negative impact Analytical results Reform A: Corporate Income Tax (CIT) Reduction Context 11. This reform looks at a simple reduction to the corporate income tax rate. DZ Modelling Results 12. We have modelled a $1 billion reduction in corporate income tax, which is equivalent to reducing the CIT rate by 4.3 percentage points (based on standard Treasury fiscal cost estimates). As noted above, this is offset by reduced government transfers to households. Table 1: Summary of modelling impacts for a corporate income tax reduction GOP Economic Personal Total capital Foreign Current welfare savings stock capital account 0 ~ 0 0 0 • See key on p.3 of Annex 2 13. The DZ model indicates that one of the main impacts of a corporate tax reduction would be a deterioration of the current account balance due to an increase in foreign capital inflows (and therefore outflows of capital income to non-residents), as shown in Table 1. This also increases net indebtedness. There is an increase in GOP and a small increase in both savings and in total capital stock, driven by the increase in foreign capital from the reform. These changes take effect almost immediately, with little difference between short-and long-run results. Treasury:2366671 v1 0 3 Trea sury:2366671v10 4 14. However t here is a small decli ne in economic welfare despite t he f act t ha t GDP increases. This is becau se t he economic welfare loss f rom giving up t ax revenue t o non-r esident owners exc eeds t he welfare ga in f rom additional investmen t and GDP; whil e only some of t he ga in of t he CIT reduction acc rue s t o residents, t hey bear t he entire bu rden of t he revenue off set. 15. The eff ects of a corporate t ax cut are small , in pa rt, due t o t he presence of imputation in t he New Zea land t ax system (so aft er t ax returns t o residents are no t aff ected sign ifican tly). There is an increa se in cap ital stock in t he corporate sectors, given t hey are t he only t wo sectors t o receive t he t ax cut, with capital falli ng in othe r sectors in t he economy (notably t he non-corporate sector but also the housing sectors). 16. The impact on macro vulne rab ili ty is always diff icult t o ass ess , bu t overall t his sc enario suggests t ha t it may worsen, given t he increase in f oreign capital and li tt le domestic cap ital response and worsening of t he curr ent acc ount (although dynamic growth benefits, no ted be low, f rom t he cut in corporate t ax cou ld help mitiga te t his through increased servicing capacity of external li abili ties). Wide r Economic Ass ess men t 17. The result f rom t he DZ modelli ng – t ha t a CIT reduction increases GDP - is consisten t with wider evidence 4 t ha t corpo rate income t axes are ha rmful t o levels of economic growth. However, t he result t hat t he CIT reduction leads t o a small economic welfare loss (and a small er change in GNP compa red t o GDP) is no t something pick ed up in wide r evidence. Much of t his evidence (includ ing t he OECD work referenced below) looks on ly at t he eff ects of lower t ax rates on GDP rather than on economic welfare. As a result, these analys es won’t pick up t he f act t ha t some economic benefits acc rue t o non-r esidents, which will t end t o reduce economic welfare benefits relative t o impa cts on GDP. The DZ model t akes t hese welfare impacts into acc ount as pa rt of its general equili brium analys is of t he t ax change. This is importan t f or New Zealand be cause we ha ve a higher share of foreign investmen t as a proportion of GDP t han most other OECD countries. This may also explain why t he model suggests a small er impa ct on economic growth from a change in CIT rates t han a change in personal income t ax rates (see Reform B). 5 I n addition , othe r stud ies t end t o be ba sed on cross -country averages, which make it diff icult t o draw inferences about ind ividual countries. 18. Evidence shows 6 t ha t, as with pe rsonal income t ax rates, reducing t axes on cap ital investment can also aff ect economic growth rates, no t just levels, although t he OECD suggest pe rsisten t growth eff ects are li kely t o f ade ou t in t he long run. Reducing t axes on cap ital investmen t can remove distortion s in relative f actor prices resulting in a more eff icien t re-all ocation of resou rces t owards po ten tiall y more productive sectors (sho wn in t he modelli ng results by a shift in capital f rom 4 See , eg , Tax and Economic Growth, Economics Departmen t Working Paper No. 620, OECD (2008) 5 Stud ies such as t he OECD (2008) stud y and work f rom Australi a (CGE Ana lys is of t he Curr en t Australi an Tax Sys tem’, KPMG Econ tech, 2010) f ind t ha t corpo rate income t axes t end t o ha ve a more distorting impa ct on economic growth – although t he se f ocus on stud ies f rom othe r countries and don’t f ull y reflect t he NZ-spe cific f actors disc uss ed above such as impu tation clawing ba ck t he benefit of t he company t ax reduction f or do mestic investors. 6 OECD (2008) housing/non-corporate to corporate sectors). This has the potential to increase total factor productivity (TFPf and economic growth, which is not picked up in the model results. 19. The model results suggest a large foreign capital response to the modelled CIT reduction. In general FDI can be an important source of the capital needed to support increased productivity growth (through spillovers to domestic firms), which would not be picked up in the model. However, evidence is limited about whether FDI has any additional increased productivity benefits over and above the usual benefits from increasing capital investment. Non-Economic Assessment 20. The equity implications of this option are lower than for other capital tax reductions such as ACE and DIT as, for individual shareholders, much of the benefit of a company tax reduction is clawed back by imputation. However, cutting the company tax rate without cutting personal income tax rates reduces the integrity of the tax system by making it easier for people to use companies to shelter income from higher rates of personal taxation. On its own, changing the tax rate should have little impact on complexity or administrative costs, but other measures may be required to address the integrity issues identified above, which could add complexity. Reform 8: Persona/Income Tax (PIT) Reduction Context 21. This reform looks at a simple reduction to personal income tax rates (labour income, dividend income and interest income taxes). DZ Modelling Results 22. We have modelled a $1 billion personal income tax reduction 8 , which is equivalent to reducing the average tax rate by around 1 percentage point (from 23.4% to 22.4% in the model based on 2007 rates), while retaining the current progressive structure. As noted above, this is offset by reduced government transfers to households. Table 2: Summary of modelling impacts for a personal income tax reduction GOP Economic Personal Total capital Foreign Current welfare savings stock capital account 0 0 0 0 • ~ See key on p.3 of Annex 2 23. The DZ model suggests that this change would result in increases in GOP, savings, economic welfare and capital stocks as shown in Table 2. There is some reduction 7 Reducing the corporate tax rate from 35% to 30% is estimated to increase long-run TFP ~rowth by 0.4 percentage points (OECD, 2008) Modelled as a reduction in both the average tax rate and average marginal tax rate in order to maintain the same level of progressivity in the personal income tax structure Treasury:2366671 v1 0 5 Trea sury:2366671v10 6 in macro vulne rab ili ty given t he domestic cap ital response t o t he t ax change is larger t han t he change in f oreign capital, which is also expected t o improve t he curr ent acc ount ba lan ce and ne t indebtedness , and given higher saving s will increase servicing capacity. I nitiall y, much of t he increase in dispo sab le income f or households is saved , cau sing an increase in investment. Consumption levels t ake longer t o increase, bu t reduce t he initial increa se in savings as t he y do so. 24. The lower pe rsonal income t ax rate means ind ividuals ha ve more disposable income, all owing t he m t o both save and con sume more. The increa sed consumption increa ses GDP, and t he increa sed saving increa ses cap ital stocks. All sectors see increases in t heir cap ital stocks, although t he highest increa se is seen in t he non-corpo rate sector given t he na ture of t he t ax change. Wide r Economic Ass ess men t 25. The results f rom t he DZ modelli ng are con sistent with wider evidence t hat personal income t axes are ha rmful t o levels of economic growth. The OECD 9 also f ound tha t t axes aff ecting labour supply mainly influence GDP levels (r ather t han growth rates), bu t t ha t t he re may be some additional productivity growth benefits f rom such a t ax change, which are no t cap tured in t he model. I n particular, reducing PIT rates can promote R&D activities and en terprise crea tion , given it is li kely t he most relevan t t ax rate f acing small , start-up en trepreneurs. It can also aff ect TFP t hrough immigration of t hose with high sk ill s and managemen t expe rtise, and can aff ect human capital f ormation . The OECD no te t he se are li kely t o ha ve persisten t long- run eff ects on economic growth. 26. The model may also underestimate t he impact of reducing labour t axes on FDI: evidence 10 suggests t he impa ct of t he labour t ax rate on FDI is poten tiall y large (although, as no ted above, evidence is li mited about whe the r greater FDI f lowing into New Zealand will led t o increased productivity or economic growth). However, if grea ter FDI f lows were t o result f rom reducing t he pe rsonal t ax rate, it is unli kely to have t he same economic welfare-r educing result as seen by a corporate t ax reduction since almost all pe rsonal t ax revenues are ea rned f rom residents. Non-Economic Ass ess men t 27. The equity impa ct of such a change will depend on how t he personal income t ax structure is changed in practice t o bring about the ass umed reduction in t he average t ax rate. Of cou rse, t he way t hat t he personal t ax structure is changed will also ha ve some impact on t he othe r variables t ha t we have commented on above. There is li kely t o be li tt le change t o complexity, compli ance and ad ministration costs compared t o t he curr en t system. Reducing t he t op pe rsonal t ax rate, relative t o t he company rate, wou ld also reduce t he benefits of sheltering income within companies, increasing t he coherence of t he t ax system. 9 OECD (2008) 10 OECD (2008) Reform C: Reduced tax on interest income Context 28. Currently, all income from interest payments is taxed, including that part of the nominal return that is due to inflation. Taxing the inflationary component of returns has efficiency consequences as it can distort how people decide to invest. A simple option to address this partially would be a tax discount applying to interest income only, such as considered in the (Australian) Henry review. Discounting the interest income taxation rate would, by itself, be a relatively simple change to the current tax system, but anti-arbitrage rules (e.g. to prevent individuals converting one form of capital income into another) and other tax integrity issues could add significant complexity. DZ Modelling Results 29. We have modelled a $1 billion reduction in tax received from interest, which is equivalent to reducing the average tax rate on interest income by around 4 percentage points (from 24.9% to 21% in the model based on 2007 rates). As in other reforms, this is offset by reduced government transfers to households. Table 3: Summary of modelling impacts for a reduction in tax on interest income GOP Economic Personal Total capital Foreign Current welfare savings stock capital account 0 0 0 0 0 • See key on p.3 of Annex 2 30. The DZ model estimates this would result in increases in savings and capital stocks, but smaller increases in GOP and economic welfare, as shown in Table 3. Initially, savings and therefore investment and the capital stock increase substantially. Over the longer term, savings settle back to a level that is still higher than pre-reform, and consumption increases so that the extra household income ends up being more balanced between consumption and savings. 31. Our modelling results suggest that reducing the tax on interest income increases the effective return on that income, and so encourages more personal saving. This increases the capital available for production, enabling some increase in GOP. Economic welfare also increases. The effects on the level of savings and the total capital stock are similar to those estimated to arise from a reduction in PIT (see reform B). However, the impact on production and GOP is muted in part as, unlike a reduction in PIT, a reduction in the tax on interest income does not directly incentivise additional labour supply. Furthermore, the accumulation of capital under a reduction in the tax on interest income owes partially to an increase in foreign capital, due to general equilibrium effects, as opposed to a reduction in PIT where the level of foreign capital is estimated to decrease. 32. The impact on macro-vulnerability is likely to be mixed: while there is an increase in net indebtedness and worsening of the current account, there is also higher national savings and capital stock, which may partly improve the economy's servicing capacity of external liabilities. Treasury:2366671 v1 0 7 Trea sury:2366671v10 8 Wide r Economic Ass ess men t 33. As no ted ea rli er, an y increa se in private saving f rom changes t o t ax rates is li kely t o overstate t he increa se in cap ital stock given investment alternatives ab road. This is not pick ed up in t he DZ model. If it were t he case, t his wou ld reduce additional capital investmen t taking place in New Zealand and t he model results may overestimate t he economic impacts of t he t ax reform. I n reali ty, we would also expe ct much of t he savings response t o be driven by changes in peoples’ saving habits (e.g. shift ing f rom shares t o t erm deposits t o t ake ad vantage of t he lower t ax on interest income as compared t o other capital income). 34. The DZ model is also li mited in t hat it doesn’t cap ture t he economic cost of incen tivising debt investmen ts when t he pre-tax return is lower t han t he pre-tax cost of capital. The impact wou ld t end t o reduce economic welfare. Non-Economic Ass ess men t 35. The reform in itself is regress ive (as higher income households t end t o ea rn more interest income) and it would add complexity. An importan t question is how comprehensive t he rules would be . For example, lease payments ha ve an interest component and systematicall y att empting t o t ax t his at a low rate cou ld be complex. The reform would remove t he neutrali ty of debt and equity f inancing do mesticall y and instead f avou r debt f inancing of domestic companies, which could reduce t he financial stabili ty of t he domestic company sector. It also raises t he arbitrage poten tial of ba ck -to-back lending where a t ax ad vantage is obtained and t he re is no net debt created overall . It may require some po tentiall y compli cated rules, such as a do mestic t hin capitali sation regime. Reform D: Dual I ncome Tax Context 36. A dual income t ax, as used in Norway, constitutes a low, f lat t ax rate on all capital income (corpo rate and interest income, with t ax on most dividend income removed to avoid double t axation) 11 and a higher, progress ive rate structure f or labour income. This would be a f undamen tal change t o New Zea land’s t ax system. DZ Modelli ng Results 37. We ha ve modell ed t he introduction of a dual income t ax at cost of $1 billi on , comparable t o other reform option s. This is equivalen t t o capping cap ital income tax rates at 30% in t he model (whil e t his reduces corporate income t ax f rom 33 %, it does no t change t he average interest income t ax rate in t he model, which is 24 .9% - a reform t ha t set a sing le cap ital rate equal t o t his rate wou ld instead cost around $2.5billi on ). It also includes t he removal of impu tation and dividend t axation given capital is only t axed on ce under a dual income t ax reg ime. Con sisten t with other reforms, f isc al cost is t hen off set by reduced governmen t t ran sfers t o households. 11 I n practice, dividends and cap ital ga ins are t axed t o t he exten t t ha t t he y exc eed t he aft er- tax risk -free interest rate (which in itself penali ses risk ). A f ull Norweg ian system also ensures t ha t double t axing at t he cap ital t ax rate is equivalen t t o sing le t axation at t he t op pe rsonal rate. Table 4: Summary of modelling impacts for a dual income tax GOP Economic Personal Total capital Foreign Current welfare savings stock capital account 0 ~ 0 0 0 • See key on p.3 of Annex 2 38. The model results (in Table 4 above) show that the introduction of a OIT regime at a cost of $1 billion would lead to an increase in personal savings and total capital stock, and some increase in GOP. This is due in part to the increase in foreign capital resulting from the reduction in capital tax rates, which also leads to a small reduction in economic welfare for reasons discussed under the corporate income tax reform above. The tax change sees the capital stock increase in all sectors of the economy, although this is more pronounced in the corporate sectors. Economic welfare and GOP are not significantly affected. 39. Impacts on macro-vulnerability are mixed. On the one hand, the model results suggest a small worsening of the current account and net indebtedness. On the other hand, the more significant increase in national savings and the capital stock may improve debt servicing capacity. 40. While the fiscal cost of a OIT is modelled here as offset by reduced government transfers to households, it could also be offset by higher labour income taxes. Results for this combination of reforms show that, while there would still be increases in savings and capital, there would be a fall in both GOP and economic welfare due to the negative impact of higher labour taxes on labour supply. Wider Economic Assessment 41 . As indicated earlier in the paper, reductions in corporate income tax rates are likely to have additional dynamic growth effects not captured in the model through increased TFP. 42. In its study on tax and economic growth, the OEC0 12 notes that for open economies with mobile capital (such as New Zealand), any increase in private saving is likely to overstate the increase in capital stock given investment alternatives abroad, meaning some private savings will flow into foreign investment options. This is not picked up in the OZ model. If it were the case, this will reduce additional capital investment taking place in New Zealand and the model results may overestimate the economic impacts of the tax reform. 43. It has been argued that dual income tax could be a way of reducing perceived preferences for investing in owner-occupied housing or rental housing or both. Norway, which has the most complete example of dual-income tax system, also has a high level of domestic savings invested in residential property compared to financial assets. The same observation has been made of New Zealand. Norway also has significant tax preferences relating to housing, such as: • Non-taxation of imputed rental income combined with a deduction for mortgage interest expense; • Non-taxation of capital gains on owner-occupied housing; and 12 Tax and Economic Growth, Economics Department Working Paper No. 620, OECD (2008) Treasury:2366671 v1 0 9 Trea sury:2366671v10 10 • A wealth t ax on all capital (includ ing housing ) bu t calculated in such a way t ha t the eff ective t ax rate on housing cap ital is lower t han t he eff ective t ax rate on othe r cap ital. 44. This suggests t ha t a low income t ax rate on capital income alone (or other measures con side red elsewhe re in t his report such as cutt ing personal t ax rates) will not ne cess aril y corr ect f or an y preferen ces f or investmen t in housing ; instead these should be address ed more directly. 13 Non-Economic Ass ess men t 45. I n a steady state a dual income t ax would t end t o be a less progress ive t ax structure, becau se individuals who earn a high level of capital income compa red t o labour income t end t o be wealthier t han ind ividuals who ea rn predomina tely labour income. 46. The need t o diff eren tiate be tween labour and cap ital income at t he pe rsonal level requires rules t o distinguish capital and labour income, and also t o distinguish normal capital returns f rom very high capital t ax returns (as t his is oft en bundled with labour income in a way t hat cannot be separated ). Such a system would significan tly increa se complexity, compli ance costs and administration costs compared t o t he curr en t system, and lead t o con siderab le arbitrage risk ass ociated with ha ving people reclass ify labour income as cap ital income. Reform E: All owance for Corporate Equity Context 47. An all owan ce f or corporate equity (ACE), as recommended f or t he UK by t he Mirr lees Review, only t axes above-normal returns on equity capital, and does no t tax normal returns. I n its f ull f orm it also includes a rate of return all owance (RRA) for normal returns t o investmen t at t he individual level, which was also included in the Mirr lees Review’s recommendation s. This wou ld also be a f undamen tal change to New Zea land’s t ax system. DZ Modelli ng Results 48. The ACE/RRA reform ha s been modell ed by reducing t he t ax rate t o zero on normal corpo rate returns and on interest and dividends ea rned by ind ividuals. Abo ve-no rmal returns (which are ass umed t o exist only in t he imperfectly compe titive company sector) would con tinue t o be t axed . The t otal cost of t he reform is estimated t o be around $9bn p.a. - $1 billi on of t his cost ha s been met through reduced go vernmen t t ran sfers t o households (so it is consisten t with other reforms presen ted) with t he remainder of t he cost met by increasing remaining income t ax rates. Table 5: Summary of modelli ng i mpac ts for a dual i ncome tax GDP Economic welfare Personal savings Total ca pital stock Foreign ca pital Curr ent account 13 See OECD Economic Surveys Norway (2010). Trea sury:2366671v10 11 See key on p.3 of Annex 2 49. The model results show t ha t t he introduction of an ACE/RRA would lead t o large increases in personal saving s (due t o t he RRA elemen t) and t he capital stock , bo th from domestic sou rces and increa sed FDI. The t ax change also cau ses a significan t reall ocation of cap ital f rom housing t o non-housing sectors. 50. However, t he re are significan t reductions in GDP and economic welfare. This is due t o t he ad verse labour supply eff ects f rom t he higher labour t ax rates required t o off set t he bu lk of t he f isc al cost of implemen ting t he ACE (aside f rom t he $1 billi on from reduced t ran sfers), and f rom pa rt of t he t ax reduction acc ruing t o f oreign owners of capital (which generate wind fall gains without improving marginal incen tives t o invest). This is shown in Table 5. 51. There is a li kely increa se in macro vulnerabili ty given a large increase in f oreign investment and worsen ing of t he curr ent acc ount, although a change in t he mix of external li abili ties f rom debt t o equity (caused by t he ACE) and higher na tional saving s (increa sing servicing capacity) will serve t o mitiga te t his. Wide r Economic Ass ess men t 52. As ind icated ea rli er in t he paper, reductions in corporate income t ax rates (in t his case f or no rmal returns, whe re t ax rates f all t o zero) are li kely t o ha ve additional dyna mic growth rates no t cap tured in t he model t hrough increa sed TFP. However there is a large increa se in personal income t ax rates which is li kely t o disc ourage human cap ital f ormation and make New Zealand a much less att ractive place t o set up a bu sine ss . Also, ass ess men ts of ACE regimes in Belgium and Brazil ha ve indicated t he re is some impa ct on t he debt-equity ratio, although t his is li kely t o be less importan t f or New Zea land as, f or domestic f irms, imputation large ly removes any bias t owards debt f inance. Changes t o debt-equity ratios would ha ve eff icien cy eff ects t ha t ha ve no t been f actored into t he DZ model, although given t he size of adverse labour supply eff ects, these are no t li kely t o alter t he overall model finding s. 53. As no ted earli er, any increase in private saving due t o changes t o t ax rates, is li kely to overstate t he increa se in cap ital stock given investmen t alternatives abroad. This is not pick ed up in t he DZ model. If it were t he case, t his would reduce additional capital investmen t taking place in New Zealand and t he model results may overestimate t he economic impacts of t he t ax reform. Non-Economic Ass ess men t 54. As with a dual income t ax, an ACE wou ld t end t o be a less prog ress ive t ax structure t han t he curr en t structure, as earne rs of large amounts of cap ital income would benefit t he most and t hey t end t o be wea lthier. An ACE regime wou ld also add significan t complexity t o t he t ax system, and could open up sub stan tial interna tional arbitrage opportunities t ha t would be very diff icult t o guard against. Ane cdo tal evidence f rom Belgium suggests it ha s been diff icult t o manage t he f isc al cost by att empting t o restrict t he ACE deduction t o ne w equity – rules att empting t o do t his have been diff icult t o design and en force. Trea su ry :2366671v10 12 55. Furthe r, al though an ACE system is li kely t o resul t in lower debt t o equity ratio s, thi s will not reduce overall t ax arbi trage po ssibilitie s. In f act, the y are li kely t o in crea se as equity in vest ment will ha ve an arbi trage of being deductible/non-assessable. Thi s is li kely t o be a la rger arbi trage ad vantage t han f or debt as in terest in come is taxable in most countrie s, while f oreign equity in come is oft en no t t axed . These arbi trage opportunitie s risk the co rporate t ax ba se and could in crea se f iscal co st. APPENDIX A: THE DIAMOND AND ZODROW CGE MODEL Description 56. The model used to inform much of this report is an overlapping-generations dynamic computable general equilibrium (CGE) model, originally designed for a closed economy by George Zodrow and John Diamond. They have extended the model to an open economy for New Zealand. This model allows the calculation of changes to GOP, savings, utility, and other economic variables due to the tax changes considered in the model. It also provides a guide to understanding the indirect effects of the tax changes, some of which are counter-intuitive at first glance. 57. The economy is made up of five sectors: the perfectly competitive corporate, imperfectly competitive corporate (to reflect the presence of location-specific economic rents in New Zealand), a non-corporate sector, rental housing, and owner-occupied housing sector. Firms in each sector uses capital and labour to produce goods and maximise the value of the sector, based on the dividends each sector provides to investors. Capital and goods can be both imported and exported from the corporate sectors. Individuals, in the model, work for 45 years then retire and live off their savings for 1 0 years before dying and leaving a bequest to younger generations. They maximise their lifetime utility from consumption, leisure, and bequests. The government taxes personal income, corporate income, consumption, and some types of capital gains, then use the funds primarily for government consumption. The money flows modelled in the Diamond and Zodrow model are shown in Figure 1 below. bequests Generations capital (FDI) Production International Figure 1: Money flows in the Diamond and Zodrow model. Note that, as this is a money flows diagram, the arrows labelled "capital" refer to the return from capital, rather than the capital itself. Treasury:2366671 v1 0 13 Trea sury:2366671v10 14 58. The model parameters were t aken f rom New Zea land da ta when po ss ible, and t he model starts f rom a presumed equili brium of 2007 (the latest year f or which we had complete da ta). The model t hen calculates a new equili brium ba sed on a t ax change. When t ax changes are implemen ted t he revenue loss is made up eithe r from changes t o lump-sum governmen t t ransfers (fisc all y neutral changes) or by making proportional, off sett ing changes t o income t ax rates t o make t he reform revenue neutral. This varies by t ax reform bu t is noted in t he disc uss ion of t he results f or each sc enario. Interpretation of economic welfare 59. Economic welfare, in t he DZ model, is represen ted by a li fetime utili ty f un ction of consumption, leisure, and t he bequest left for f uture generations. Utili ty does not have a measureable value , just a compa rative ranking . Therefore t he cho ice of mathe matical f un ction is arbitrary provided t he utili ty f unction ranks diff erent op tions in a suitable way, (e.g. more leisure means more utili ty all else equal). Because of this f ea ture, a 3.1% improvemen t in utili ty will no t necess aril y make people 3.1% happier – t he only t hing t his nu mber can say is t hat people ha ve a grea ter improvemen t in utili ty (and by proxy , economic welfare) t han if t he reform ga ve a 2.4% improvemen t in utili ty, f or example. Model testing 60. Analys ts f rom Treasury and I R carr ied out robustne ss t esting of t he initial version of the DZ model t o ensure it was suitable f or ou r purpo ses and t o understand t he shortcomings of t he model. This high li ghted a nu mber of iss ue s around how t he open economy pa rt of the model is be ing modell ed , which cen tre around t he calculation of f oreign cap ital (and how it responded t o changes in t he corporate income t ax rate). 61. As a result we made a nu mbe r of improvemen ts t o t he model t o address t he se, and othe r, iss ues and improve t he robustne ss of t he results. The key changes are: • Changing t he production f unctions used in t he model t o give a more rea li stic elasticity of sub stitution be tween cap ital and labour f or New Zealand, and improve model cali bration using New Zealand national acc ounts da ta; • Separately calculating t he aft er- tax rate of return earned by f oreign investors in New Zea land in t he model. This all ows f or a more robust calculation of t he foreign capital f lows in response t o a New Zealand t ax change (foreign cap ital flows had previou sly been based on t he do mestic investors’ rate of return, which included a t erm f or impu tation so does no t properly reflect t he impa ct of a change in corpo rate t ax, f or example); • All owing f oreign cap ital t o be invested as bonds as well as equity. This now all ows t he model t o pick up t he diff eren t rates of return (and diff eren t t ax treatments) of debt vs . equity investmen ts by f oreign investors, and t herefore provide s f or more reali stic f oreign income f lows in t he ba lan ce of paymen ts; and • Updating t he wage profil e so it uses New Zealand da ta and properly incorpo rates t he cohort eff ect of increa sing labour productivity. Trea sury:2366671v10 15 62. Separately, we are con cerned t ha t t he absence of an expli cit exc hange rate in t he model and t he f act t ha t exports are calculated purely t o clea r t he ba lan ce of paymen ts. This means it is li kely t he model is not properly cap turing t he f ull impacts of t ax changes on externa l ba lances. This was no t po ss ible t o address in t he t ime avail ab le bu t is something we can loo k t o refine go ing f orward. 63. Overall t hough we t hink t he model is useful f or drawing broad observations/insigh ts tha t can he lp as part of a broader ass ess men t into each of t he modell ed t ax reforms rathe r t han reporting specific quantified results. Going f orward t here are a numbe r of refine men ts we wou ld seek t o make in t he longer t erm alongside additional t esting work t o increase ou r con fidence in t he interna l workings of t he model f urther. Sensitivity analys is 64. We ha ve also carr ied ou t sen sitivity analys is on key parameters in t he revised CGE model. The se include t he elasticity of labour supply, t he elasticity of supply of foreign cap ital and t he ass umption about t he size of economic ren ts. I n addition we ass ess ed changes t o some of the main pa rameters underpinn ing t he model calculation s (such as t he intertempo ral elasticity of substitution and rate of t ime preference). In general t hese ass umption s were varied by ±50 % of t he ir origina l value s t o ass ess changes on model results f or separate changes in t he corporate income t ax rate, pe rsonal income t ax rates and GST rate. Table 2 below sho ws t he central ass umptions f rom t he model t ha t ha ve been included in t he sensitivity analys is. 65. Overall varying t he se key pa rameters did no t materiall y change t he con clusion s of the results and direction of impa ct of t he model results. • The size of model results was most sensitive t o changes in t he intertempo ral elasticity of sub stitution , which is no t surprising given it de termine s how consumption changes over t ime. The ass umption used in t he model is based on existing economic li terature and is a midpoint of t he elasticity value s used in othe r simil ar models. I n all cases t he direction of t he model results were no t aff ected by varying t his ass umption . • The results are generall y not overly sen sitive t o changes in t he elasticity of labour supply (proxied in t he model by t he intratemporal elasticity of substitution between labour and leisure), although changes t o results are more significan t when loo king at a personal income t ax change. Again t he direction of impa ct of the model results are no t aff ected by varying t his ass umption . 14 The ass umption used in t he model is within a range of elasticities estimated in a stud y by Guyonne Kalb 15 as pa rt of recen t work f or Treasury. • Model results are no t sen sitive t o t he size of economic rents ass umed in t he model, including f or a change in t he corporate income t ax rate. Whil e f urther work understanding location-specific economic ren ts is important, ou r analys is suggests it is no t a key sen sitivity f or t he model results. 14 The on ly exc ep tion is f or t he ACE reform, whe re reducing t he intratempo ral elasticity of substitution cau sed t he GDP impa cts of t he reform t o be sli gh tly po sitive. This is no t unexpe cted given t he size of t he labour supply response t o t he income t ax f isc al off set and t ha t t his variab le ha s been varied qu ite sign ifican tly by 50 %). 15 For t he model t his was con verted by Diamond and Zod row into an intratempo ral elasticity of substitution (be tween leisure and consumption ) of 0.80 , which t he y ad vised was approximately equivalen t in eff ect t o t he 0.44 hours worked elasticity. Trea sury:2366671v10 16 • Changes t o t he elasticity of supply of f oreign cap ital (which is ass umed t o be highly elastic) also does no t change t he direction of t he impa cts of model results. The re is more sen sitivity when loo king at t he se changes alongside a corporate income t ax reduction - what seems t o be more impo rtan t here is t he fact t he re is already high levels of f oreign capital invested in New Zealand. I n the case of a corporate income t ax reduction , f or example, t his appears t o be a more significant driver of t he divergent impacts on GDP (which increa ses) and economic welfare (which de crea ses), rather t han any ne w f oreign investmen t resulting f rom t he reduction in t he corpo rate t ax rate. Table 2: Key parameter va lues use d i n DZ model (va lues va ried by ±50% during se nsitivity analys is) Parameter Value use d in the model Notes Intertempo ral elasticity of sub stitution (be tween consumption no w and con sumption later) 0.30 Mid-po int value of ass umption s used in compa rab le stud ies. Intratempo ral elasticity of sub stitution (be tween leisure and con sumption ) 0.80 Set at a value t ha t approximates the Galb² labour supply elasticity of 0.44 , and within t he range of value s used in compa rab le stud ies Size of price markup in non- compe titive sector (denotes size of economic ren ts in t he model) 0.25 (i.e. 25 %) Based on estimates f rom Bayou mi, La xton , and Pesen ti (2004) Elasticity of supply of f oreign cap ital 5.0 Relatively high elasticity value used to approximate high ly elastic supply of cap ital Rate of t ime preferen ce 0.0175 Based on value used in a compa rab le stud y and mod ified t o cali brate cap ital and labour income in t he initial equili brium Trea sury:2366671v10 17 APPENDIX B: THE ANDREW COLEMAN MODEL OF TAX AND HOUSING Description 66. The high -level model de veloped by And rew Coleman is a version of the overlapping generation s li fecycle model pioneered by Modigli ani and Brumberg (1980), and adapted t o analys e housing iss ue s by Ortalo-Magné and Rady (1998, 2006). It is deli be rately complex t o cap ture t he key f ea tures of t he f actors t ha t aff ect how people make housing choices. The heart of t he model is a dynamic, f orward looking maximization problem in which a series of agents who diff er by income, age, and wea lth make choices about t he t ype of housing in which t hey li ve, how much t he y con sume and save, and how much t he y borr ow and lend. These agents have choices over whe the r t o ren t or buy, t o li ve in large or small houses, or t o share housing with othe r people. The y f ace reali stic bank impo sed constraints on the amount t he y can borr ow and t he repaymen t sc hedule t he y f ace if t hey a purcha se a house, and t he y f ace a t ax system t ha t closely reflects t ha t prevaili ng in New Zea land. Long-term house prices and ren ts are de termined endogenously in the model, and reflect t he interaction of t he de cisions t o supply or demand housing by households, landlords, and a construction sector. 67. The model calculates dynamic steady-state pa ths f or house prices and ren ts, and a set of equili brium housing supply and demand pa tt erns t hat depend on f undamen tal parameters such as interest rates, con struction sector supply elasticities, the inflation rate, and t he f eatures of t he t ax system. Particular att en tion is paid t o t he various ways t ha t cap ital income, including housing income, is t axed , ho w t hese taxes diff er acc ording t o whether one is an owne r- occ up ier of housing or a landlord, and ho w t hese t axes will change if a cap ital gains t ax is introduced . 68. The model analys es t he eff ect of a cap ital gains t ax on t he economy when property prices increa se be cau se t here is real population growth or real income growth, and not just be cau se t here is generali sed inflation. The t hree cases are analys ed separately, be cau se t he re are sign ifican t diff erences in t he underlying behaviou r of the economy in ea ch case. Conclusions 69. The paper acc ompanying t he model de rives algebraicall y a f ormula f or determining the price t o ren t ratio f or residential ren tal property given values f or interest rates, inflation rates, and expe cted real property appreciation rates. The paper sho ws tha t t he price t o ren t ratio determined in t he ab sen ce of any income t ax is t he same as t he price t o ren t ratio resulting if t here were a comprehensive income t ax t ha t included t axing acc rued capital ga ins. The price t o ren t ratio may be diff eren t if there is an income t ax t ha t t axes ren ts but not capital gains. Therefore, in t he presen ce of an incomplete income t ax t ha t does not include t axing capital ga ins, changing value s f or inflation and interest rates may change t he price t o ren t ratio resulting in house prices (and ren tal rates) changing as interest rates and inflation changes. App lying historical da ta f rom t he 1990s and t he 2000s de cades, and ass uming t he curr en t t ax system, t he price t o ren t ratio wou ld ha ve doubled f rom the 1990s t o t he 2000s compa red t o either a no t ax or f ull t ax (includ ing cap ital gains) en vironment. This means house prices increased more t han t he y otherwise would ha ve if cap ital gains had been t axed (or if t here had been no income t ax at all ). Trea sury:2366671v10 18 70. Coleman also modell ed t he impa ct t he impact of rising house prices resulting f rom eithe r income growth or population growth in an environ men t with bo th t he curr en t tax system and a system t ha t t axed capital ga ins. 71. The model results show t he introduction of a cap ital ga ins t ax on residential ren tal property only would (compa red t o a poli cy of no capital ga ins t ax) t end t o reduce the price of all housing , increase ren ts, reduce t he stock of ren tal housing and increase t he stock of owne r- occ up ied housing , reduce t he amount invested in housing and increa se t he amount invested in debt (other f ull y-taxed investmen ts). It would also increase economic welfare by ass uming t he revenue raised f rom a capital gains t ax would be used t o reduce con sumption t axes. The Coleman model also sho ws a f airly sign ifican t impact on ne t f oreign bo rr owing , as lower housing prices wou ld reduce t he demand f or f oreign bo rr owing t o buy housing .