Regulatory Impact Statement The tax treatment of payments by employers in respect of employee expenditure, and employer-provided accommodation Agency Disclosure Statement This Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) has been prepared by Inland Revenue. It provides an analysis of options for reforming the rules determining the tax treatment of allowances and other reimbursing payments paid by employers to, or for the benefit of, their employees and the direct provision of accommodation. Inland Revenue has identified a number of issues which have broad implications for the tax treatment of these types of payments. As a result, the Government added the review of this area of tax law to its work programme. Given that employers and employees do not need to provide separate information to Inland Revenue on these payments, Inland Revenue does not hold detailed information about how much employers pay by way of allowances and other reimbursing payments. We have, however, been advised that businesses generally pay fewer types of allowances than they used to. Nevertheless, there are still a number of payments that are commonly paid by employers, in particular, in relation to accommodation, meals and clothing. To overcome the lack of comprehensive data in this area and gain a better general understanding of the scope of the issues around employer-provided accommodation, allowances and other reimbursing payments, officials consulted with a wide range of employers, key business representatives and Government agencies, to obtain their views on such payments. There has also been wider public consultation on the options for reform. This consultation has helped to shape the options and our recommendations. Our findings are summarised in this RIS. The Treasury has worked closely with Inland Revenue in preparing this statement and agrees with the analysis. A strong message from employers and their representatives has been the desire for certainty over the tax treatment in particular circumstances. This need for certainty has been a key objective in shaping the preferred options. Although the proposed changes, when broken down into individual issues, may be slightly fiscally positive or negative, the effect of the measures as a whole is likely to be broadly revenue neutral, as originally intended. Inland Revenue is of the view that there are no significant constraints, caveats and uncertainties concerning the regulatory analysis undertaken, other than as noted above. None of the policy options would restrict market competition, reduce the incentives for businesses to innovate and invest, unduly impair private property rights or override fundamental common law principles. David Carrigan Policy Director Policy and Strategy Inland Revenue 17 October 2013 2 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY There are a number of significant concerns around the tax treatment of employer provided accommodation, accommodation payments and other allowances and payments by employers to cover employee expenditure. The generality of the current tax legislation has led to impractical outcomes that may differ from how employers apply the rules in practice. Under current tax law when an employee expenditure payment is made, provided it is to cover a work expense, it is not taxable. However, when there is a private element in the linked expense, that element is taxable irrespective of compliance costs. As meals, accommodation and normal clothing are inherently private, the starting position under current tax law is that any employee expenditure payment to cover these sorts of expenses should be taxed. (This is on the basis that the private benefit is a salary substitute and that, just like salary and wages, should be taxed to ensure that there is no incentive to provide remuneration in ways that are not taxed.) In many instances, however, the private benefit is either incidental to the business objective or is minimal and/or hard to measure. Accordingly, some more practical rules of thumb are needed to determine where to draw the taxable/ non-taxable line, which means that legislative change is required in this area. The major areas of concern relate to employer-provided accommodation and accommodation payments, particularly when linked to work-related travel and secondments. There has been a lot of confusion in this area, leading to calls from a range of representative bodies, agents and employers for the law in this area to be made more certain and workable. Legislative change is also required for meal payments, as the current law does not match practice (for example, the amount that an employee saves because an employer pays for their evening meal while working out of town is in theory taxable under current law), and for work- related clothing allowances. Officials have undertaken extensive consultation over the past two years on these issues. A range of options have been considered and measured against the objectives of limiting compliance costs, fairness and economic efficiency, leading to the recommendations below. There are no environmental or cultural impacts from these recommended changes. Potentially these changes could impact on a wide range of employees. However, in the vast majority of cases the new rules will largely match existing business practice but with the added advantage of providing greater certainty, so the overall impact on employees and employers should be limited. The recommended changes are: Accommodation • Employer-provided accommodation or an accommodation payment would be tax exempt when an employee is required by their employer to move to a new work location that is not within reasonable daily travelling distance of their home, and either i. the move is not project specific but there is a reasonable expectation that the employee's secondment to that work location will be for a period of two years or less, in which case the tax exemption is for up to two years; or ii. the move is to work for a period of three years or less on a project of limited duration, in which case the exemption is for up to three years. 3 There would also be a special exemption of up to five years for employees working on Canterbury earthquake recovery projects (reverting to the three year time limit by 31 March 2019). • When an employee has to work at more than one workplace on an on-going basis the accommodation or accommodation payment would be tax exempt without an upper time limit. • The rules for determining the taxable value of an accommodation benefit when it is not tax exempt would be clarified, including in relation to accommodation provided by churches to ministers of religion. Meals • The full amount of meal payments linked to work-related travel would be tax exempt, subject to a three month upper time limit at a particular work location. • The full amount of meal payments and light refreshments outside work-related travel, such as at conferences, would be tax exempt. Clothing • There would be a specific exemption for the costs of purchasing and maintaining distinctive work clothing, such as a uniform, to align with the fringe benefit tax approach when the clothing is provided directly by the employer. • There would be an exemption for plain clothes allowances paid to members of uniformed services who are required to wear ordinary clothing when performing their duties where those allowances were treated as tax-free as at 1 July 2013. General rule for other payments • The general rule for determining when an allowance is or is not taxable would be clarified, including by providing the Commissioner of Inland Revenue with the discretion to issue a determination as to what proportion of a class of payment is non- taxable when the private or capital element is hard to measure and/or low in value. The recommended application date for most of these changes would be 1 April 2015. However, to ease the transition, some of the changes, including the special rule for Canterbury earthquake recovery projects, have earlier start dates. The general accommodation rule would, at the taxpayer's option, apply from 1 January 2011. 4 STATUS QUO AND PROBLEM DEFINITION Background 1. This RIS provides an analysis of options for the reform of the rules affecting the tax treatment of allowances and other payments made by employers to, or for the benefit of, their employees and employer provided accommodation. These reforms arise out of the policy review, as outlined in the November 2012 officials' issues paper, Reviewing the tax treatment of employee allowances and other expenditure payments. 2. Businesses have a long history of paying their employees allowances, although we understand that there are fewer allowances today than thirty years ago as many have been incorporated into salaries and wages. The legislated tests have also changed over time from a system where all tax-free allowances had to be sanctioned by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue to one of taxpayer self-assessment. 3. Although the term "allowance" is commonly used in this statement, the review covers a wider range of employer payments. An allowance can be categorised as a payment to an employee which is additional to (and in some cases a substitute for) salary and wages, paid in advance and based on estimated expenditure. An employer can also make a payment to reimburse actual expenditure or on account of an employee to settle the employee's expenditure. These sorts of payments are normally paid in arrears either directly to the employee or to a third party. This variety of payments can more generally be described as "employee expenditure payments". The most common employee expenditure payments relate to accommodation and meals. In addition, accommodation provided directly by an employer has been included as part of the review. The current legislative approach 4. The tax legislation covering these areas consists of some limited specific rules either, as in the case of accommodation, setting out the basis on which it is taxed or, for certain other paymentsl, the basis on which they are exempt from tax, with a general rule setting out when other types of payments are tax exempt. 5. Generally, under the legislation, when an employee expenditure payment is made then, provided it is to meet an expense incurred in earning the employee's employment income, it is not taxable. The exception is when there is a private or capital element in the expense being reimbursed. In such circumstances, the payment may be taxable in part or in full. A taxable employee expenditure payment is taxable income of the employee and subject to PAYE. In the case of employer-provided accommodation, the benefit of the accommodation or accommodation allowance is treated as income of the employee and subject to PAYE to the extent of its market value. These taxable benefits are also taken into account when calculating social assistance entitlements. 6. The framework behind the current legislation is that any benefit that is a salary substitute should be taxed, just like salary and wages, to ensure that there is no incentive to provide remuneration in ways that are not taxed. 1 Specific exemptions are provided for reimbursement of certain expenses arising from the relocation of employees, for overtime meal payments and for employees' additional transport costs. 5 Problems with current approach 7. The rule setting out when most types of employer expenditure payments are tax exempt is very general and over the years has been open to a number of different interpretations and practices, leading to taxpayers questioning what is the correct application and intention of the law. Furthermore, there are questions over whether the current law represents the most appropriate policy outcomes. These questions create uncertainty for everyone. 8. In the past, gaps that have arisen from the general rules had to be subsequently filled with either more detailed legislation or interpretive statements by Inland Revenue. For example, changes were made in 2009 specifically to deal with employee relocation payments and overtime meal payments. Since then a number of further concerns with other types of payments have arisen, in particular in relation to accommodation, meals and clothing. As a result the law needs to be clarified to provide greater certainty and better alignment with business practice. 9. To minimise uncertainty and create consistency in the area, while at the same time ensuring that there is not significant salary substitution, the Government included a review of the tax rules in this area in its work programme, with particular focus on accommodation and meals. 10. Some examples of the problems that need to be addressed are: • Accommodation: It has been common practice for employers to adopt a "net benefit" approach in determining whether employer funded or provided accommodation is taxed. Under this approach, when an employee maintains a home elsewhere for their use, it is argued there is no taxable benefit, whatever the circumstances. Inland Revenue does not agree that this approach is supported in law and the Commissioner of Inland Revenue published an interpretation statement in December 2012 2 clarifying her view about the correct approach. Under the statement, the exemption for employer-provided accommodation and accommodation payments depends on the circumstances in each case (as measured against certain fact-related criteria) with a maximum exempt period of 1 year, and only applies to existing employees. This statement has generated widespread comment amongst employers and their representatives that this interpretation produces an unreasonable outcome that does not match what businesses are doing in practice. • Meals: Arguably when an employer reimburses the cost of a work-related meal then the amount saved by the employee (in other words their normal expenditure on the meal) should be taxed. However, it would not be practically possible to comply with or administer a test that requires such an apportionment to be made. 11. Without change, uncertainty in these areas will continue and is likely to remain a significant issue. A strict interpretation and application of the current law could result in significant additional compliance costs for employers, or even non-compliance. The uncertainty can also result in unfairness and economic efficiency issues to the extent that any payment or employer-provided accommodation provides an untaxed private benefit. 2 CS 12/01 Commissioner's Statement: Income tax treatment of accommodation payments, employer-provided accommodation and accommodation allowances. 6 12. It has not been possible to quantify the impact of the problem because Inland Revenue does not hold detailed information about how much employers pay by way of employee expenditure payments. However, discussions with individual businesses and key business representatives indicate that the issue is likely to be significant for a wide range of employers and, potentially, for many thousands of employees. These employees would be in both the public and private sectors and would include manual workers, technicians, executives and other professionals. OBJECTIVES 13. Given the concerns outlined above, three key policy objectives were identified for the review: Objective I: Improve clarity and certainty, thereby improving compliance. The first objective has been to explore options for providing greater clarity and certainty in this area for employers and employees, something employers and their representatives have said is important to them particularly in relation to accommodation. Rules that are relatively easy for employers to understand and apply, aid compliance and help to minimise compliance and administration costs. Objective 2: Fairness — ensure individuals pay their fair share of tax and social assistance payments are targeted at those in genuine need. When an employee expenditure payment is a substitute for labour income/provides a material private benefit, the second objective is to tax the payment and include it in income when determining eligibility for social assistance. In this regard, the review attempts to identify a workable boundary between payments that confer a private benefit and those that do not. As outlined in the policy principles set out in the issues paper, when a payment by an employer is to meet an expense incurred by the employee during the course of and directly because of their employment, there should normally be no tax consequences because there will be no or only incidental private benefit, but when the payment is to meet a purely private purpose then it should be taxed in full. When there is a mixed private and employment purpose, ideally the amount relating to the private purpose should be taxed. However, apportionment may not be practical in all cases due to the compliance costs associated with separating out the relative private and employment elements. In such cases the private amount should be ignored when low in value (and incidental to the work purpose) or hard to measure, and the benefit is not provided as a salary substitute. This approach ensures that when there is a private benefit, the tax and social assistance outcomes are the same for employees irrespective of the composition of their remuneration. 7 Objective 3: Economic efficiency — ensure that tax rules in this area are not an impediment to business decision making. The law in this area can impact on a broad spectrum of employees who incur expenditure during the course of their work and for which they are reimbursed by their employers. In some cases their employers ultimately bear the additional tax costs. Other than this direct fmancial implication for the employee or employer, there is the potential for the tax rules to act, where the payment relates to accommodation and meals, as a disincentive to the free movement of labour and, more generally, to normal businesses activities that require travel. To avoid these economic costs, it is crucial to have rules that are clear and that tax only the private benefit element. REGULATORY IMPACT ANALYSIS 14. The main options for change considered during the review are summarised in the table below and discussed in the paragraphs following the table. They are assessed against the three objectives outlined in the preceding section (compliance, fairness and economic efficiency). A description and fuller analysis of all options considered is provided in the annex. That annex assesses the options against compliance, economic, social and fiscal impacts. The social impact is considered in terms of fairness. There are no cultural or environmental impacts. Why the status quo is not an option 15. The option of retaining the status quo was also considered for all issues but was rejected because we did not consider it would address the compliance, equity and economic efficiency problems associated with the current rules identified earlier. The status quo option, therefore, is not an option for the long-term. 16. The key options for change are: Issue Option Net impact and whether objectives are met Employer-provided & funded accommodation linked to work travel and secondments generally Net benefit approach (see paragraph 19 for further explanation) - Likely to involve significant compliance and administrative costs. - Equity issues as employee's tax and social assistance outcomes differ depending on personal living circumstances. - Likely to distort behaviour/encourage salary substitution if applied without any time limit, leading to high fiscal risk. Not preferred option as is high risk and subjective. Series of upper time limits (two years generally, three years for projects with up to five years for Canterbury recovery projects) (see paragraphs 20-26 for further explanation) - Is the approach adopted in a number of other countries. - Removes uncertainty around where boundary is drawn so should reduce compliance and administration costs. - Extended upper limits for projects and for Canterbury recovery work provide flexibility to avoid equity issues. - This flexibility should also not impede labour movement and normal business activity. Preferred option as limits risk and provides flexibility without subjectivity. Upper time limit with Commissioner discretion to extend (see paragraph 27 for further explanation) - Removes some uncertainty around the boundary of what is/is not taxable, upper limit provides a safe harbour, and discretion allows for special circumstances. - Commissioner discretion would involve more compliance and administration costs. - Application of Commissioner discretion may impact on fairness/consistency. 8 - Commissioner discretion provides flexibility to avoid impeding labour movement/normal business practice. Not preferred option as although limits fiscal risk and provides flexibility, may cause inconsistency. Valuation of taxable accommodation benefit Market value - Compliance and administration costs minimised as is current valuation approach and therefore well understood. - May not be fair where employee provided high priced accommodation that employee would not normally occupy but for the requirements of the job. May impede labour mobility in such cases. Market value with standard adjustment - Compliance costs dependent on nature of the adjustment. - Standard adjustment difficult to determine and application could be too wide, so raises issues of fairness and economic costs. Market value with caps for church-supplied property, for those posted overseas (see paragraph 28 for further explanation), and possibly for New Zealand Defence Force housing - Generally limits compliance and administration costs. - Targets adjustment to specific cases identified as requiring adjustment. Preferred option for this reason. Meals payments during work travel Upper time limit — tax after 3 months (see paragraphs 29 and 30 for further explanation) - Removes uncertainty around where boundary is drawn so should reduce compliance and administration costs. - Should be sufficient for vast majority of journeys away from normal workplace so should not impede normal business activity, while recognising extra costs for employee. - Limits fiscal risk associated with alternative option of having no limit Preferred option. Clothing payments Distinctive work clothing exemption (see paragraphs 29 to 31 for further explanation) - By in effect codifying the outcome of case law and mirroring fringe benefit tax treatment when clothing provided by employer instead of an allowance, it provides greater clarity and therefore reduces compliance costs relative to the status quo of relying on general rule. - Plain clothes exemption for uniformed services reflects long-standing practice recognising specific circumstances. General rule for other payments Some minor clarifications and a Commissioner determination power to specify proportion of benefit that is taxable (see paragraphs 32 to 34) - Improves status quo by providing more clarity and flexibility to handle future questions over what is taxable/not taxable while retaining current rules. - Alternative of a substantial revision would lead to greater uncertainty with no guarantee of improvement 17. More discussion of these points in the context of each area of employee expenditure payment is provided below. Employee accommodation 18. Employer provided and funded accommodation provides an inherently private benefit to the employee and should generally be taxed, particularly if provided as part of a salary trade- off. However, in some instances there is little benefit to the employee, largely because the accommodation or payments arise from the requirements of the employer or the job. In such cases there should be no tax liability. The key problem is identifying a workable boundary between private and work-related expenditure so only private expenditure is taxed. 9 Accommodation linked to work travel (and secondments) Tax exemption when no net benefit 19. To establish this boundary, as noted earlier, many employers have in the past adopted a "net benefit" approach which takes into account whether an employee maintains a home elsewhere for their use and where this is the case, it is then argued that there is no taxable benefit when the employer provides accommodation. This is on the basis that the value of the accommodation related to the work secondment is wholly linked to the employee's job and is extra to the employee's on-going normal home costs. However, such an approach is highly subjective requiring an evaluation of an employee's personal affairs to determine the right tax outcome which may not be possible at the time of payment. It would also be difficult for Inland Revenue to audit and would result in significant administration costs. Whilst in many instances the employee will be incurring extra costs because of the 'temporary' nature of the 'move', the question is the point at which maintaining a home elsewhere is a matter of personal choice for the employee that ought to be recognised as a taxable benefit. The net benefit approach ignores this key issue. Tax exemption subject to time limits (recommended option) 20. A test or tests based on objective rules may be easier for employers and employees to understand. Some time limit cut-off would be required to establish a suitable boundary and this would also need to take account of fiscal considerations 3. 21. The issues paper suggested a one year bright line test for accommodation linked to work-related secondments of existing employees. However, feedback suggested that a one year limit would be too short for a significant proportion of temporary shifts such as work- related secondments. Consultation indicated that a two year time limit should cover the vast majority of cases in New Zealand. However, there were still concerns in relation to longer- term projects. Options considered for dealing with these concerns included an increased time limit for projects, including the Canterbury earthquake recovery, or alternatively, a power for the Commissioner to agree to an increase in the two year time limit in particular cases. A variant of this alternative option was for the taxpayer to self-assess whether they qualified for a time extension against a set of fact-related criteria. 22. Accordingly, for the general situation, our preference is for a tax exemption linked to a two year upper time limit. 23. Given that increasing any time limit beyond two years for employees in general would not be necessary for most work-related secondments, our preferred option is to allow a limited extension to three years for major projects of limited duration. To qualify the employer will need to have been contracted by an unrelated third party to supply employees to work specifically on such a project for a duration of no more than three years. (While the employee's contracted work cannot exceed a maximum of three years, the duration of the project could be longer.) Both new and existing employees would be potentially eligible in this case. 3 An exemption with an upper time limit is the approach used in Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States. Australia and the United States have a tax exemption with a one-year upper time limit, while Canada and the United Kingdom have a tax exemption with a two-year upper time limit. 10 24. This extension would be in recognition of the long-term nature of the engagement in these sorts of projects and that some of the projects are often not located where employees might want to relocate permanently. The employees might be employed on a fly in/fly out basis, so would not be relocating, or recruited specifically from overseas with no intention that they ever relocate to New Zealand. 25. Even a three year time limit might not be a long enough period for many of the individual projects that will be undertaken as part of the Canterbury earthquake recovery. Consequently, the package includes a separate transitional rule specific to accommodation provided to employees working on Canterbury earthquake reconstruction projects, over the period 4 September 2010 to 31 March 2019. The recommended maximum tax-free accommodation period is five years for employees arriving in the period 4 September 2010 - 31 March 2015; four years for arrivals in the period 1 April 2015 — 31 March 2016, and three years thereafter. However, Canterbury recovery work will eventually come to an end, at which point the general rules would apply. Consequently, the specific exemption would cease from April 2019. 26. The advantage of the option of a series of upper time limits is that it provides flexibility to handle a wide range of business situations and should not impede labour mobility. At the same time it balances the equity issues associated with ensuring that a pragmatic boundary is drawn to delineate what is a private, and hence taxable, benefit. Since employers and employees can identify the treatment upfront, it aids in limiting compliance and administration costs. Commissioner discretion to extend 27. The alternative option of giving the Commissioner of Inland Revenue a discretion to extend the two year time period would also provide additional flexibility for particular cases. However, ideally the factors the Commissioner would take into account would be defined in legislation, along with any upper time limit to the extension. There would be additional compliance and administration costs in applying such an approach. Whilst some employers might welcome this discretionary approach, there is scope for inconsistency in how the power is applied and if the factors can be defined in legislation it is questionable whether there would be much to be gained by requiring employers to apply for, and Inland Revenue to consider, an extension of time. The same concerns would apply if the extension was self- assessed by the taxpayer and could lead to more disputes between Inland Revenue and taxpayers. (Consequently, we prefer a series of upper time limits rather than a Commissioner discretion as in the previous option.) Employees with more than one workplace 28. There are also a number of circumstances in which an employee has to work at more than one workplace on an on-going basis, because of the nature of their duties, and the additional workplaces are beyond reasonable daily travelling distance from their home. This could be the case, for example, for senior managers of large organisations. In these circumstances, because of the on-going nature of the two workplaces and the associated costs, an upper time limit is not appropriate. Accordingly, our recommendation is to introduce an exemption for employer-provided accommodation and accommodation payments in such circumstances, without an upper time limit. 11 Value of accommodation benefits 29. When employers provide accommodation to their employees, the current approach is to base the taxable value on market rental value. The recommended approach is to leave this well understood approach unchanged, but to make the position clearer in legislation, including recognition of any contribution made by the employee. However, adjustments to this market value rule are recommended for: • Ministers of religion: A longstanding existing administrative practice has capped the benefit of church-supplied accommodation at 10% of stipend. From a policy perspective this accommodation provides a significant private benefit and should be taxed like salary and wages given that no rent is charged. However, removing the existing practice would place a significant additional cost at relatively short notice on individual churches at a time when they have other significant financial obligations, such as making earthquake strengthening repairs. There is a case therefore for continuing the effect of the longstanding practice in a way that is workable, and across the spectrum of churches. This could be by way of a full exemption or by simply including the current practice in legislation. In either case, it would seem more workable to include both rented as well as owned accommodation provided to ministers as they are largely substitutable. A specific valuation rule is recommended for accommodation supplied (whether owned or rented) by religious bodies to their ministers, subject to a reasonableness test that would cap the exempt amount at a reasonable market rental value. • Accommodation for employees working overseas: The recommendation is to cap the benefit value at the rental value of a property that the employee would be expected to occupy in New Zealand. This would be for fairness reasons, to ensure that the attributed tax value does not exceed the perceived benefit from the accommodation. • New Zealand Defence Forces (NZDF): Historically the NZDF had an administrative arrangement allowing for a discount of up to 40% of market value, meaning in effect there was no taxable benefit when personnel paid below market rents. This arrangement was terminated in December 2012 by the Inland Revenue Commissioner's statement on accommodation. The NZDF was moving incrementally towards market values as part of a wider review of terms and conditions, however, this was subsequently suspended in August 2013. Currently, the main differences between market value and the rental charged by the NZDF arise in Auckland (where rents are on average nearly 20% below market) and, to a lesser extent, Christchurch. The NZDF has argued for a continuation of past practice based on the special nature of the armed forces and the housing provided (such as being on base and subject to certain restrictions). Generally, following the principles of a broad-base, low-rate tax system, the full market value should be used to determine whether there is any tax liability. The NZDF could gross up the salaries of the affected personnel to cover the tax (and any social assistance) implications of applying full market value. However, there is debate over what is an appropriate market value for NZDF accommodation that sufficiently takes into account the additional restrictions of military life. Arguably, therefore, there is a case for continuing the past practice of discounting the market value and incorporating it into tax legislation, either temporarily through to 1 April 2016, or permanently. 12 Employee meals 30. Employers typically meet an employee's meal costs when linked to work-related duties. Arguably the amount of normal expenditure saved by the employee is taxable. In these circumstances any private element is likely to be low in value and difficult to measure. The options considered ranged from exempting the full amount of the cost of meals linked to work-related travel without limitation to limiting the exemption either to where there are overnight stays or a three month upper time limit at a particular work location. A limitation was considered to be necessary to limit the fiscal cost of and incentive for salary substitution. A three month time limit was considered preferable to a limitation based on overnight stays because it would better match when an employee incurred additional expenditure as part of work travel and a cut-off that employers might reasonably apply in paying for employee meals. 31. A further recommended option is to exempt reimbursements for working meals and conferences and light refreshments, provided the payments are not a substitute or trade-off for salary. These recommendations are largely consistent with current business practice and should, therefore, have minimal impact on business behaviour and compliance costs. Distinctive work clothing 32. A specific exemption for payments provided to cover the costs of buying and maintaining distinctive work clothing, such as uniforms, is recommended on the basis that the payments are clearly related to the employee's job. The provision of such clothing is already specifically exempted from fringe benefit tax. Payments in relation to the purchase and maintenance of other clothing would be subject to the general rules for determining when a payment that does not have its own exemption rules is tax-exempt. 33. The alternative option was to just rely on the general rule and existing case law, but the additional certainty of a specific exemption was considered to be preferable. This exemption would be along the lines of the fringe benefit exemption when employers provide distinctive clothing rather than a cash allowance. 34. This distinctive clothing exemption will also cover partly taxable plain clothes allowances that were in place as at 1 July 2013 and paid to uniformed personnel who are required to wear plain clothes in order to carry out their duties. For example, there has been a longstanding expectation that a portion of the plain clothes allowance paid to police officers is non-taxable, based on the specific circumstances involved. Under normal circumstances, however, the provision of ordinary clothing or an allowance to purchase ordinary clothing would be a taxable benefit. General rule for determining taxable portion of other expenditure payments 35. Our preferred option is to leave the rules that determine what other benefits are provided tax-free largely unchanged. The general rule requires the expenditure in question to be incurred in connection with earning the employee's employment income and exempts the reimbursing payment from tax to the extent that the expenditure is not a private or capital expense. Although this requires a judgement to be made about the nature and extent of any private benefit, any alternative test would require similar judgements to be made. There would, therefore, be significant administrative and compliance costs in moving to any new general rule, without any guarantee of delivering additional clarity. 13 36. However, an enhancement can be made without a fundamental alteration by clarifying when an expense would be incurred in connection with earning employment income. Under this recommended option several criteria would be added to the general rule, focusing on whether the expenditure was incurred because of the obligations of the job or as a practical requirement of the job. 37. We also recommend adding a Commissioner's determination making power specifying the proportion of any class of payment that would be taxable or exempt. Such a determination would be binding on the Commissioner but optional for the taxpayer. To limit the need to use this power to determine an exempt proportion, the payment involved would need to affect a large group or class of employees, and the Commissioner would need to be of the view that the private or capital benefit involved was low in value and/or hard to measure, and involved no salary re-characterisation (that is the payment was provided mainly for business purposes). This power would provide flexibility in handling future questions over what is the taxable portion of a type of payment and should be a more efficient process than requiring a law change when issues over apportionment arise. CONSULTATION 38. Following informal consultation with a number of individual businesses and key business representatives, Inland Revenue published an officials' issues paper in November 2012, Reviewing the tax treatment of employee allowances and other expenditure payments, setting out the scope of the issues and its initial thinking in this area about the options for resolving them. Submissions on the issues paper led to further refinement of the options suggested in the paper. 39. Twenty-seven submissions were received. In general, submitters welcomed the review as a positive move to clarify the law in this area and supported the policy principles set out in the paper4 . However, some submitters took the view that the starting position should be that any payment by an employer to cover an employee expense should not be taxable unless it is specifically a reward for services (or similar). 40. Submitters were also positive about any moves to clarify and make the law more certain. In particular, the proposals to exempt the full amount of any meal payment (rather than the excess over the employee's normal day to day costs) for a three month period, working lunches and light refreshments were welcomed. 41. Most submissions focused on the tax treatment of accommodation expenses linked to work-related travel and establishing a boundary between private and work-related expenditure. There was some focus on costs for employers in complying with any new interpretations or rules, particularly when the types of payments likely to be affected are minor and any tax consequences are relatively small. 42. Given the main areas of concern were around the tax treatment of employer-provided or funded accommodation, substantive further consultation was undertaken to discuss this with a range of employer representatives. A number of submissions favoured the net benefit approach to the tax treatment of accommodation payments or, alternatively, a safe harbour 4 See objective 2 in paragraph 13 for an outline of those principles. 14 time period with the ability to extend beyond that time period if certain fact-based criteria were considered to be met. We did not agree that these options were the best approach, for the reasons explained earlier regarding the consistency question and the compliance and administration costs of such approaches. 43. Our view was that a better approach was to focus solely on a simpler test linked to an upper time limit. Consultation then focussed on the length of any time limit for accommodation linked to work-related travel. Those consulted thought a two year time limit should cover the vast majority of work-related secondments, based on anecdotal evidence. Some even commented that a two year limit would be generous in a number of cases. 44. However, there were concerns that this time limit would not be long enough in all cases and that the exemption should also apply to accommodation for new employees in certain situations. In particular, issues were identified about how well a time limited rule might work for longer-term projects — mainly large-scale construction projects that take longer than two years to complete. These include work on the Canterbury earthquake recovery (where there will be a number of major longer term projects with construction workers moving between different projects), projects in other locations throughout New Zealand (for example, the ultra-fast broadband roll-out, dam rebuilds and other major water storage projects, and road building projects such as Transmission Gully), and international secondments (which often last for two to three years). The recommended rules have taken this into account and included new employees in the 3 year test so as to provide the same tax treatment as existing employees. 45. The Treasury has worked closely with Inland Revenue on this review of employee expenditure payments. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 46. It is recommended that changes be made to the legislation determining the tax treatment of employee expenditure payments and employer-provided accommodation to improve clarity and certainty. 47. In doing so, the proposed approach would result in the following outcomes for accommodation, meals, clothing and the general rule covering other employee payments: Accommodation Employer provided/funded accommodation linked to work travel a) Employer-provided accommodation or an accommodation payment will be tax exempt when: • An employee is required by their employer to move to a new work location and that location is not within reasonable daily travelling distance of their home; and • Either i. the move is not project specific but there is a reasonable expectation that the employee's secondment to that work location will be for a period of 2 years or less, in which case the payment is exempt for up to 2 years; or the move is to work on a project of limited duration for a period of 3 years or less, in which case the time limit is 3 years. 15 b) The accommodation payment will cease to be tax exempt before the respective maximum period if any of the following occurs: • The employer makes a tax-free relocation payment to assist an employee buy a property in the new work location (an indication that the shift is more than temporary); or • The expectation that the employee will be at the new location for, as relevant, a maximum of two years or three years changes. c) The rules will also be subject to certain conditions to protect against abuse: • The exemption would not apply if accommodation is provided under a salary trade-off arrangement. • There would be an anti-avoidance rules to prevent behaviour intended simply to restart the relevant time limit. d) The above exemptions would apply to accommodation or accommodation payments with existing employers. New employees could also qualify for the three year exemption when they move to work on a particular project of limited duration - for example, when an individual is recruited to work on a project to build a new thermal power station in a remote location. New employees would only qualify for the two year exemption when: • an employee is recruited to work at a particular work location but is then sent to work at another work location temporarily; or • an employee working for one employer is seconded to work for another employer on a temporary basis, with the expectation that the employee will return to work for the original employer. e) The upper time limit for Christchurch recovery projects would be: • five years if the date of arrival is in the period 4 September 2010 to 31 March 2015; • four years if the date of arrival is in the period 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2016; and • three years when the date of arrival is in the period from 1 April 2016 to 31 March 2019. 0 Employers and employees would have the choice of applying these revised rules retrospectively to accommodation arrangements put in place on or after 1 January 2011 (4 September 2010 for Christchurch accommodation). Otherwise, the rules would apply from 1 April 2015. Accommodation when employee has more than one workplace There are a number of circumstances when an employee, because of the nature of their duties, has to work at more than one workplace on an on-going basis and these additional workplaces are beyond reasonable daily travelling distance from their home. An exemption for an accommodation payment in such circumstances, without an upper time limit, is recommended. Value of taxable accommodation benefits When employer provided accommodation is not tax exempt, a mechanism is required to determine the taxable value. The current approach is to base the taxable value on market rental value. We recommend continuing this approach but with some clarification around what constitutes 'market value' in certain circumstances: Accommodation benefits linked to a particular job — A specific valuation rule for church-supplied accommodation provided to ministers of religion is recommended given the specific historical tax treatment in their case of valuing the benefit at 10% of stipend. The tax exempt amount would be limited to the extent that the accommodation is a reasonable amount for the area and the nature of the minister's duties. There is also debate over whether the market rental value test adequately takes into account the additional restrictions applied to personnel who rent New Zealand Defence Force accommodation. Accommodation for employees working overseas — The value of employer provided accommodation in overseas locations can be particularly high — this issue is of relevance to MFAT staff posted to overseas embassies, for example. To address this issue, we recommend the taxable value should be capped at the value of a property the employee might reasonably be expected to occupy in New Zealand. 16 Payments to cover meals Work-related travel meals — We recommend exempting the full amount of meal payments linked to work-related travel, subject to a three month upper time limit at a particular work location. Other meals — We recommend exempting the full amount of meal payments linked to work-related meals outside of work-related travel and the meal arises because of the nature of the work. This would cover meals at conferences, for example. Light refreshments — We recommend exempting payments to cover the cost of light refreshments, such as basic tea and coffee, away from the employer's premises when the employer provides refreshments on those premises. Payments to cover distinctive work clothing We recommend exempting: • payments to cover the cost of purchasing and maintaining distinctive work clothing, such as uniforms; and • that part of a plain clothes allowance that had previously been treated as non-taxable if: the allowance was in effect as at 1 July 2013; it relates to employees who have been issued with a uniform but, because of the nature of their current duties, are required to wear ordinary clothing; and part of the allowance was previous treated as taxable. General rule for determining the taxable portion of other expenditure payments We recommend: • Clarifying the current general rule for determining whether an employer payment is taxable by including several criteria that focus on whether the expenditure was incurred because of the obligations of the job or as a practical requirement of the job. • The Commissioner of Inland Revenue be given a power to determine, by way of binding determination, the proportion of a particular type of payment that is taxable when the private or capital benefit is hard to measure, low in value and not a salary substitute. • A minor technical modification to the general exclusions from the definition of "expenditure on account of an employee" to clarify the way the relevant provisions operate. IMPLEMENTATION 48. To address issues of uncertainty around applying the current rules, employers and employees will have the choice of applying these revised rules retrospectively to accommodation arrangements put in place on or after 1 January 2011 (4 September 2010 for Christchurch accommodation). Otherwise, the rules would apply from 1 April 2015. 49. Any initial compliance costs arising from gaining familiarity with the new rules can be limited by releasing clear guidance on the operation of these new rules through existing Inland Revenue channels. Inland Revenue customer information products would be updated (for example, guides, booklets, fact sheets and website). Inland Revenue is considering the merits of an on-line tool to help individuals when self-assessing how the new rules will apply in particular circumstances. 50. Consistent with existing tax rules, individual taxpayers would be required to comply with the existing individual tax return (IR3 return) and information obligations. Employers would be required to comply with any new PAYE obligations. Generally, taxable employee expenditure payments and the benefit of employer provided accommodation are taxable income of the employee and therefore subject to PAYE. Employees who receive the benefit of such payments or accommodation will also be required to include them in their social assistance calculations. 17 51. The administrative impacts of the recommended changes are likely to be small as no system changes will be required. 52. Enforcement of the proposed changes will be managed by Inland Revenue as part of its usual business and no specific enforcement strategy will be required. MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REVIEW 53. Inland Revenue will monitor the outcomes pursuant to the Generic Tax Policy Process ("GTTP") to confirm that they match the policy objectives. The GTPP is a multi-stage policy process that has been used to design tax policy in New Zealand since 1995. 54. The final step in the process is the implementation and review stage, which involves post-implementation review of legislation, and the identification of remedial issues. Opportunities for external consultation are also built into this stage. Any necessary changes identified as a result of the review would be recommended for addition to the government's tax policy work programme. 18 Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bjec t ives ? Issue 1: Tax trea tmen t o f emp loy er p rov ide d or fun de d accommo da t ion dur ing wor k trave l 0. :es t - ma ke a sp ec i fic a dju s tmen t for cos ts incurre d by an emp loy ee w hen t hey re ta in a p rop er ty e lsew here .1.., 0..) C u as ar '5 cal) tia)r) E\_> . (771L'c0C aj to o c '5 •S >. a) a) 17: crEE cl a' a) -0 0 o ,a) 4-3.-.., 3- •-" a) >• ›- 00 ro 0 u ° c" z z o\_ c E -- .fu I:13 43 '2 c - o Li u: ui . a )E 4)E 0 , 00>o- ti 'Fa u - m aj 0 (..) L) no 'a Cll Ul R is ks Q.) U ?..... c to .1.., f, -0 — - c ro CI) CL „, "" v; Li) C o E r.a 4-, °) w 3 0 E ca c -0 0 . 0 V) > U • c u E '- -6-, a) c C .- L. a) ror.) o 1\_ c .- 7) -c o) i\_ .i., .\_ 4-- , .\_ .c,, ,,\_ = - 6 2 . 2 .- E o E E '- L. a 0 - v) 0 0. ti) \_, — = 1.1- CO I- U Ca Lz. V) t to E 1-1 Comp liance Econom ic Soc ia l F isca l imp ac t tn (L) CD a) 4\_, ).O U La 03 • In CI M " 0 s' X C " U) -c ro ro a) (1) u) 0 .> >- 4\_, 4\_, ca 0 6 0 C ›.- C uru u) '73 En ,Ln a) -0 13 „,cu E •4:4- t.) 4 =- , „ , , , • E • E c . c . ,, 2 a i x • c- a ) - 2 a.)c- us-a).4- , ,crioEo r-0) (VEBEE 0- 15. 0'- L.E a) \*(7) n3 L0 o 3 , O4 2 E -i-, G.) 6 CL tll g 0 , 0 a) í .. a, c,:n 0 0-00 . 0) uu),- -0 4-, c,o in C4.-..-Ca) 03c\[i2o a) u LL 2, Doovi ..o.6\_, C.o2ro 17 C tn co CO M tll .- u tn c a) a) o a) 0 „,- o -(.7) 0.- a z a >, i ri, t:: r.12 00 aw IS a) E -0 :-. -5• 0 4 2, c 6 COETOX508 7 j cn c 7, C -C -.P.\_. • c.7) -c 1 .13, a - al :'-'' Ln u) 0 CM v) V) C4t C M ai j C .— t 4 , 03 t 10 C'n (J)C . CCWMCE al CI) a) S2 '- , a)" tl a) = .{-,T; (39- E .0 3 .c a) :b- (r) P -0 u t 1 >, 6 co c 0. 0 n3 c E tn E ° 4-' E a) •- c :E, -o 4.4 c a) . 0 2 u , , n a) - a M3 ..- - - >" 'w 0\_ E 0 a 3 0 > >. 'a) — fp •- E L \_ a) to '0 a) (./1 fa -1-. 17 5... CL -C c- ci) C 4- >. 0 cu Cl- (f) C ") (13 " 0 CD > a) in c • E o .64 .- cy \* 4 >" • (7) c3) > 0 .- = 4 (.5' uool cc uo > owo aj cl ) a .c \_o a)E -0 7,c,- 0 > ce a.) .1..,cocMo\_0(i)0.c Op t ion 1: Ne t Bene fit 1 0—.\_ c - 0 .,, a) - ----- ..u) 0 E., .,.., < a) , \_o a) rcl a) 0 c a) -o la-.) c CL) Ln Ln a) >:„. . L.I C U) -0 • - 1.\_ C >. • - >, cu 1- ui - 0 u co = ía , < n) .cs E a g a . . . 3 -,- 62 E s -..t. 2 ti a Q)•, L) w .- E ° c a) o c an c e) u 0\_ .- \_c 0 0 .-WcOcuCLn a):E c o— ..„,C1•5(0 7 .0 .6 , ro ro c c :12 ,..,..0 >. ,,, c c on 0 CO C -C aj = E v) -c cts - — \_o 6 .ru 0 , 0 — 4 \_, 0 0) 0- C 4-, a-cn i, >„) ,3) = C ..- 00- 0. a) 0. ,,, 0 c r.) '-' a) -0 - c -0 ru (.) - 0 c - a) c crou c Eor- cp 1:$ cocb u'S -Es wnl E\` 1)41z 4'c4- '.° .'!= ''' nab ° in a) ,t-'- L. .(\`' -° C ' (73 ° F) • c u 'E — u) o 4) 4- -C (n 0 17 C n3 0) E C a . E - m Q , ,,, c „ w u 0 O.) 1.7 CT u) t- -0 = :E 1.\_, - fu = " a E , o -, Q) (I) CD , CD ...„ aj ...\_ a. 0 a) ...„ 1- o co \_ o ce COCL• \_05,570(n5.01.1 -\_L-UMEM Annex — cons idera t ion o f op t ion s To ac hieve t he o bjec t ives ou t line d a bove, a num ber o f op t ions were c ons idere d as fo llows: Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bjec t ives ? Op t ion 2: Fu ll exemp t ion - no t ime lim it - e xemp t accommo da t ion p ay men t ma de w hen wor king temp orar i ly away from t he emp loy ee 's norma l wor kp lace 4., \_c 0 -0 3 0 0, -. p :10 .0 IP 8 :62 • ED 0 To ED) E y\_ 2 M en • Ln - 4, \`; co C n> ' t7i c. ) u 4= ■ (U c . o — s\_ ED 0 w ' m ,...a' -0 0 4= a) ›- Z ›- -C '' (1) = -0 a) .E a) u u: 14 E •E aj t.) x a .- o 4.., 0 4-' ua) ,- cci\_ccc\_cE ••,Et CO 0. (0 7 7 4-, 0 ro C 0 - 0 0 - E ts (re commen de d op t ion) X 4, 40 a) 0 7 \_C 4-, ,,, a) ,.. 2 CU v) (13 "C1 .c W '0 W 4-, 0 6 a) 1.1.3 t-,r) roc -2 6- • 4--' .0 4.-' -C-7, 4, 0 CO -0 (..) C 3\_ - -6' ED - •,-, (..) > 0) C > (I) -, > c 0 r 0 L- CCE C'ED)O -w E -0 ° c .-c' 23 \*L7) u) f° u) ti) cn 0 .?..- cEcoln n ■ c ' v) s\_ a) a) a) 1- c 0 0 , aj QJ (E3 E\_ > >- > c c cu o- -c Li u: Lti 76 t - 13 u, ,>• 0 \_c 4-, ° E it-, cu E 0 0 3 .5 E ul 42 10 a)-. cu R is ks 4\_4 c c al c0 CO EU• u w a) , C 4- - -° -0 " C E - .0 4, a) V) \_C En X Q) Ell •- 0 ED U) \_c a) .- Q) c a) .- - 6 > E r0 a) -c u) o = „, o a\_ - 0 >" 0 .0 - -- a) E -o " E>c-c 0 0 4-S 4-- a) : v) E) E1:3 4 0" • fp cu ro L.\_ - C> -- ,, , • - 0 " >. U E ,\_,,a) W. E \_o- - a) ED \_ c u. = CI) .- -,0 -0 .c u)u) 0 0 <a) 3 4, 1 .4 .T co E 3 Imp ac ts Co mp liance Econom ic Soc ia l F isca l imp ac t u) u) .u., W C 4-5 o , a) a) 4, COCS -0 x u, c - , ' E 13) , (\_, c -0 o 4= (U o\_ .1.- -;.- co 4-, E '. 14.7, Cl. CD 01 • - 0, 2 0 O. C ... • - 76 0 a v) E \*.E ' 03 a) E .c 0 W 1\_ >, 4-) af) c u) 4- , 0 f0 , T: 0 • c CIJ 4- {:). 0) c >. ro {-1) 4-, c To c " u 4, a ) o 0 > cK) a) o E ,\_cv rr) co co ao c = 40 CO 40 0- V) (n v) OC mu) . " La o 4\_,- o c V) C a) > 0 ,\_ a) o '- a) 76 0 > r u cu c 4-, 4-, c 4' a ) 0 > (1) c 0 \_ ul , = \_ c 4, CS' ° (S' ''-' '' I - (13 = 0 C a) n3 t " = 03 .- °° EED E a) -c , .s7 ' U = .01\_ 4\_, ..0 ED 1\_ E\_ 0 . (A U) -IL' s..9- °- -csc i .\_\_,E -a° t-a) orEm Ello .\_ 0 CL ED ED -0 7 ,- ED a .c \_c a \_c E' c o o c c a) E H .I., co 4... .- ED -17 ,.- CD a.) 4, s\_ 0 6 U)0) c 0 C '''' a) o -47, " cr ) v) o I- >.- vc.0 rp -0 Q) . 4\_■ X - rE) ro c c 0 cu .- 0 ;7\_ c 4-,-,oE Ea °4-4 (7). --- .S3 0ED u0s\_.• -1-, C.- 4- CD -C r " s - r CI {‘\`$- C u a u) T- a) v)u 0 3 a) c w E .WC 0 0 E 0 > cr): 6' E L ') ro 0 .-4": -- ,\_-, -5 .,\_ ,a) 0.) >• Ln L. C 0 '47 a En oj 0 a .v) c-- 0- r9 it, .13 ,c0 ,.,cv 2 , 0 3 c ,,,, . u ,., s\_ a) c o > ...., y- .c a) , s\_ .c a) CD 0 1.1) LL1 1\_ 40 4.., 1/) -C CO 0 CO 4..) .0 = CD 4-, -0 1- 0- CO a) .c .,.., -o o (0 c IA 01 V) „,(1) C .-o 4-, c •co .., 03 a) c o ui > > \_c w - 4-, 0a) c °EEt u) U EE5 0 0 > v) Ln 0. .0 0" a) C 4 C C 4- -0 0, - W ,-)(-) 5 cu - c) 0 E c c.,2 a) cu o c = ti SS a) ca CU m (0 (n \_Y E T 0 u) a; 0. - ...- . — En 7 a) E c tin) 0 L- 0 W •- EJ) 0 ...0 .E CO 2:i: E -E, .in w >:: " C.) 1-- ro El? 0 >, vi u) \_o ro u) w „, , \_c a, 4-, c,-) 0 CmC0100S- 4-' V) 4-' 04' a 2 c 0 CO 4, na a. , \*.,7, I— 1... En E u, .■ (A. U.0 C .- 0= 0.„2 C D W 4,0 54-,E c c u) C x - 0 c 0.., c to 12 ca C .- En • CD •- aj . 4\_, 0\_ o . 01C 0 X CZ= t .T>.E xrucD.cfoo' cituOCD , 0 ED >•• >. .47-1 '40 CU .- 0) c E >2 -c -51\_, 3 'EU LoW -0 > 000-Y-0. E\_ uc En4-4ED 1.\_ co 0 \_c a) Op t ion 3: Fu l l exemp t ion w it h upp e r t ime lim i a) cn w E E E , 0 L., ..-I --4. 4-, VI V) ,>:.. .- aj" -c, ro .. 0) L\_-' '0 0 ,.\_ c C a) a 0 En CD 0 •,7i > .- \_C -0 C 'IC (s3 .0 a) co a)4, .,..,au0o CL) ro co " \_c a) a o i v) 4- , 4, 4 , 4 , V) 14\_ Ul ,, co a) co o 0 a) -0 Lt) \*r\_- C 4.4 CLE Q7 0. 3\_ >. C , >.• CU 4\_ -.° •{22 0 lj CD ° .° 0 ° vi 0 5 a 0= ' ,..E-- 'E. 4(;,- u) - 0. E a) 12 E a \_c r a E ,\_,L) (c13 E o\_ = co v) .ro a.) \_= 1- Q) 4-, Lf) co 4-, 0 v).. ° a, -;, 4.7, 0 .. - ID u) .r ., 4.4 - 5 ,u) En .6,- u) 0 .— - 8 474 al E > -0 g 0 a.)(0v)uE a) o \_, \_c 0 - Eumu a) .E u LL 1.\_ tn fa C a) 4-, o u (1 ) , 4, C >, - .V) E ,:p „ , &- \_ c , vi 0 E -0 .E., . D. ) 0 ED a) 0 0 a ) LE u >, c -°(1) 8 8 -5" E ou 2 . 4 5 - ia\_ 4- -C ,- ° -,° -c o E "(2 a) 0 .c, 9, ,\_ ,2\_, 4-, -0 U cv 0 ED >•• ED " ED ED u) c 0 0 ED >•• a) s- cp U U 0 C y\_ > c '4 0) >. a U ED > 4.4 0. 4-' r\_) u, c "' cp -° > 0 o c 0 \_ 2 4-; ai 2 M 5 c c E 0 c c-) s\_o,,,a)00occ CUE\_cCccED 0- - 0 .= Ce 4-, U cn C co V) 0\_ ED 7 u = 0. Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bj ec t ives ? Op t ion 4: Fu ll exemp tion - upp er t ime lim it w it h p ower to ex ten d in cer ta in c ircums tances U) C C 0 .0 C '0 2.-5-0--(Ti0(8cccu CE) - 0 8 . 0 ." 23 4e, (0 O)$) ,..1 (:, ,t, .\_ o c o o -' 0 rts t- '0>ECE1.-•W C C,..,, (I) ft) c .V) 0 (-) -C i- m 17 - c E.L\_J c. , C ro a) a) a) L\_ .- E. no 5.. C4-a) (13E - F2E0E in -5. w o :5 '5 :0 o ..o 2 3 12 — a >. 0. tr) to .c a, CD ). .; t u) u) a) - ., .r 'E . > (0011)0-0 0 0 a) • Li u: Lai o 2 76 ' ,- t u' .1-J cp a) s\_ a) Ea, ;,, ,..,.° .c no 13 o 0 ' c •- CU) 0- 0 ,-r- 4-J-, W4., Cfl (0 :H- = .'. 10 0. Issue 2: Tax trea tmen t o f emp loy e r p ro v ide d o r fun de d accommo da t ion a t o r near nor ma l wor k loca t ion (e. g. care ta ker ) \_ ° '- -C C 4-j <e t ren ta l va lue, a dj us te d for a rang e o f fac tors \_ Wou ld be li kely to lea d to C. No s ig n ifican t a ddit iona l F. Pa r t ly a dm in is tra t ive cos ts in E. Yes In lan d Revenue ag r ee ing ta xa ble va lues an d Overa ll, w hi ls t t heore t ica lly t his a ddit iona l comp liance op t ion resu lts in t he correc t va lue cos ts for emp loy ers in be ing taxe d, t his is un li ke ly to be es ta blis hing t he t he case. It wou ld be very difficu lt discoun te d va lue, to q uan t i fy ac cu ra te ly t he discou n te d va lue w hic h wou ld a lso dep en d on t he p ar t icu lar fac tors. Ris ks In ° .E u T.) >. c ° o= 73 0 0 1.- -0 c CO a 3 a ) - 5 0 no w tn E o 4-, ›.. -o 4-.„., a) c \_c '4"=, (-) L- 4-' 5 ■,-, - 4- , .I--• Q.) = 0 a) a) = a.) .- ., .,,-, ,. L 1\_ •- c \_c .. 1.\_ .- >•• •..) c 0 J.J La o •-, - .0 ,„ 4- a \_a E .c CO a) 01 a) no a) PA 4- 4-' .111 ).% cp \*c c 0 , 4-.2 0 .- E ea cu 03 a 4-' no :0 L.,,.= a) .,\_,- in c 4\_, u -c, .- , .- VI IV U) no a) in (c.- U fla 0. Co mp liance Econom ic Soc ia l Fisca l imp ac t .4 CC - I), 4a (-/)), 4 C a : -u s ..CC •- L) • 4 '; 4r 04= - )u E tcua E a) -c ro 73 s„, \_c '-2 I C C C C >. 0. c o 1- o - \_o ic lc C a, a 3 -0 .,-- >. 3 ..=u) C-0 c E 01- .0 c ,-- a-, i0 CD .- 1.- 0 C a) cu ..sz -- \*-- 4-, 1E '5 c 0 4' 0 cu a c 01 I- U o u .E co .r) -o = c rn 2 ,7 V) , t . U 0 a a) En L\_ z jai c -0 4- • .77 .- 0 r•E Ll v) ° c 0 c '- 0 o 04-.. 2 " .- >-- -- 0 :0 CU crs ss\_ cn .- ,,, \_o C - C 0 M 4-, .') 73 (13 7 45.‹. (1) X -C L " < 2 c a.) 712 w 3 .92 :,au\_ 3c 4c s C - \_ O i.,) - C ' u a n -.a. C CO CCS 4-, 7- 713 u 0 0 T .0 II - U 4-' ( 4- a) c •„ .•-• -0 > c .- no .c 6 U ..= C -3 (1.) 19 v) >7 c a) \_c 2 cs t " " 3 76 .CO 4-• 03 J--, Ln i ts >, u.) a) U) a) 0 cu no U " s\_ L. .1.1 -c 0 -cl. no .4-• , a , a .) co 4-, C E , O. , 4 c 0 4- ,„ wooc, 00.=.1)(0E). o -o 0, ol :1\_, c c ui To a) o 4.-• u, -0 c \_o 4-, 4-, - C cn i;.,- 0 p .- (.1) a.) VI ..- ra = .- 4-' ,-, a) c — >, 0 17 (C) •-• •-• = 4-4 7- fo a) 1.- a) :I=' w c 4- , '- 4-4 • - -C .1-' C U 0)E> >..04,-0-C,„ CO C -C > )..) C (1) cu a) w >\`''' 3 -1z) 'o-- , (1) s\_° -' • E c- E 0- " 1:I a) 0 ° o c a \_o \_ no lc c 0. C C 0)4= C 0 • - E 0 ,., \_c c cu .c " .- c 3 r, 4-' E .L , .L-.1 a) c L. U) o a) a) 10 in c ,-- Li-, s- cu 0 " E o a) a ) c • -0 .0 t ra W 0 CU .--:. • .0 -0 -6- , 0 0 C , ,-, in 4\_ 4\_ ,-, 7-' nO I- V) ,-,, ril 0 -0 V ) VI s•-" '" ,,,La ,r, >, . -- c = 1- - C I-. I1) >-- C 0\_ :I-' i'n V) .- a roca-00(13 (1) 7 cn \_c E c 4T' cu '7 CI) 12 :5 .5, a) mc ro I\_ . 5 ou04-, LCROB3 cu.P.;\_cn3.,-, ° un .> ou:Eu so\_uu- corp.= , 2 0( (0 .\_- ,,, 0 1••• (I) 0 as \_c u 4,3 c 0 RI a.. ,... 3 no \_o no in co u o ."!, in a 1) I E f, .(!) a -- ..c E ••\_° -6 3 a) >. 4-, , 4 -, " -0 1- .IL) (0 U (6 a) a) .„ 3.- -0 a)> > -0 477 c >. m -c c s U \_ 0 \_ x c c.' col a)...\_ ra o a, 0 cuow,E, ,,u \_c> .c a .- a ) .i-. >. 4.! tri 4.) c RS a) 1.11 to " •13 4- LSI • C (1) " 0 ' 6' 0 0 7 - >•• W a) ' 2 > - -2 i•:\_- a) g if) ° E a) c ° IP "° ° 'a 4= a) 10 -5 -EL a) a".65no w 0C U) 0 E x c .- x = " " -0 0 a.) CU 0 C C (/) W 4- 0 CU 4.• .rn C 4-, 7 CO Q) CL 0 U1 4-, a) E ri-') :).:.' in -c E \_ .... c cn o ,c2 w s •\_ co a) , u , 44'C 7) 4- , 0=C-CCCC 1/3- ra 0 ' O. 0 0 4-' 0 ca .1-J 0. o •\_ a; in c 01 c • ,:i E I'-'• E n c ci) E • a c .17. CU (z, Oa 7-1 .0 0 z 1-0- \_ 7\_ E = 4E , Q., ,. • 4, 0 - 0- U - 0 0 0 C ° ° 0 4- Li 73 .;-) •••., co c 4"' 1. 0 ro E .1-, 0 .0 ,-., - " I- 0 7-, 4\_, •\_,• - a.) •- x 4= 4.... 4-, 4- , a) 0 4-, .1\_, in 1 -1-3 c (0 .1\_, U .- 4- CU ro \_c E 0 c o a) no -a .c >., ro \_ 4- = -0 u) 'c -1-. CU U C 40 4.) U it 03 u) WV)CL.i.,C,-,US\_>••0,0 \_0„ :° '- 0 U '- •= 9:: a) 0 7 4-'„ -so :15 J.., -0 LI) 2, 2 E o. -"-zn) E .c "" .ca , co" E > .° 0 , .° a i 2 - c, . 0 o\_ = ra 1\_ = cn Lo -0 (1) 4-, > r4 -- 1- sn > 0 ,L, 77 a) ,..," To a) o ro x .-- 4-, 4- La a) c" ra c 0 o ,.„ c 4\_, c a., -1-, (I) ,••, (0 ‘4' L.) a) L.. 0 a) \_c 0 -CI U >'.0 C > +-+ -c L. \_ c (L0 0, (i) = U " -0 ( I ) >- • - w c cv a) s\_ 4.-. E no .F., o 0.) 0 -?-. Q.) , tj IS u E \_c C12 \_c -1--, E -i-, > . u). u) ,,, 7- , U „ i.,:: ..., 0 (1) . 0 47; C a; ,-,a) \_c le- .0 cu al c s-cC>.(0 .."- 4- , C ›...- C. )..' -0 . .- -ri 0 W )- M., W 0 a) 0 -6 "-.) - a) - \_a > -.F.• ca c :r:Tcs 0- 4-4 \_C 0 (13 a - (0 o v) o0Ec"To ':DE-L-) c's -E3 m --c °0 -o wo 3... > ro 4-, a.) 4-, — C VI ..cn a) ro o L.. s- if; Ecs - ..0 no = u 0 00(0 a) 730 a) :E a) u c . =" 0 -P- 55 (';', C 4)>. MI o 4-• -0 c , 4-, ' E - ra o ° ,\_ u) 0 CO al -C -W (") C E ..° U -C 4- E 1- 4- 4 -' C fa 0 = C C 4-, I- 10, >.°3" >•• MfaC2 UrC30 ° a) c 42 (7) co ,..> J., a -s-s 1--.) u ro -o c 0 in no -0 > a, . ro ,,, ,.. ,-, c co 0 c L. 0 o .c7, c a) a c ..1.7• L.. 4-, w c -••,3 , .L., no ro u) 4-, 4•-• V) . 0> ,NE ; -m ua S C L:n 1°.,- s-M -t,,, a9 -0 0' =0.: .,--.1 . 3 CC • \`7" E r.) r-. n3 ° :17' ''' '- a) i'n E E E a) cn es -1-' 0 10 0 1- I- cn 0 - a) ,\_ c c c c a) 0 -o in a 0 x ee .•\_, u u) c no u) 0. CD c u = a L.) co no no 0 a) Op t ion 1: Tax fu ll mar l 4-4 4-- C .1--• co .8 0 0 0 ra in a) >• 1\_ -° cn 4-, a) •.\_ c 4- Ln .- c .> - E ) , , 0 = i.,) - o - - " LII - , ,0 0. .1., La u, u,a) 4-'c La co u 0 La ro u .) o o - ,\_ a, ..c co „, 4--' -° •.\_-' c s)-, (D CI) 2 0 n) 0 0 .0 0 -.0 \_c ,a) 4--' C .47, -0 >,co 3- -5 u co 0- 7- ft) u u- ' (1) E o - c ED a) 4= 0 .s-s , 0\_ .\_ l- 0 no v) \_o LL.. a) 113 (1) 4-, 0 Ne t Imp ac t Does op t io n mee t o bjec t ives ? Op t ion 2: Fu ll exemp t ion i f emp loy ee req u ire d to occupy p rop er ty in or der to do jo b C. No F. No E. No Overa ll, a g enera l ex emp t ion wou ld br ing new comp liance issues in iden t i fy ing w hic h hous ing s hou ld be exemp t, fa irness issues in dec iding w hic h emp loy ees s hou ld ha ve t he ir hous ing trea te d as exemp t an d econo m ic e ffic iency concerns t ha t t hose emp loy ees were no t be ing taxe d on a va lua ble p r iva te bene fit. Op t ion 3: Tax fu ll mar ke t ren ta l va lue, bu t su bj ec t to a sp ec i fic exemp t ion or cap on va lue for c hurc h-owne d accommo da t ion supp lie d to m in is ters o f re lig ion (recommen de d op t ion ) 4 , CU 0 0 4 7 + -- -er To- cv >. C c > - es o ro fo .0 u, so. 4., sz 0- o u) ro 0 E o x -c .- CL) U fr, 4- In -5,.... a, 4-) c - 0 tu CU c = \_c .> m o .10 ra CL -1-.J CU a, >->, 4 , tf, 47. 0 U (ntt E.6\_, i.4..0.(63 a.) ru ro - 3 a) CU Li u: ui T2 0 \_o a) a) F., \_c \_c o (1) v R is ks C) a) a.)4-' U 10 \_C \_c C-•-• 0, -0 (13 .c 0., i--' 4\_ C 7 - o a) E.) CZ 17, U La • -. >. a) -CI '- C C CV •Y\` - >•• lf) a) 1:' a) 4\_ a) ,.,- co 0 , c'EE, - o.,93u,a)x.v)o W 00 =00-13°3 C C C 4-• (13 01 • -0 0 (CI P VI C Tioc. 10. c,>.,0:o.zco .u) -5, n3 a) 0 "4.-:' c o a) -o A-2 ca 3 r< 0. t4,' 1-/, .L., a) E 0 0 0 \_c 0x a) U :lc L.) a) c >,.. 0 \_o 0 \_c 2, t 0 (13 0. •-•' L) 1- CI. , ,r.c0C1,2 1E, ,\_,.. a) ..c c a 1\_ u, .L.= , V) 0 •• W 0 1E \_c a) a) 4.-. ..- .1-, v) En if 0 E ui 2 a) ro 0- a) in w h. '17 • > n:I 7 cu 0 0 \_ 4- .L. ' C aa > Imp ac ts Comp lian ce Econom ic Soc ia l Fisca l imp ac t C0 o >. CD -0 0 C o c a.) a)"(13 \_c . u) c a) -.0 u E E o 0 cr) 4- -I-. to na a, -0 En\_ a, r1.1Clan> . C(110c)C 4., - 4-,n3ow cEEcc7.--,4-, a)m .- co fp 0\_ cu En7 (13 E .F.T la (1) E 0 - 0 a) 0 E.) cn .-- E 43 0U L) o -e„., (6) To x \_ c a) . - CU V) al= CD .C5 V) U CU U -0 .. (13 4- 'F., c 0 C -10 a) U- a) 0 4 \_ 0 .,,,u' a.) a ra TO 0 N 5 - 0 0 a) u --... ,LL) a) . 4-, • a) 0 ;0 En E.) cO 7) .0 4= 0) 0 o a) c o (..) >< s\_c 0.) 0 o Ta >, Cu -6E, M w caa.) CU " 7 It c.) 1\_ 0.(= C\_ u o a) a) -1' > \_o 10 a) CO 11) -0 > a) .Co " 7 a:S 0 ra a)> 0- - C •6•' -0 -1-' a) a) 7 til U I\_ ,...CU 4 , 0>-• c >0. 76 c (A 4-' u) L.- 0 ,, , c , .U) a, co >.17) c - o '- .,a) 11) 0.) 7 O. .'- 4' 0) c r, " ° C - -07, 0 <0 0..i-, a) 0 1 4- 4-, x 1..." .c o 0 en cn 2 a.) a.) C .0 4-) >i-. c a) a) ro .c .- c .- co -es c I- .- '..• C 0) 0 a) CU .,... ., 0 3 > ma ...\_ 0 c -1.-. U)-,-., U IS CU U) \_ \_„, fa x a) a.) u) 7 CU s\_ 4, 0 uj > „W L. its 7 a) rcs u) 0 0 -C C 7 0 a\_ > 111 , P II) MI >. a) 4., - a' > o a ) 7) z> u " ro n3 m '1 ' o a -se a --. c 1- \_ .... .. 3- 0 -,y) ,\_ -0 0. -.E -C CU RS \_C a., CO u E 2 ).- , ,o,cEa).;\_Pt To3.c 4 -• 'CS LLI 5. O. = 4;) CU .- s- -L- 0 u) ......• 4...) 00. a) 17 a) CL EJ) 7.) ro \_ \_o vi c c t c .- lc CL CU - C CU - ,, 'W ›.. 7 • -C/ E .1-, •-• C -0 c X c cr) co C) = 4-• a) (.1 -0 ' ••• o a) E 0, -- \_, fo 0 0 (13 4-) fY 4-1 En a) c 3 a) a o .c c c 44 cu C - .- o a) t 0 0 4-, 4-, 4-, a) 4-' > a) o '- E 0 L.. a) ,..9 "5 -Q ›. 0 cl. 3 4' 0 a.) ••••• co -C X ••-• V) 4-) - ,,, 0 0 „, 7 .0 . = 4-r- - 4.-• a) E a) c 0 L... 1- >... - .c) -I-. c c 0) c .1.7 • - (1:1 —„, . c,— ro .c.,, 0 v) . oz ra 0> 00 1- co) ..E. 2, wc :0n, . 5- ou .- a) I\_ u - co 31-c-c t u ,=\_c ocr a, L \_ fa cia a , u) co o -C a) - CD V, " -0 4- >-\_cc.,..=a.)-- 3u),\_"\_, 4-• 0 W a) 0 Ln vi P, - 6 2 „,u) En 'al L. -?\_5. 0 0 a 4- M a.) .-. a) a .4, ro 0 a) ro "-' ro 0 - 0 a \_ ••-) U) CU X C CU - \_C a) a) E ul > 0- 4- 03 C.) 0.) -0 CO > 0 U 4-4 -0 CU U) .6, "7 -CI (1) , 1.1 -0 01) ,- c 0 E en 0 a, 1... cac,tEraou).co> ai 5,- a) a) = .0 u) ii5 U) CU ,) 4- u) 0. .0 0- a, a) \_o 4-• Ce a) o 1- E \_, c -c, ca • 4-, (0 C CI) C 4- - qa c c.) c u' si, .c .E.7) -a- ) a ul '-' Eux5 .'- u) E -D '- . .9). .1-: 5- ra a) c :1--2 c 0 c 0 Ln CO 1.5 Cl...0 0. z CO 4.) 7 CO C -o 0 1.- 0. 17) I 6- 0-12 (L) -0 Ul -C a) 0) ." V) - 0 05 C > if 6 CU CL a.) 0 , c .0 CU "- Z 0 • o a a\_ U c a.)0, •xu , 0- ra Oc a .-c oci) r° ai ms 0 o -,,, a) a) a.3 .0 6 , 2 :cm cL E) -0c ..6 \_ 4-:, ti, ,\_(-) 4-'c " 6 E a 1- C -0 fa 0 , L.- c 2 0 u, 0 c — = 4.s:f n3 .17., tl) - -0 -1-' 1- a.) .- ..C• U) CMS•a•-■ . C-1-1-' Wal u) O-CE "wW a) C > 4-' • s\_rocn >co) - o = En :I...,- cuEa a - s- C L-0\_01\_1- 0c,•-\_ccOu u)4\_,-00 L \_W 04\_, Q)4\_, L\_4-.00U)a . V),a30:F., L 0'•,- -.M- a) ' - c,-, E ra .-c ECU) a) ...-u) st 0 0" E •EC 49 0 U>, .ur° \_c 0 \_c ,- . .\_ .1- u, o cu X 0 a) - 0 , X •(T) \_c H U 4-) C 7) 1-, -c) r.) co a) u Lu 4\_ Comp liance -0 Co .5 71 o0 0. )- E C0 u u U " Co a) a) >- 0 ã4 r E F isca l imp ac t To I.. ('3 V) 0 0 0 0. 0 0. rEs 0. \_a 4-, U) I.. co E 2 2 1:3 a•S U 0 co -C .0 a) a\_ a:1 In Lo a) 0 co ., .2" ti aicv m co >. c s .S z .0 ,, , , n1 1,..,: V) :1"" U 0 4- 01) '4- 0 -° U ° .e- a) '.. a) -0 40 -1 0 - L.) CI t 01 -1- ' = •C 0 >u a , CV , .(11 Co ›... - o as .\_ 0, a) 4-, ,\_ r a) c. QJ 0 a) C - \_C ma a, > .c . to ,..• ro u >„ >n3v)m occa ) La) cm saa >3 : 17.(-.71 E > a) 'i x -c -c ., , 1-:'- a.) o .,:cnororoa)(1) 0 C) a) Co ro C Q., fi can) -Ca) \_0 C a) ro " a) . V) a) Ell 4-4 0 o a .W>C1) -C = (1) a 7 LC)L i i L E c n Tu o> . \* v) a\_ E0 \_0 r E \_c „0 cu 0 V) - 0 4-4 1- -' o f, = 2 - 5 2 \`>) ( 47' , ›...E 0.0 Co a) o 3 0.c -r-s 0 = ar3 >•• 1- >-= r- \_o \_c .v)=0. os-04, .c . EcLcomic I- s4- co o (..) \_o u en CO o . .24\_, 4\_, - a ) c . 3 17s u > CO ca ;13 a) 2 .Z a) \_c 0 • 0 m a w ° a.) c - 0 a) u) :2 X MC 0 CO 0 En "0 = 444 10 "E >, 1!.. Co V) 2 L.) -c C - 0) -0 Ets 0 a) >. t f t, g, ,E Li u: Lu 7.- -c 1- a) a L 0 31- .= 4.4 0 U U al 0 ,- <U 0 -Clr, -0 C -0m) 2 a) = c Iv E 00 co o (..) ..o , - cov) x -C ia Ena3 - 0 > a) ...-a U Co- . r3 QS -3 "' o V CI a) 4- 3 s\_ 4- a.) o , a) a) 0 . .?- >- c - 0 -° > o 1 s4. ,..., ,- o - a) C 0 : 0 -15 . = ,,„ = c = - E .E ° E t 3 ='- Q.) a) 4.4 En o p a 01 .c a., = 11) Co (DU Co c - cc l." 4-1 U 1.. .2 Co (1' Q.)T 6 \_C (1) C 1 - +4 8 >..c a) ro ns s \_ 0 CO " To 10 ••" - C L- Ell -a o > \_C 0 a) 0. ) 'fa -C 0 Cn >. 4= .0 E cu • 0 E a.) en cu re -= 0 C U -C -4444,0 0,41EU 0 0 , a n3 E cu c en L' -c c cu C . E G) = c 4:1 0 0 5 - 0 (5) ) " c„,ro=ro, - 0 0.x0., Co \_c 1. 1,3 c c 0 cn 013.5 c > s \_c L.) a) ro o 2 z (7) u 0.> v) o a) z >- u: ui Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bjec t ives ? Op t ion 2: Exemp t ion base on ma in p lace o f wor k C. Pa r t ly F. Yes E. Yes Re duces t he fisca l r is k t ha t wou ld ar ise un der se lf-nom ina t ion. However, has s lig ht ly hig her comp liance cos ts in assess ing t he ma in p lace o f wo r k. :e l room C. No F. No E. No Li ke ly to have a ddit io na l comp lian ce cos ts s ince t he emp loy er wou ld nee d to mon itor t he na tur e o f t he accommo da t ion cos ts be ing re im bu rse d an d wou ld resu lt in some wo r k-re la te d ac commo da t ion be ing taxe d a n d o t hers un de r taxe d w it h soc ia l ass is tance conseq uences. Op t ion 4: Dis tance from home (recommen de d op t ion ) - T his op t ion focuse s on ly on t he accommo da t ion be ing bey on d reasona ble da i ly trave l ling dis tance from t he emp loy ee 's home (an d t here fore bey on d t he usua l wor kp lace ). C. Ye s F. Yes E. Yes In tro duces re la t ive ly low comp liance cos ts an d broa dly ex emp ts a ddit io na l accommo da t ion cos ts necessar ily incurre d because o f t he jo b. ..Y U) Re lies on an accura te assessmen t be ing ma de o f t he emp loy ee 's ma in p lace o f wor k. This may no t be c lear in so me cases an d req u ire care fu l cons idera t ion. A lterna t ive ly I it wou ld be difficu lt to c ha lleng e any assessmen t. cn co rt) a) ro .c ra 45 '7) 4-, c U >..0 • ''' = t 8 , to '' 0 = E , p 4-4 4-'.0 0 MI 03 s- C L.1 - -C OS 0) I- .0 ICS . -0 Shou ld be broa dly No p a r ticu lar issues revenue neu tra l. i den t i fie d. (11 4, Li to a E Comp liance Econom ic Soc ia l Fisca l imp ac t Like ly to be fisca lly neu tra l. typ e o f accommo da t ion is cons idere d temp orary, for e xamp le a ho 1 C 4-• C) a, 0 .47I -0 C CO a-, "0 73 = a) 0 = \_CI ..z E0 .. 4-' U 0) 4- E >o o c 10 ot . ) ..,a ) . u . ,- >a ) cry a, 0 4.7; Ct. U V, csi 0 • :I-2 c >•• .1--, E ° 73 -8 '13 = '47, U '5 o. tn c a.) ■ —, 0C a3 s- Assum ing t he emp loy ee 's home is near t he ir ma in p lace o f wor k, t his app roac h w ou ld mean t here was no accommo da t ion barr ier to t he emp loy ee wor king away on an on -g o ing bas is. cu 0.) .Ca) E 4\_, w E, .c 4-, 0 ti- >. 5 c .0°) 0.2 .ca) ro co w 5 C Ii7J - c E \_c a) ro 0. . I— v) ii, ...:- 4-, 4-, I- -0 - C) 0 - r'3 Cu g >. ,z, ai F; ..., (/) 4\_• .... 0 -0 E ,t; 0.0 = (1) 4 ... • , ,- .\_ 0 .0 4 i CO 4 -' (i)0 .0 0 Ta (f) 0\_ (:) X ••■•• - C 0 U) (f) (13 1 0 • - \*- >. E E E c ° T o .3 ,\_E feu —2 ."Q.) E Es' 2 rja ,(>3 8'45 za2E 4E'-c8a,Ea)g it 2- 2- 2. o c 0 0 0 cr) := -0 u) u I r0 rt3 10 4, 71 •■-, (1) a) 4-, Exemp ts accommo da t ion Exemp ts accommo da t ion aw ay from t he c os ts necessar i ly emp loy ee 's ho me so incur re d fro m t he jo b so s hou ld no t ac t as a s hou ld no t br ing any barr ier to t he mo bi lity o f excess tax c harg es. la bour. Assum ing t he emp loy ee 's I home is near t he ir ma in I p la ce o f wor k, t his app roac h w ou ld mean t he re was no ac commo da t ion barr ier to t he emp loy ee wor king away on a n on -g o ing bas is. c co c o , . s o • o u , C E 173 +-. 47, 0 cp ou, vi 0 ro 2, >•• -C, c. . 0.) E P., V- a) - - 4-. 1° E " > w4- ° '1:3 0 fa° 0 = 0 0 0 :1:4- -D E 4-' Irj ..--, 0 o P n:s (i) >. a) to -c ro w U c '5 (,) E0 a3 :w 0. CU - on -0 U '- 0) 0 .1-., - ,- V- Q) .17 > MI a)" > L. 0:6 C.- cu ° :8 ,,\_ \_c a) , ,2. E ro , :::-... )., >, a) E 0 -a •,•• =10 c s- 173 c c ....- , -I-. I- ..--, , -0 (3'C .0 . 1-• C >r. 0 0 .0 -° U ° -C a3 UuC U V') 4-, c) 4-, 4, CU CO (.3 4.., CO 0) Z0 r0 Req u ires a fac tua l assessmen t to be ma de o f t he emp loy ee 's ma in p lace o f w or k - fo r examp le, t he wor kp lace t he emp loy ee wor ks from fo r mos t o f t he t ime. T his wou ld req u ire a ju dg emen t to be ma de an d rev iewe d on a n on -g o ing bas is w it h some comp liance co s ts for t he em lo er. Op t ion 3: Exemp t io n if -o a) U) o c 4-, (I) 13.' >C X \_o a) -c' o c -= .°4-' o 3-'a) a) ro c .c P -,-- .0 L .1.-+ 0 C C ......°) ,- E '-- ..- - 0 a) ,-(3 0 ,I-. E 4, c -3. c E ° 8 a) Lu E na 2 17 T his s hou ld a lr ea dy be a cons idera t ion in t he emp loy er 's dec is ion to p ay for accommo da t ion an d so s hou ld no t br ing s ig n ifican t a ddit io na l comp liance cos ts. Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bjec t ives ? I Issue 4: Tax trea tmen t o f accommo da t ion w hen p os te d o verseas Op t ion 1: Tax mar ke t ren ta l va lue 4E) C 0 111 0 0. 4-, C 1- = 1..) >• W • 4— a) ro 0 ul • • U IL1.1J • ris 4J CI C .0 713 >7 E IP, Op t ion 2: Tax mar ke t ren ta l va lue bu t cap a t a p rop or t ion o f sa lary C. Yes F. Par t ly E. Yes Cap s t he taxa ble amoun t a t a leve l in line w it h t he emp loy ee 's remu nera t ion p ac kag e. I Op t ion 3: Tax mar ke t ren ta l va lue bu t cap a t benc hm ar k New Zea la n d p rop e r ty va lue (recommen de d op t ion ) As a bove fo r p rev ious As a bove fo r p rev ious As a bove for p rev ious C. Yes op t ion, op t ion. op t io n. F. Par t ly E. Ye s Cap s t he taxa ble amoun t a t a leve l in line w it h w ha t a NZ emp loy ee m ig ht exp ec t to p ay. R is ks 4-, 3- a) . 17I.. 1- = 03 0 .0.0 0CI CU U) V- ( 0 4,-, ›.. a3 = C .471 03 0 0 E T he num bers are li ke ly to be sma ll so r is ks are like ly to be sma ll. Imp ac ts Comp liance Eco nom ic Soc ia l F isca l imp ac t 3 ro C //, • 3- — I\_ (../ (11 = U (13 = W s= w CU) 4-, (13 0 (1) E z'. 4-, (13 U u cu 0 .- 4= C 0. w 0 E ce ta .\_ T he num bers a re li ke ly to be sma ll so un like ly to be s ig n i fican t cos t imp lica t ions. ›...,. a)4 u > = c c '7) \_a a) 0 C,-.D c 7 4.4 ° o a\_a,wrou cax4-'1->0-c a) f° E 0 c r...) N ro .1.) .->.oz-c— u) . .C 2. 15 r D 1 17) E 0 47- — E 3-ta)cuu)=-0>. > V.) :c- .0 oco .--, 0. 0 1.- 4-4 17) u) a Re duces t he a ddit ion to taxa ble income to an amo un t commensura te w it h t he emp loy ee 's sa lary so it is a ffor da ble an d t his carr ies across to soc ia l ass is tance imp lica t ions. W • Ill a) -0 La 0.) o c \_c CEO) E — ro >., cci , CO 0\_ .- c To x(D 0 0 c ,- ..a .ro c !,..-: cu a) a, E .E8>-"zsci5E„,c 10,\_,..uu,N a CD 03 'a OC u " al o c w ruw 'Llicn r .'7$a9 3 g\_16 a , E C zcs-=:4 7.,. .1.7iro c i,.c,cflEa) \_c 4-/Cn O12:v, fo > 0 frj‘-'4-, C (13 cp 0 01 (1,13) V) •C E a) ro 0..- E 03 -0 (0 X " .c 7 E > 7 ,.\_ > a , tn, v) a) ono u o,Eiiic n3 C (3 v) C C C a 0 x a) 4-' ci. ) 0 -,-;., a) s- o 1- — a) o '5 a. 1- L\_ ,-- s- a) ,u curpa-o s-4-, a)a)a) tx> -300\_0>s-xo,Y0u\_ >=0a,„,0 Li- 4- CO -I- 0 CO W 03 .= a 1.I••■ :IS 0 4.-J -1-. I-44 01 Re du ces t he a ddit ion to taxa ble income to an amoun t co mmensura te w it h t he e mp loy ee 's sa lary so it is a ffor da ble a n d no t a dis incen t ive to wor king ov erseas. In so me cases it p rov ides a su bs idy to emp loy ees, dep en ding o n sa lary leve l c hos en. As a bove for p re v iou s As a bo ve for p rev ious op t ion - bu t req u ir es op t ion. know le dg e o f emp loy ee 's c ircums tances in New Zea lan d. Ill -C >••• 4.4 — 4- ) C 13 g .E -1-'COO a3 in c 0 \_c 46. c < .r4O' cn ci m a) 0 :' a, > o (o 47, E ro a Tij 03 u a) o > X s- ,\_,••-• I.- CD :10 4, 0. -E- a) > no a, u) (I ) > 0 To .c ,.. I- 0 P 1- .6, Is p rac t ica l. Assum ing t he ren ta l mar ke t in t he overseas loca t ion is we ll deve lop e d, it s hou ld be re la t ive ly easy to i den t ify t he tax a ble va lue. Ease o f comp liance de term ine d by i den t ify ing correc t sa lary en t it lemen t. Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bjec t ives ? Issue 5: W he t her to tax accommo da t io n bene fits un der income tax or fr ing e bene fit tax ( FBT) \_ or soc ia l ass is tance /o b lig a tion ca lcu la t ion C. Yes F. Yes E. Yes T his app roac h wou ld a lig n w it h o t her fr ing e bene fits a n d be taxe d to t he emp loy er. How ever, w it hou t spec ia l ru les, it wou ld resu lt in a very s ig n i fican t fun damen ta l bene fit be ing exc lu de d fro m soc ia l ass is tance cons idera t ions. Op t ion 2: Tax un der income tax (recommen de d op t ion ) C. Yes F. Ye s E. Yes T his op t ion ma in ta ins t he curr en t app roac h w hic h has been es ta blis he d fo r a lona t ime. Issue 6: Tax trea tmen t o f mea l p ay men ts during wor k trave l 4--I C. Yes F. No E. Yes Over t ime, cou ld encourag e hig her a llowance s an d sa lary su bs t itu t ion. R is ks Ris k t ha t bene fit may no t be inc lu de d w hen ca lcu la ting income for soc ia l ass is tance p urp oses. No p ar t icu lar r is ks i den t i fie d. T here may be a cos t i f Ris k o f sa lary tra de -o ff for t he emp loy ee swap s mea l p ay men ts over a taxa ble sa lary for a mea l p ro lo ng e d p e r io d. p ay men t s ince it covers a s ig n ifican t p r iva te bene fit. Imp ac ts Comp liance Econom ic Soc ia l F isca l imp ac t Po ten t ia l fisca l g a in as wou ld be taxe d to emp loy er a t a hig her ra te. No cos ts an t ic ip a te d. 3T, w it h inc lu s ion o f fr ing e bene fit in income Neu tra l, p rov i de d bene fit inc lu de d in soc ia l ass is tance ca lcu la t ions. • Ensu res t ha t a very su bs tan t ia l p ersona l bene fit is ta ken in to accoun t for soc ia l a ss is tance p urp oses. a) 3... 3.\_ .0 \_. 0 .1-' C " C 4-- 0 4, 0 a , u) 73 0 i'n a) c u 73 X W C,,OU a) -1-' +5 ,-) c ro O c fa -o 4\_, (%) 19 • 7, • ;\_ .\_tv . w c u") : .s 03in cu co (130(nz c— 0 \_Ca) g 2 (0> -C.)me: I- a) E 1.7 .P.• cn a. Wou ld no t a lte r w ho u lt ima te ly bears t he cos t o f t he tax. Wou ld ne e d to ensure bene fit con t inue d to be inc lu de d in income for soc ia l ass is tanc e p urp os es. Ot herw ise, wou ld encourag e p rov is ion o f accommo da tion bene fits. Con t inues t he curren t app roac h so no ne w ince n tives / barr iers to emp loy ee mo bi lity. Op t ion 1: Fu ll exemp t ion - no upp er t ime lim i Ensures no barr ier to emp loy ee mo bi lity for wor k p urp oses. Op t ion 1: Tax u n der Fl Al ig ns w it h o t her fr ing e bene fits bu t t here are comp lia nce cos ts assoc ia te d w it h t he c hang e. However, t he emp loy er is a lrea dy curren t ly invo lve d in co llec t ing tax, t hroug h PAYE. Con t inues t he curren t app roac h so no new ru les fo r t he emp loy er to be co ncer ne d a bou t. Emp loy ers an d emp loy ees wou ld no t nee d to app or t ion a ny p ay men ts once t hey es ta blis h t ha t mea l exp ense s have been incurr e d on a wor k journey w hic h wou ld avo id s ig n ific an t comp lianc e cos ts. Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bjec t ives ? Op t ion 2: Fu ll exemp t ion - lim it to overn ig ht s tay s C. Yes F. Pa r t ly E. No As sumes t ha t w hen a wor k journey does no t invo lve an overn ig ht s tay t he emp loy ee does no t incur s ig n ifican t a ddit iona l mea l cos ts. t hs (re commen de d op t ion ) s C. Yes F. Yes E. Yes T he emp loy er wou ld no t have to wo rry a bou t i den t i fy ing t he no t io na l p r iv a te / wor k sp lit o f a mea l p ay men t - it wou ld be no t taxa b le a t a ll, or taxa ble in fu ll. Se tt ing a n upp er t ime lim it wou ld rec og n ise t he a ddit iona l exp enses lin ke d to wor k-re la te d tra ve l, an d t ha t t hese cos ts are norma lise d a fter a p er io d o f time. Op t ion 4: Exemp t amoun t save d, in o t her wor ds, t he amoun t taxa ble un der curren t law C. No F. Ye s E. Yes Because o f t he li ke ly difficu lt ies in iden t i fy ing t he amoun t save d an d hence t he taxa ble amoun t, t his op t ion is no t seen as a rea lis tic ou tco me. R is ks u 4-- a.) 4-- ea >•-° 0 4-' -to > ... cn MO-OCC To >,. -cs .0) a.) o c 0 o • cn (1) E EE 2 E co.= a) so 0 u a) ss- .\_ 4... 0 0 — , ID U \_C .w 4-• >. c c I- SD 0 EE ea >-• o 1- 2 E sz T he va lu e o f t he amoun t Po ten tia lly, a sma ll fisca l T he ca lcu la t ion req u ire d to save d w ou ld nee d to be p os it ive s inc e t he i den t ify t he amoun t save d ta ken in to accoun t in amoun t sa ve is no t cou ld p rove to be nea r income fo r soc ia l cur ren t ly taxe d. imp oss i ble to un der ta ke. ass is ta nce p urp oses. Howeve r, t his w ou ld be Give n t he re la t ive ly so di fficu lt to iden t ify sma ll in div idua l amoun ts emp loy er s wou ld be t his wou ld be di fficu lt to re luc tan t to un der ta ke iden t i fy an d mon itor. t he ca lcu la tions. Imp ac ts Comp liance Econom ic Soc ia l Fisca l imp ac t To v, \_ E a) On CL rt3 8 LI) 1- so 3 o :1-, > a) a) ?... (8 0- E °- c i4--- • s- o tol 4-, a) >. CU 0 4\_, LO >-..! v) ro s\_ o a.) E ■ c -, -- 0 0 CU) , 4T 'di Ln a) c 4-s 0 v; -C 0L 0 o CO , I- 0 0 C 0 (f) cu \_ o , . 0 \_c m 3 c En .- (13 0 a) • — a.) 0 In ., 4- fo ."-, co o. c 4- 4-. C fri u In 0 o v, 4, s.., 0 o a) v) .(7) ' u-0 > 4-' U) >. .- X 0 U) co 1- L.) fOUV),..00 r0 r..) CL u) ime lim it o f t hr ee mon c L x E 'du C u) a) \_, -o co ...... a) .c u a) a) E a) cu E -0 >-. c .-E ca) o • 0 cn 'E— oca)Ea).- • c o -0 0 0 • - -.4. .- — 0 .-- .0 0- to • a) a) 4-' X C .,.., 4- ... C 13 c L./) a) In w 0 0 (fl. cl) 0 E7 m 0 (>3 E -0 — o W a o. u) CU s- o\_ (7.) , s-) .,\_- fp-00M,- -CL - ')<XCMC C L-OCC F- s w a.) a.) o = E c U 0.) 0 ›.. .1.) so co .6) ..c En .1-. >.. ,j, 4\_, a.) 03 .1- 14 E ' 0) c u E (1) a) — a., • 0 0 „ 0 = OE UCDC Oc>.(i) Op t ion 3: Fu ll exemp t ion - su bjec t to upp er ti -0 rn a) a) o >- as v) 4-, a) u) .1-, a) c u) C a) , I- 0) 0 1- 0 0 .-" -C .0 P - 5o0 o,,s- 1-• a) • a) vs ED 0 En 0 0.) I , .0 C C 0 o o ' ua - ) i>0E no tn7' = ,.., >. ,\_ 4- >... 1- • :s, 4- 0 4 --' .1-, Cn CL -t.• '' r: 0 = -C 0 - rll 0>.(1)( 0%....7•'-1\_1 12 >, , 0,,,,Cac C na ea Esa 0 00 0- o a 2 -51.) E ro 751. c E E so u T here wou ld be an imp e dimen t to no rma l bus iness ac t iv ity i f emp loy ers an d e mp loy ees ha d to un der ta ke co mp lex ex erc ises to i den t i fy t he ta xa b le e le men t o f a mea l exp ense. As a bo ve for op t ion 1. However, emp loy ers wou ld nee d to dis t ing u is h w he t her overn ig ht s tay invo lve d w it h emp loy ee trave l. As for op t io n 1. However, t here w ou ld be an upp er time lim it t ha t emp loy ers wou ld have to comp ly w it h, a lt houg h t his wou ld s e t a c lear non - taxa ble / taxa ble boun dary for emp loy ers. T here wou ld be a s ig n ifican t co mp liance cos t from t he e mp loy er hav ing to i den t ify t he emp loy ee 's nor ma l mea l exp enses. T his wou ld be very di fficu lt, if no t imp oss i ble, to do. Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bjec t ives ? Op t ion 5: Exemp t a fixe d p or t ion or a capp e d amoun t C. Yes F. No E. Par t ly Emp loy ers wou ld have to c hang e t he ir p rocesses to tax mea l p ay men ts in p ar t an d accoun t for t his t hroug h PAYE. Op t ion 1: Exemp t fu ll amoun t - su bj ec t to upp er mone tary lim it C. No F. Ye s E. No Emp loy ers wou ld have to mon itor emp loy ee exp en diture to ensure mone tary lim its a re no t excee de d an d any excess is taxe d. Dep en ding on w here the cu t-o ff was s e t, cou ld cu r ta i l norma l bus iness be hav iour. Op t ion 2: Exemp t fu ll amou n t (recommen de d op t ion ) C. Yes F. Yes E. Yes T his op t io n wou ld re flec t cur ren t p rac t ice s o ne t imp ac t li ke ly to be m in ima l. Ris ks = o) LE >, o4, o.6,— o)\_ > .ww ..o . u .6)c„.. cu i\_ •,, En (o a) v).oV) — a) a(13c mm\*7) um= a) U,.0 =t5 — 4, M •Wm5E CO"Os- -CCO i—roc T ha t t he comp liance cos ts wou ld imp ac t on bus iness dec is ions an d be ha v iour. No imp ac ts. Po ten t ia l for p r iva te mea l bene fits to be p a i d by way o f sa lary tra de -o ff or o t herw ise as a tax - free - s a lary su bs t itu t ion ru le for t his. Imp ac ts Comp liance Econom ic Soc ia l F isca l imp ac t a) c 4-) = o c a) E c4-, X i\_ fr3 c) 13V)>•• L9,p cu ca) -..=)-c4 o , , o en.)- a) o ....\_— )r.-: > -0 s.pa),,c5 ww m ,T.,-E-06 w mcn O. S-0 0\_c>,-,-'•— 0 — >\_ 0CoWEEW m En To o cu io 4, a) (nu E E '5' .c c \_c a) a) H co R3 a) 0 H o 4., Un like ly to be a fisca l cos t. \_c 1- C ro s\_ uw z ccpcpwEcE 4=-.5w= 28mmw w .2.E ..c.0 .0 • c ici 0 -1-, 1.0 OW40\_11:\_" COS217) Et 0-o =°-0 m0mw==> mcouc\_)=Ilim3P,E )t ErIE.blf et.',“gloow o ,.( 7,4-)3o > aam .cwww=0ma'our..EEw H.o.Sm\_clEzEacuwE Issue 7: Tax trea tmen t o f wor king lunc hes / lig ht re fres hmen 1 No p ar t icu lar issues iden t i fie d. vi u m a E \_ o z 4, 4, cu c c m -12..-F, w u 0- wE (7„E4 6.-E,:i5 coW a) v) , .R.E'al>1?-10 o>, x-a2t—„9-0 c CO a) 1\_ >, a) W C 4-, 1: 17 4 .-mm U, . 1-, c w\_\_ 0 c ....->". C D "-- C E wc5L6 mm>.,...,a4, — 'WO C".'M s, MXU wZamua)49mE T he boun da ry app roac h cou ld resu lt in emp loy ers p ay ing up to t he lim it an d no mo re. T he boun dary wou ld req u ire mon itor ing to ma in ta in t he rea l va lue or it cou ld s tar t to dis to r t dec is ions. No imp ac ts. A broa d brus h app roac h t ha t s hou ld have re la tive ly low comp lia nce cos ts. T he app roac h is a lrea dy a dop te d by t he USA an d Cana da w hic h exemp t 50% o f any exp ense s. However, emp loy ers wou ld have to c ha ng e t he ir p rocesses to I tax in p ar t p ay men ts t ha t are curren t ly be ing p a i d tax - free. It p rov i des a c lear boun dary. However, wou ld in tro duce a c li ff e dg e w hic h emp loy ers wou ld have to mon itor a n d p o ten t ia lly a lloca te exp en ditu re be tween emp loy ees, br ing ing s ig n ifican t comp liance cos ts for re la t ive ly sma ll amoun ts. Emp loy ers wou ld nee d to ens ure t ha t t hey sa t is fy any cr iter ia for ma king ta x - free p ay men ts, bu t o t herw ise no comp liance cos ts. Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bjec t ives ? Issue 8: Tax trea tmen t o f c lo t hing p ay men ts Op t ion 1: Tax in fu ll C. Yes F. No E. No There wou ld be s ig n i fican t a ddit iona l tax conseq uences for un i form an d spec ia lis t c lo t hina. nc tive c lo t hing - inc lu ding p o lice p la in c lo t hes a llowance (recommen de d op t ion ) C. Yes F. Yes E. Yes Pay men ts re la t ing to un i form an d spec ia lis t c lo t hing wou ld con t inu e no t to be taxe d - however, a p la in c lo t hes a llowance p a i d to an emp loy ee w ho ha d been issue d w it h a un iform bu t was req u ire d to wear or dina ry c lo t hing because o f t he na ture o f t he ir du t ies wou ld be exemp t. nc t ive c lo t hing an d a bnorma l use o f or dina ry c lo t hing C. Yes F. Pa r t ly E. Par t ly By ens hr in ing law t he tax p os it ion fo r or dinary c lo t hing, t his cou ld resu lt in a ddit iona l p ressure to w i de n t he very lim ite d cu rren t scop e. Op t ion 4: App ly g enera l ru le to c lo t hing Re ta ins t he ex is t ing Re ta ins t he ex is t ing C. Yes p os it ion in e ffec t, p os it ion in e ffec t. F. Yes E. Yes Re ta ins t he ex is t ing p os it ion in e ffec t. Ris ks Tha t bus iness dec is ions w il l be dis tor te d towar ds p r ov i ding c lo t hing dir ec t ly. No ne i den ti fie d. By ens hr in ing law t he ta x p os it ion for or dinary c lo t hing, t his cou ld r esu lt in a ddit iona l p ressure to w i den t he very lim ite d curren t sc op e. IC Cl. Comp liance Ec onom ic Soc ia l F isca l imp ac t Wo u ld resu lt in a ddit iona l revenue s ince emp loy ers wou ld have to con t inu e to p r ov ide an d serv ice c lo t hing for cer ta in jo bs. To" L.\_ 4.4 7 0..) C a) 7 C o > 2 >. -o ro F2 Fisca l cos t i f in terp re te d to ena ble more or dinary c lo t hing to be tax - free. Assum ing emp loy er s con t inue to ma ke suc h p ay men ts, t here wou ld be an a ddit iona l tax a b le income t ha t wou ld flow t hroug h in to soc ia l ass is tance en t it lemen ts. L. a.) U) 70 4.., CI (1) 8 6' • 0 • — 0 C S.- -C C .— 4-, 0) c 0 .\_ , .,... U C u, cu tu7) 0 > To C r, >. ro E i\_ 0) o -c L. ID -6 a) 0. >. 9 ,q o5 EP 2 3 \_ Z 0 Q) 4.J CO 0 Ince n t ive to try to inc lu de o r dinary c lo t hing tax - free. Re ta ins t he ex is t ing p os it ion in e ffec t. Wou ld a lso cover un i forms an d sp ec ia lis t c lo t hing t ha t emp loy ees req u ir e to do t he ir jo b, p us hing up cos ts an d dis tor t ing bus ines s dec is ions. Fo r t he vas t ma jor ity o f emp loy ers, t here s hou ld be no imp ac t on bus iness de c is ion ma king. Cons is ten t w it h fr ing e bene fit tax trea tmen t o f dis t inc t ive c lo t hing. Incen t ive to try to inc lu de or dinary c lo t hing tax - free. Re ta ins t he ex is t ing Re ta ins t he ex is t ing p os it ion in e ffec t. p os it ion in e ffec t. A s imp le ou tcome s ince emp loy ers wou ld tax a ll c lo t hing p ay men ts. Op t ion 2: Exemp t dis t i Su bs ta n tia lly ma in ta ins t he curren t app roac h for emp loy ers. Issues wou ld rema in aroun d emp loy ers iden t ify ing w ha t c lo t hing is covere d by t he de fin it ion o f un ifor m or sp ec ia lis t c lo t hing an d is t here fore tax ex emp t. Op t ion 3: Exemp t dis t i Di fferen t from curren t p os it ion w it h resp ec t to a bnorma l use o f o r dinary c lo t hing. Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bjec t ives ? Issue 9: C lar ify ing t he de f in it ion o f "e xp en diture on accoun t o f an emp loy ee " Op t ion: Amen d g enera l exc lus ions to ma ke a c learer dis tinc t ion be tween w hen t hey s hou ld app ly (recommen de d op t ion ) C. Yes F. Yes E. Yes Re ta in ing t he ex is t ing p os it ion is s imp ler app r oac h t han c onso lida t ing the two p rov is ions. Ot her op t ions a lso cons i dere d bu t wou ld have e it her le ft a g ap in t he law ( if rep ea le d g enera l p rov is ion ) or lea d to a more con fuse d ou tcome if merg e d t he two exc lu s ions. Issue 1 0: En hanc ing t he g enera l ru le t ha t de term ines taxa ble /non - taxa ble p or t ions o f o t her a llowances Op t ion 1: Amen d g enera l ru le to re f lec t p o licy p r inc ip les C. No F. Yes E. Yes Uncer ta in w he t her it wou ld a llow emp loy ers to ma ke a ddit iona l p ay m en ts tax - free in a r ang e o f w or k-re la te d scenar ios. Op t ion 2: C lar i fy g e nera l ru le by inc lu ding g enera l cr iter ia t ha t focus on w he t her exp en diture is incurre d because o f o blig a t ions o f t he jo b or as a p rac t ica l req u iremen t o f t he jo b Lim ite d r is k t ha t t he C. Yes r ev ise d ru les de liver an F. Yes un in ten de d o u tcome an d E. Yes crea te some unce r ta in ty or a re laxa t ion hav ing some Lim ite d imp ac t exp ec te d. fisca l imp a c t. R is ks a) u cu c = cu .,.. a) a) s\_ -= > Cr a) 4' CO 0) > \_C 'n • 01 c -,•• C F 0 -0 ra -0 t c , 0 I- Eli cp ›... 4-, 4-' U ra T.") •C tij — -C X E .c —o- I— cu c +., a. T ha t t he c ha ng e in app roac h me re ly comp lica tes t he ex is t ing ru les. Imp ac ts Comp liance Econom ic Soc ia l Fisca l imp ac t .6.. C a) s\_ L. c U a) \_c .6., . u) c CO . Ea 4-, 71 (1) 0 ce a. Po ten t ia l s ig n i fican t fisca l cos t i f t he c hang e in app roa c h resu lts in a re laxa t ion o f t he cu rren t app roac h. No s ig n i fica n t cos t imp lica t ions. 4-4 C CU n u aJ .c 4-, . IJI C CO 7, P -64 (7) a) o ce a Po te n t ia lly wou ld ma ke it s imp ler for emp loy ees to be re fu n de d wor k- re la te d exp ense s. No s ig n i fican t soc ia l imp lica t io ns. 4-, C a) 1... L.\_ = c.) aJ .c 4.., . in c CO 75 ;17' .1.-, t.7) a.) o I Po te n t ia lly wou ld ma ke it s imp le r for emp loy ers to p ay wor k-r e la te d exp enses. No s ig n i fican t eco nom ic imp lica tio ns. Re ta ins s ta tus q uo so m in ima l comp liance imp ac t. Re -wr it ing o f t he g ener a l ru les wou ld resu lt in s ig n i fican t comp liance cos ts as e mp loy ers an d t he ir a dv isers have to come to g r ip s w it h t hem an d how t hey s hou ld be in terp re te d an d app lie d. Ther e wou ld be corresp on d ing a dm in is tra t ive cos ts. Invo lves m ino r re -wr it ing o f t he g ene ra l ru les t ha t s hou ld re du ce comp liance cos ts over t ime t hr oug h p rov i ding g rea te r c lar ity. Ne t Imp ac t Does op t ion mee t o bjec t ives ? Op t ion 3: App ly t he a bove c hang e an d p r ov i de t he Comm iss ioner o f In lan d Revenue w it h p owe r to de term ine t he p rop or t ion o f a c lass o f p ay men t t ha t is no t tax a ble w hen p r iva te or cap ita l bene fi t is har d to measure or low in va lue an d no t a sa lary su bs titu te (recommen de d op t ion) C. Yes F. Yes E. Yes Ena bles sp ec i fic app or t ionme n t issues to be a ddresse d in a more s tream line d way t han hav ing to le g is la te fo r eac h case. ca x ta T ha t t he de term ina t ion p ower is app lie d incons is ten t ly or too w ide ly, bu t have p u blic ru ling s to lim it t his. Imp ac ts Comp liance Econom ic Soc ia l Fisca l imp ac t Fisca l cos ts s hou ld be low s ince any discre t ion wou ld be focuse d on lo w va lu e app or tionmen t asp ec ts t ha t are curre n t ly ha r d to measure or lo w in va lue. De term ina t ion p o wer s hou ld ma ke it eas ier to dea l w it h issues t ha t have an imp ac t on e mp loy ees. Comm iss ioner De ter m ina t ion p ower de te rm ina t ion ma king s hou ld ma ke it eas ier to p ower is exp ec te d to lea d dea l w it h g rey areas t ha t to some a ddit iona l are an imp e dimen t to a dm in is tra t ive cos ts. Bu t a bus iness dec is ions. de term ina t ion wou ld re duce comp liance cos ts for emp loy ers.