Regulatory Impact Statement NRWT: Related party and branch lending - N R W T changes Agency Disclosure Statement This R egulatory Impact Statement (RIS) has been prepared by Inland Revenue. It provides an analysis o f options to ensure the correct amount o f non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) is paid at the appropriate time on related party lending, lending that is economically equivalent to related party lending, and lending by unrelated parties w hich have a New Zealand branch. Inland Revenue has identified a number o f arrangements that have been entered into by taxpayers to remove, reduce or defer an NRW T obligation that would otherwise arise if a m ore conventional loan arrangement were entered into. In some instances, an existing anti­ avoidance provision has applied to arrive at a tax treatment consistent with the policy intention but this is not possible for all arrangements. Because o f the sophistication o f existing financial products an almost infinite variety o f different arrangements m ay be constructed, including m any that m ay be designed in the future if a comprehensive solution is not introduced. The options in this RIS are intended to comprehensively cover both know n and potential avoidance arrangements. They are designed to impose NRW T on a tim ely basis on related party interest and amounts equivalent to related party interest. There is a key constraint on the analysis. The fiscal cost estimates o f the options are based on the amount o f foreign direct investment and conservative assumptions on interest rates compared w ith N R W T collected over a number o f years1. Fiscal estimates o f the individual options are not available as the modelling estimates the amount o f NRW T officials expect should be paid compared to what is paid, rather than what is avoided by particular structures. Furthermore, the fiscal costs o f each option cannot be determined on a stand-alone basis as the introduction o f rules that removed the tax advantage o f a particular arrangement could encourage taxpayers to adopt another arrangement. A range o f options have been considered and measured against the criteria o f economic efficiency, fairness, and certainty and simplicity. There are no environmental, social or cultural impacts from the recommended changes. Inland Revenue is o f the view that, aside from the constraint described above there are no other significant constraints, caveats and uncertainties concerning the regulatory analysis undertaken. 1 Statistics New Zealand data on direct investment debt instruments and NZD equivalent BBB rated 5 year interest rates between 2001 and 2014. Statistics New Zealand direct investment is defined as 10% or more of voting shares in a company. While this definition is different to association for tax purposes it is likely to have a significant degree of overlap. N one o f the policy options identified are expected to restrict market competition, unduly impair private property rights or override fundamental common law principles. Carmel Peters Policy Manager Policy and Strategy Inland Revenue 1 December 2015 2 3 STATUS QUO AND PROBLEM DEFINITION Non-resident withholding tax rules 1. Non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) is required to be withheld on certain payments o f interest, dividends and royalties. This RIS is concerned w ith NRWT on interest. 2. In general, N ew Zealand imposes tax on the worldwide income o f N ew Zealand- residents and the N ew Zealand-sourced income o f non-residents. A n interest payment made by a N ew Zealand resident to a non-resident is an example o f N ew Zealand-sourced income o f a non-resident. A lthough the standard approach is to impose income tax on income it can be difficult to enforce and collect tax from non-residents. To ensure tax on this income is paid, New Zealand (like many other countries) imposes a withholding tax on interest payments. The payer o f the interest withholds NRW T from the interest payment and pays it to Inland Revenue, and the balance is paid to the non-resident lender. 3. The NRW T rate on interest is 15% but this rate is usually reduced to 10% for lenders whose hom e country has a double tax agreement (DTA) w ith N ew Zealand. These rates are consistent with international tax practice. The lender will often be taxable on the interest income in their hom e country and allowed a tax credit for the NRW T withheld in New Zealand. This means that their income tax liability in their home country will be reduced by the NRWT withheld. 4. NRW T is only required to be withheld on arrangements where a number o f definitions are met, including “interest”, “money lent”, “paid” and “non-resident passive income”. The increasing sophistication o f financial transactions has allowed the development o f arrangements that are economically equivalent to debt from a related party, but do not trigger a liability to withhold N RW T on interest payments. In addition, the financial arrangement rules in the Incom e T ax Act 2007 m ean that for New Zealand borrowers, finance cost deductions are calculated on an economic accrual basis. This means deductions can arise even when there is no interest, money lent, or payment that would trigger NRW T for the lender. Related-party and third-party lending 5. NRW T is one o f several areas o f tax law that distinguish between related parties and third parties. 6. A “related p a r ty ’ is one that is associated, as that term is defined in the Income Tax Act 2007. Association recognises that there is, or m ay be, an ongoing relationship between two entities and covers a w ide variety o f relationships such as a person w ith their close relative, a company w ith its m ajority shareholder, or a trustee w ith its trust. The m ost common relationship betw een related parties is one company that, directly or indirectly, owns at least 50% o f another company. 7. A “third party” is one that is not associated and recognises that two entities are not directly involved w ith each other. For the purposes o f the problem definition, a common third party relationship arises w hen an individual or company borrows from a bank in which they have no ownership. 2 This is mainly because AIL is paid by the borrower not the lender and, unlike NRWT, AIL is not an income tax. 4 8. The distinction betw een related parties and third parties recognises that the incentives and behaviours o f related parties m ay be different than an otherwise equivalent transaction involving third parties. For example, a person that lends to a related party m ay be willing to not receive interest paym ents as they are happy instead to hold an increased receivable from the borrower; whereas, a bank would expect interest payments as they do not w ish their exposure to the borrower to increase beyond the agreed amount. Approved issuer levy rules for third party lending 9. In certain circumstances, approved issuer levy (AIL) can replace NRW T on third party lending. AIL is a paym ent by the borrower that allows the rate o f NRW T to be reduced to zero. Paying AIL is voluntary and applies at a lower rate o f 2%. Unlike NRWT, however, AIL cannot be offset against the lender’s income tax liability in their hom e country.2 10. AIL is levied on third party lending. Applying AIL to third party lending helps ensure that taxes on interest do not push up interest rates in N ew Zealand too much. There is international evidence that NRW T on third party lending m ay largely be passed through as a cost to domestic borrowers in higher interest rates rather than being absorbed by foreign borrowers. This is because a very large and important group o f foreign lenders including foreign margin lenders m ay have little or no scope to claim credits for NRWT. (Foreign financial institutions are often described as m argin lenders because their profits are m ade on a small m argin between borrowing and lending rates. Because N RW T is levied on the gross interest paid abroad, little m ay be creditable i f gross interest is very large compared to the interest margin). 11. Other countries often have different ways o f dealing w ith this concern and some exempt certain lenders from NRWT. A difficulty with that approach can be in identifying who should be exempt and who should not be. New Zealand’s approach o f allowing borrowers o f third party debt means to elect to pay AIL means that domestic interest rates may be bid up very slightly (by one fiftieth, e.g., from 5.0% to 5.1%) but this avoids the need to make different rules for different third party lenders. In practice it is very difficult to identify exactly w hich foreign lenders will and w hich w ill not be sufficiently sensitive to tax for NRW T to drive up domestic interest rates. 12. AIL would not be required and indeed would not be in N ew Zealand’s best interest if there were a sufficiently large pool o f foreign third party lenders who could absorb the costs o f NRW T without this being passed on in higher interest rates. Allowing AIL in this circumstance would reduce domestic taxes and increase the cost o f borrowing to N ew Zealand as a whole because the cost o f borrowed funds to New Zealand as a whole is the interest paid b y N ew Zealand borrowers net o f any domestic taxes that our Government collects on these payments. However, there is unlikely to be this large enough pool o f foreign third party lenders and this appears to be borne out by international empirical evidence. Our AIL regim e for third party debt is a pragm atic response. Requirement to pay NRWT on related-party lending 13. The AIL option is not available to related parties. This is consistent w ith international tax practice including, for example, the OECD model which applies a withholding tax o f 10% to related party interest. Officials consider that this treatment remains appropriate. 14. Unlike the case o f third party debt the m ajority o f related-party lenders are likely to be foreign taxpaying companies. These will often be able to absorb the costs o f NRW T without this necessarily pushing up the cost o f capital (i.e., the hurdle rate o f return they require to invest in New Zealand). Under OECD conventions New Zealand has a right to levy NRW T in this case. This is justifiable given that N ew Zealand provides the infrastructure that foreign-owned business operating in New Zealand make use of. Failing to levy tax in this situation would put upward pressure on other tax rates in N ew Zealand which would create their own costs and be likely to provide a greater burden on N ew Zealanders. 15. Even where these taxes are not able to be absorbed by a particular investor, there remains a good reason for continuing to levy NRWT on related party interest. Taxes collected on international investment are a source o f national income. I f w e levy lower taxes on one group o f foreign direct investors than another, there will be incentives for investment to be undertaken b y those paying the lowest amount o f New Zealand tax. For a given amount o f international investment into N ew Zealand, this will tend to lower national income. This provides strong grounds for trying to levy tax on different related-party investors into New Zealand that are as neutral and consistent as possible. 16. AIL has never been available as an option for related party lending and officials consider that this continues to be a sensible approach. 17. There is another consideration too. Related party debt is a close substitute for non­ deductible equity. Borrowers are entitled to income tax deductions for interest payments on debt but not dividend paym ents on equity. As a result, there is an incentive for non-residents to invest in their N ew Zealand related party b y w ay o f debt to reduce their N ew Zealand tax liability. NRW T, along w ith thin capitalisation rules3, support a more balanced investment. 18. There is a balancing consideration. The company tax rate, NRWT on interest paid to related parties and thin capitalisation rules can all combine to increase the cost o f capital w hich will discourage investment to some extent. A n important goal is ensuring that New Zealand’s tax rules are not too onerous and do not discourage investment too much so that N ew Zealand continues to be a good place to invest. A t the same time there are no easy solutions here. There will be costs associated with just about any form o f tax and taxes are necessary to finance the government services that New Zealanders expect. 19. The reform s discussed in this RIS are not aimed at overturning the current basic rules applying to third-party and related-party lending into New Zealand but instead at ensuring that they apply in a m ore consistent and neutral way. In particular, our basic framework involves levying tax on interest paid to a single foreign controller o f a domestic company for standard debt contracts. The framework involves a balancing o f competing considerations including cost o f capital issues and the benefit o f consistency and neutrality. There is, for example, no attempt to allow AIL o r a lower rate o f NRW T i f a single foreign controller is unlikely to be 3 Thin capitalisation rules restrict the proportion of related party debt that a New Zealand subsidiary of a non­ resident owned group can have. 5 6 able to claim credits for NRWT and this pushes up the cost o f capital. The aim o f the current reform is apply consistent rules in situations that are economically equivalent but where NRW T can currently be walked around. The problem 20. The m ain problem is that the tax rules for related party lenders are not being applied on a neutral and consistent basis. This problem arises because: • There are problems w ith definition and recognition o f income under the NRW T rules; • Current restrictions on related parties, or those who are economically equivalent to related parties, accessing the AIL rules are not sufficiently robust, which allows structuring into the AIL rules when the policy intention is that the interest payments should be subject to NRWT. • The AIL requirements are limited, which allows certain N ew Zealand taxpayers to borrow from non-resident associates and use the AIL rules even though this interest does not meet the legislative requirements. • Current exemptions from the NRW T rules relating to onshore branches are so wide in scope that they exempt certain interest payments that are not consistent w ith the policy intention for the taxation o f New Zealand-sourced income earned by non-residents. 21. We consider it is in N ew Zealand’s best interest to maintain the NRW T rules but that they should apply consistently to economically equivalent transactions. Applying the rules m ore neutrally and consistently w ill help ensure that investment is undertaken in ways which will generate the best return to New Zealand as a whole rather than in ways where it is possible to sidestep NRWT. Allowing N RW T to be sidestepped in the case o f related party lending provides incentives for assets to migrate to firms paying lower amounts o f tax in N ew Zealand. This is likely to be economically inefficient and unfair. The reforms that are proposed are aimed at reducing these distortions. Scale of the problem 22. Inland Revenue estimates that the amount o f NRW T paid is approximately 75% o f the amount that should be paid. This allows an inference that the current law provides an uneven playing field w here a small number o f foreign-owned firms that are not paying NRW T are subject to less tax than their competitors. 23. The Government currently collects around $180 million per annum from the combined NRW T and AIL rules applying to interest. For the 2014 year this was $135 m illion NRW T on interest and $47 million AIL. 24. The 2014 Statistics N ew Zealand international investment position data shows that debt instruments held by direct investors in New Zealand entities were approximately $49 billion. 7 OBJECTIVES 25. The m ain aim o f the reform is to ensure that N ew Zealand’s tax rules for related party lenders are applied on a neutral and consistent basis. This would mean having rules that ensure the return received b y a non-resident lender from an associated borrower (or a party that is economically equivalent to an associated borrower) will be subject to NRWT and, at a time, that is not significantly later than when income tax deductions for the funding costs are available to the borrower. 26. The desired outcome is that amounts that are economically equivalent to related party debt should be taxed consistently w ith more use o f standard debt instruments as originally anticipated b y the existing NRW T rules. For example, bonds where interest payments are made regularly (including where the interest is capitalised into the debt) should have a similar N RW T treatment to zero-coupon bonds that p ay no interest for 30 years w ith a very large interest payment built into the final payment on maturity. 27. The options in this RIS have been subject to consideration by tax policy officials for a num ber o f years, as the deficiencies in the NRW T rules are w idely known. This project is not part of, but is consistent with, the approach taken by the OECD base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) work. 28. The criteria against which the options will be assessed are: • Economic efficiency. The tax system should, to the extent possible, apply neutrally and consistently to economically equivalent transactions. This means the tax system should not provide a tax preferred treatm ent for one transaction over another similar transaction or provide an advantage to one business over another. This helps ensure that the m ost efficient forms o f investment which provide the best returns to New Zealand as a whole are undertaken. A t the same time there is a concern that taxes should not unduly raise the cost o f capital and discourage inbound investment. • Fairness: Taxes should not be arbitrary and should be fair to different businesses. N eutrality and consistency across economically equivalent transactions is likely to also promote fairness. • Certainty and simplicity. Although the NRW T rules are necessarily complicated, they should be as clear and simple as possible so that taxpayers who attempt to comply w ith the rules are able to do so. 29. W hile all criteria are not equally w eighted they are important. A ny change (except for the status quo) would have to improve neutrality and consistency o f treatment. This will tend to prom ote economic efficiency and fairness. A t the same time, the measures will also tend to increase the cost o f capital in some circumstances so there are trade-offs to consider. Due to the complexity o f these transactions, the sophistication o f taxpayers who enter into them and the rules that cover them, and the fact that taxpayers are generally able to choose to enter into m ore simple transactions as an alternative to those dealt w ith b y these rules, officials would see economic efficiency and fairness as the m ost important criteria. 30. The options do not deal w ith all tax issues arising from related-party debt. In particular, they do not deal w ith cross-border hybrid issues. The timetable for dealing w ith those issues is linked to the O EC D ’s BEPS timetable. Consultation is likely to commence on them by early 2016. 8 REGULATORY IMPACT ANALYSIS 31. A range o f options and the status quo have been assessed in this RIS for addressing the problems identified in paragraph 20. Owing to the complexity o f the NRWT rules and the variety o f structures that must be covered by them it is not possible to design a single option to address the entire problem definition. 32. Two options are assessed as “general options” because they potentially address more than one o f the identified problems. Eight options are grouped according to the specific problems they seek to address and this format is consistent with how these problems and options were presented in the M ay 2015 officials’ issues paper NRWT: related party and branch lending. 33. The options are: • General options - Option 1: Status quo Option 2: Specific anti-avoidance rules • Problems with the definition and recognition of income under the NRWT rules - Option 3: Extend definitions applying to the NRWT rules (preferred option) - Option 4: M ore closely align NRW T w ith the financial arrangement rules (preferred option) - Option 5: Defer income tax deductions until NRW T is paid • Defining when payments are to a related person - Option 6: Thin capitalisation style acting together test (preferred option) - Option 7: Back-to-back and multi-party reconstruction rules (preferred option) • Eligibility for AIL - Option 8: AIL registration changes (preferred option) - Option 9: Requiring upfront p ro o f o f non-association before allowing AIL • How branches interact with the NRWT rules - Option 10: Onshore branch changes (preferred option) 34. I f a general option is relevant to one o f the specific problems it will be mentioned in the discussion o f that problem. Although the general options have not been separately listed in each specific category their exclusion is not intended to imply that the preferred option was the only available option. General options Option 1: Status quo 35. Under this option, the current NRWT and AIL rules would remain unchanged. 9 36. Some submitters suggested retaining the status quo for an undetermined period before considering options following or concurrent w ith the O ECD ’s BEPS project work. Officials did not consider that any additional information would arise from the BEPS project that would fundamentally alter the conclusions reached in this review. Therefore, officials do not support any deferral. Assessment against criteria - status quo 37. The deficiencies in the current NRWT rules create an incentive for taxpayers to enter into complex arrangem ents to achieve tax benefits that would not be available under transactions that would otherwise be entered into but for the differing tax treatment. Therefore, this option would not meet the criteria o f prom oting economic efficiency or fairness. 38. Owing to the use o f structures that are often challenged under existing anti-avoidance provisions this option w ould fail the criterion o f promoting certainty and simplicity. Option 2: Specific anti-avoidance rules 39. This option would introduce one or a series o f anti-avoidance rules that would apply to arrangements w hich had either the intention or effect o f removing or delaying an NRWT (or AIL) liability. This option would apply in addition to the existing anti-avoidance provisions. 40. To the extent the anti-avoidance rules are effective they would raise additional revenue. Assessment against criteria - option 2 41. To the extent the anti-avoidance rules apply on a different (and uncertain) boundary to the status quo and the other options, this option would not fully m eet neither the criterion o f promoting economic efficiency nor that o f promoting fairness. 42. A n anti-avoidance rule that was intended to apply to a broadly similar range o f transactions as the specific provisions considered in the other options would incur higher compliance and adm inistration costs (for example due to the cost o f tax disputes) than under the status quo and preferred options. 43. Anti-avoidance rules are generally a second best approach when compared with a more general principles-based approach. Such rules create uncertainty for taxpayers and Inland Revenue and can involve considerable expense, particularly w hen the disputes process is required before a reassessm ent can be made. This option would be associated w ith greater uncertainty and complexity, compared w ith the status quo. Problems with definition and recognition of income under the NRWT rules 44. This problem relates to the inconsistencies in the rules for income tax and NRWT which allow borrowers to obtain income tax deductions for financing costs while deferring or rem oving the NRW T liability on interest payments or amounts that are economically equivalent to interest payments to a non-resident related party lender. General options 45. The only general option that merits specific discussion here is option 2. Some submitters favoured the adoption o f this option for addressing the specific problem. However, officials do not support this option on the basis that it would require specific anti­ avoidance provisions to cover transactions w here taxpayers would seek to argue that the arrangement was structured in a manner for commercial reasons in order to be effective. Even i f these commercial reasons were accepted, it is possible for these transactions to be inconsistent w ith the policy intention underlying the interaction o f the NRW T and financial arrangement rules. 46. For example, a N ew Zealand resident borrower w ith no or limited cash flow could borrow money from its parent using a zero coupon loan, or using a loan that capitalises interest. B oth types o f loan are commercially justified, but the former defers the NRW T on the interest until the loan is repaid, whereas the latter does not. From an economic efficiency and fairness standpoint this is not desirable. In order for this option to be effective it would have to apply comprehensively. This would result in an anti-avoidance provision applying in almost all o f the same scenarios in w hich the preferred option applied but without providing the same degree o f certainty. 47. Option 2 is likely to be less effective in promoting economic efficiency and fairness than the preferred options (option 3 and 4). There would also be greater compliance and administration costs o f applying the provisions which would likely result in a higher burden on the economy for equal or less tax. For these reasons, this option is not preferred. Option 3: Extend definitions applying to the NRWT rules 48. Under this option current definitions in the N RW T rules would be extended to apply to arrangements that are economically equivalent to those arrangements w hich are covered by the current definitions. 49. These extensions would apply to arrangements involving associated persons and for the purpose o f the NRW T rules. Transactions w ith genuine unrelated parties have less scope to circumvent the existing rules as arm s’ length lenders would usually require returns on their investment w ithin reasonable timeframes; whereas, related parties can generate their return on investment in other ways, such as an unrealised increased value o f their w holly owned subsidiary. Limiting these changes to the NRW T rules removes the need to consider the impact o f these changes on other areas o f tax law, w hich have not had similar concerns identified. 50. Because this option would result in more arrangements being subject to NRWT it would increase revenue. Assessment against criteria - option 3 51. This option would achieve the criterion o f promoting economic efficiency as it would impose NRW T on transactions that are not currently subject to NRWT but are economically equivalent to those that already are. A balancing consideration is that this option could increase the cost o f capital but only for borrowers that are structuring around the existing rules and only to the level that applies to economically equivalent transactions. On balance officials consider this would prom ote economic efficiency. 52. The greater neutrality across econom ically equivalent transactions will achieve the criterion o f prom oting fairness. 10 53. The certainty and simplicity criterion would be m et because taxpayers who have the ability to enter into such transactions would be able to apply the new rules w ith little difficulty. In addition, taxpayers would have an incentive to revert to less complex transactions which have the same tax treatment. Option 4: More closely align NRWT with the financial arrangement rules 54. Under this option the NRW T and financial arrangement rules would be more closely aligned. This means NRW T would apply to income arising on an economic accrual basis w hen a transaction had a larger than acceptable level o f deferral betw een accrued income and interest payments. The rules would not apply to arrangements involving third parties or related parties that had interest payments that broadly aligned w ith the economic accrual o f that income, including w hen interest was paid on an arrears basis4 after the balance date before which part o f the income accrued in. 55. Currently, m any transactions will eventually have the correct amount o f NRW T paid but can achieve a significant timing advantage by deferring the timing o f the interest payment compared to the economic accrual o f the income under the financial arrangement rules. 56. As explained in option 3 this timing advantage generally only arises betw een related parties due to the different commercial pressures compared to unrelated party lending. Owing to the complexity o f this option we only considered these changes in relation to certain related party transactions rather than a wholesale refocusing o f the NRW T rules. 57. In order to broadly align the time when income and expenditure are recognised, the two options available are to accelerate the income or defer the deductions. These are considered under option 4 and option 5. 58. Option 4 involves determining which arrangem ents could be subject to these proposals and only capturing the subset o f these arrangements where NRW T is paid beyond an acceptable deferral compared w ith the corresponding income tax deductions. 59. For these particular arrangements an amount o f income that would be liable to NRWT would be calculated for the non-resident lender consistent w ith the deductions available to the borrower under the financial arrangement rules. In accordance w ith the existing rules this non-resident interest income should exclude foreign exchange movements. 60. Although this option would accelerate the paym ent o f NRW T it would, w hen measured in the currency that the loan was denominated in, have no impact on the amount o f NRWT payable on an arrangement, the amount o f foreign tax credits available to the lender, and deductions available to the borrower. 61. This option would accelerate the paym ent o f NRW T on transactions so that the timing is similar to income tax deductions and the NRW T treatment o f other economically equivalent transactions. Consequently, there would be a revenue gain. 4 Interest is typically paid on an arrears basis. This means that it is paid at some point after being earned. For example, a 5 year loan that makes its first interest payment at the end of the first year on income accrued up to that date. 11 62. This option would achieve the criterion o f prom oting economic efficiency as the liability for NRW T would broadly align with the economic accrual o f the income and income tax deductions. It would increase the cost o f capital in some circumstances but only to align this better with the cost o f capital on economically equivalent transactions. It will mean economically equivalent borrowing will be taxed in a similar manner irrespective o f the timing o f interest payments. The greater neutrality across economically equivalent transactions would also achieve the criterion o f promoting fairness. 63. Owing to the complexity o f this option it would prim a facie only partially m eet the certainty and simplicity criterion. However, these rules would only be applied by sophisticated taxpayers and the NRWT liability would broadly approximate their income tax deductions and so these rules could be applied correctly b y almost all taxpayers. This option could provide an incentive for taxpayers involved in such arrangements to revert to less complex transactions that have the same tax treatment, but require less complex rules. Option 5: Defer income tax deductions until NRWT is paid 64. This option would take the opposite approach to option 4, in that there would be no changes to the NRW T rules but would still require rules to identify certain funding arrangements w hich had an unacceptable deferral compared w ith the corresponding income tax deductions. The difference is, for these arrangements, changes would be required to either the financial arrangement rules or the provisions that allow a deduction for financial arrangement expenditure so that income tax deductions would be deferred until NRW T was paid. Rather than forfeiting income tax deductions, these deductions would be carried forward to a future period w hen NRW T was eventually paid. 65. This option has the advantage o f leaving the NRW T rules unchanged so that borrowers do not face any tax liabilities that cannot be immediately m et by w ay o f reducing a payment to the lender. However, this option would create a number o f income tax complications that officials consider are undesirable. 66. These complications include: • The financial arrangement rules are designed to give an accurate measure o f a person’s income or expenditure from financial arrangements in order that a person’s tax liability can be calculated. Deferring deductions would reduce this accuracy, w hich could in turn create difficulties. For example, deferral allows a company in tax loss to artificially preserve the interest deductions, in situations w hen it m ight otherwise be eliminated by an ownership change. • I f deferral were applied to a related party loan in a foreign currency, it would not make sense to apply deferral to the recognition o f foreign currency movements on the loan, since these are not subject to NRWT in any event. Furthermore, i f the loan is hedged, deferral o f recognition o f foreign currency movements could create a timing mismatch. Deferring part o f the expenditure but not all would be complex. • • It would be difficult to integrate this option w ith the thin capitalisation regime. Deferral would prim a facie mean that interest economically incurred in one year would give rise (or not) to an additional amount o f income under the thin Assessment against criteria - option 4 12 13 capitalisation rules depending on the borrow er’s debt/equity ratio in the later year when the interest is paid, rather than in the year it economically accrues. That would not be desirable. 67. This option is not considered to be economically efficient as it changes the income tax treatm ent o f interest deductions away from w hen they economically accrue. It also provides differing incentives for the lender to have NRW T paid on their b eh alf depending on the income tax position o f the borrower. 68. This option would raise additional revenue but not as much tax as option 4. Although a small number o f borrowers m ay have deductions deferred which would result in income tax at 28% rather than NRW T at 10%, in practice this would only occur w hen the borrower is in a tax loss so that the deduction deferral would not affect current year income tax payable. Assessment against criteria - option 5 69. Economic efficiency and fairness would be improved over the status quo but these criteria are only partially met as full neutrality might not be achieved depending on the borrow er’s income tax position as noted above. At the same tim e this option would increase the cost o f capital in fewer circumstances. 70. These rules should only be introduced if the complications mentioned above are resolved. A lthough this might be possible it would result in even more complex rules than the other options so the certainty and simplicity criterion would not be met. Defining when payments are to a related person 71. This problem relates to the ability o f interest payments to unrelated parties to be subject to A IL instead o f NRW T. There are numerous arrangements in which the ultim ate lender and borrow er are associated (or economically equivalent to associated) but any interest payment m ade by the N ew Zealand borrower is not paid to an associated non-resident and so AIL is available. General options 72. A specific anti-avoidance provision (option 2) was suggested b y some submitters to resolve the back-to-back and m ulti-party arrangement concerns (see below for explanation o f these). However, such a provision is not favoured by officials. A lthough option 2 might meet the economic efficiency and fairness criteria b y the same degree as the preferred option for addressing this problem it does so w ith m uch less certainty. As mentioned earlier, a specific anti-avoidance provision would likely have a greater impact on the cost o f capital because o f the additional cost o f challenges as to whether the provision applied. Officials also consider that a specific anti-avoidance provision would not be a viable option for addressing the issue o f “acting together” . 73. Some submitters favoured the status quo (option 1) over an acting together rule. There are commercial reasons w hy some taxpayers would be unable to substitute between other structures identified in this RIS and this structure, such as a desire to retain 100% ownership and control o f a N ew Zealand subsidiary. However, officials consider this option would not m eet the economic efficiency and fairness criteria. I f two or more non-resident investors act together to control a N ew Zealand company this structure would be economically equivalent to a single non-resident investor with the same ownership. It would be economically inefficient for a business w ith a single owner to face a tax disadvantage compared to one w ith two or more owners that are acting in an otherwise equivalent manner. Option 6: Thin capitalisation style acting together test 74. N ew Zealand borrowers can elect to pay AIL instead o f withholding NRW T on interest payments to non-residents provided the borrower and lender are not associated. A lender and borrower will generally be associated if one company, directly or indirectly, owns 50% or more o f the other. This is a measure o f the extent to which the lender and borrower are commonly controlled. 75. However, if tw o or more companies, who are not associated w ith each other, but make decisions as i f they w ere a single person, collectively hold 50% or m ore o f the shares in, and lend to, a N ew Zealand company this can be economically equivalent to them controlling the N ew Zealand company without them being associated with it, so that AIL is still available on the shareholder loans. 76. This can be shown in the following example: 77. In this example interest payments by NZ Co 1 to Non-res Co 1 would not be eligible for AIL as these companies are associated. Interest payments by NZ Co 2 to Non-res Co 2, Non- res Co 3 and Non-res Co 4 would be eligible for AIL as none o f these companies is associated w ith each other or w ith NZ Co 2. W hen considered together Non-res Co 2, Non-res Co 3 and Non-res Co 4 are economically equivalent to Non-res Co 1 and so should be subject to the same tax treatment. 78. A similar issue existed for thin capitalisation before the introduction o f non-resident owning body provisions for the 2015-16 and later income years. A non-resident owning body is m ade up o f a group o f non-residents5 that have one or more characteristics which indicate they are acting together to debt-fu nd a N ew Zealand company. The owning body is essentially treated for thin capitalisation purposes as a single person w ith the ownership interests o f the group. 79. This option w ould introduce a similar measure into the AIL rules. This would m ean that i f there is a group that is acting together, and i f considered as a single entity would be associated w ith the N ew Zealand borrower, the borrower would be ineligible to pay A IL on interest to a mem ber o f the group. This option would not involve changes to the association 5 It can also include certain New Zealand resident trusts. 14 rules and so a m em ber o f the group or the group as a whole would not become associated solely because o f this option. This option would allow interest payments on lending w hich is not part o f the group activity to qualify for AIL. 80. Other measures under this option include whether the group should comprise both residents and non-residents or only non-residents and whether ownership interests should be calculated based on the highest o f the four ownership tests (which would be consistent w ith thin capitalisation) o r the average o f these tests (which would be consistent w ith the associated person rules). 81. It would be possible to define an acting together group including resident members but only apply the AIL restrictions to the non-resident members o f that group (the resident members not deriving non-resident passive income). This was the proposal in the issues paper. However, submitters were opposed to this m easure and considered that if an acting together test w ere adopted it should only apply to a group o f non-residents. Submitters raised the possibility o f the rules applying w hen non-residents only have an extremely minor interest in the New Zealand company. To meet this concern, officials revised the proposed measure so that it would only apply w hen a borrower is controlled b y a group o f non-residents who are acting together. This is consistent w ith the existing thin capitalisation test. 82. There are four shareholder decision-making rights which are the right to participate in decision making concerning: dividends; the company constitution; varying capital o f the company and appointing directors. The existing thin capitalisation test looks at the highest o f these four ownership interests while the existing associated person rules look at the average o f these interests. As taxpayers would always prefer to not be treated as acting together, and the average interest test would be a m ore difficult threshold to breach than the highest interest test6 the average m easure would be the preferred option o f potentially affected taxpayers. 83. The advantage o f the average test is that it would generally more accurately reflect the control a shareholder has over a company. The disadvantage is that it would leave open the possibility o f aggressive structuring. For example, having three o f the decision-making rights over 50% and one m uch lower so that on average the shareholder and the company would be below 50% and so would not be associated. 84. As the existing A IL requirements rely o n the associated person rules, and therefore the average o f the shareholder decision-making rights, officials consider it is more consistent to also apply the average o f the shareholder decision-m aking rights to the acting together requirements. 85. This option would impose NRW T instead o f AIL on certain interest payments but only in relation to arrangements that are economically equivalent to those that are already subject to NRWT. This option would raise additional revenue. Assessment against criteria - option 6 86. This option would prom ote economic efficiency b y imposing NRW T on interest paym ents to groups o f non-residents that are economically equivalent to a single related party lender. A balancing consideration is that this would increase the cost o f capital but only to the 6 Except when all four decision-making rights are the same in which case both tests have the same outcome. 15 level that applies to economically equivalent transactions. On balance officials consider this would achieve the criterion o f promoting economic efficiency. The greater neutrality across economically equivalent transactions will achieve the criterion o f promoting fairness. 87. This option relies on a variant o f the existing non-resident owning body definition in the thin capitalisation rules. Although this test complex it is an existing provision and for most taxpayers it would be clear whether it applies or not. Therefore, the certainty criterion would be met. Option 7: Back-to-back and multi-party reconstruction rules 88. As the AIL rules apply the legal form o f the associated person rules rather than their economic substance they currently do not apply w hen an associated borrower and lender interpose an unrelated party. For example, a N ew Zealand borrower could borrow from an unrelated finance company that has an agreement to be funded by a deposit from a non­ resident that is associated with the New Zealand borrower. Although such an arrangement is vulnerable to the general anti avoidance rule, the exact parameters o f this rule are uncertain and it is not desirable to rely on it when specific rules can sensibly be used. 89. This arrangement can be shown in the following example: 90. In this example, if Non-Res Co lends m oney to its N Z Sub any interest payments would be subject to NRWT. However, if Non-Res Co puts m oney on deposit w ith a Foreign Bank and the Foreign Bank lends the same amount to N Z Sub the interest paym ent by N Z Sub would be eligible for AIL (subject to the non-application o f an anti-avoidance rule). 91. Similar structures can also be applied to arrangements that are economically equivalent to, but are not, a loan that meets the necessary definitions for NRW T purposes. For example, a bank could lend to a New Zealand company then agree to sell the repayment obligation to the N ew Zealand com pany’s foreign parent. Economically, this arrangement is equivalent to a loan from the foreign parent to the N ew Zealand company, but is not currently subject to NRW T as it is not an interest payment on a loan from a related non-resident. 16 17 92. Option 7 involves introducing a specific set o f tests that would identify arrangements that have the appearance o f providing funding from a non-resident to an unrelated New Zealand borrower but the funding is ultim ately provided by an associated party and the economic effect o f the structure is in whole or part equivalent to a direct loan from that associated party. W hen these tests are met the tax treatm ent o f the arrangement would be recharacterised to reflect the economic substance as a loan from an associated party. 93. I f an arrangement is economically equivalent to a N ew Zealand borrower being partially funded by an associated non-resident and partially by a third party this option would only apply to the extent o f the associated party funding. 94. While this option could slightly increase the cost o f capital it would raise additional tax from taxpayers who are structuring around the existing NRW T rules. Assessment against criteria option 7 95. This option removes one avenue to enter into a tax avoidance arrangement and strengthens existing anti-avoidance provisions that might already apply to such a transaction. This option would achieve greater economic efficiency despite possibly pushing up the cost o f capital slightly certain investors who circumvent the existing rules. However, the impact w ould be consistent w ith existing taxes already applying to equivalent transactions and, on balance, officials consider that this will satisfy the criterion o f promoting economic efficiency. The greater neutrality across equivalent transactions will also satisfy the criterion o f promoting fairness. 96. The effect o f these rules would be similar to reconstructing under an anti-avoidance provision. However, the rules would provide greater certainty to taxpayers and Inland Revenue, as well as provide parliam entary guidance on how the anti-avoidance provisions should be applied to this type o f transaction. Therefore, the certainty and simplicity criterion w ould be met. Eligibility for AIL 97. AIL is not intended to be available for interest payments to associated parties. However, officials are aware o f a number o f instances where AIL has been paid b y associated parties that claim to be unassociated. These instances can only be prevented if they are identified by Inland R evenue’s investigations unit which, outside o f the larger cases, would not b e cost effective. General options 98. Submitters favoured the status quo (option 1) for addressing this problem, but officials did not. 99. The status quo would not meet the economic efficiency and fairness criteria, as taxpayers (particularly those w ith relatively low borrowing amounts) would be aware that their tax position could not be cost effectively audited to ensure it was correct. The tax system relies on voluntary compliance and i f there is an incentive not to comply w ith the tax law it is not efficient for this to be retained. 100. Option 8 would restrict who can register a security for AIL to replace the current rules w hich allows any person to register a security. This restriction would only allow security registrations where there was a low risk o f the registration being on associated party lending. Two requirements would be needed to provide for this restriction namely; the borrower and/or lender must be subject to either regulatory or public oversight so that abuse o f AIL would be highly unlikely, and the amount o f the borrowing m ust be sufficiently large that further review by Inland Revenue could be cost effectively undertaken. 101. Officials consider that a publicly listed company undertaking a private placement and a closely held company borrowing from a foreign bank are examples o f low risk registrations. These and many other examples would be able to continue to register securities under this option. 102. One disadvantage w ith this option is that it could restrict access to AIL for legitimate third party foreign borrowing, such as an individual borrowing from a foreign business associate. However, officials are not aware o f a suitable distinction to draw between these cases and cases w hen AIL is accessed inappropriately. Officials expect that relative to the amount o f lending that might continue to be eligible for AIL these transactions would be very small. This would be balanced against the extra tax paid by borrowers currently inappropriately accessing AIL. Assessment against criteria - option 8 103. This option would prom ote both economic efficiency and fairness. This is because taxpayers who are choosing not to apply the existing law would no longer have this choice and they would have to pay a consistent amount o f N RW T like other taxpayers w ith economically equivalent arrangements. 104. The certainty and simplicity criterion would be met as taxpayers would be able to determine whether they or their lender are on the list o f approved borrowers and/or lenders. Option 9: Requiring upfront proof of non-association before allowing AIL 105. Under this option the registration process would include a requirement that would provide that the borrower and lender are not associated. Inland Revenue would confirm this requirement is met before completing the registration or, alternatively, rely on the existing legislation and apply greater audit resources to ensure that when AIL has been paid the parties are not associated. 106. Confirming this information, under either approach, would be time consuming because taxpayers who are willing to pay AIL w hen they know it is not available are often willing to provide incomplete or incorrect documentation to suggest their tax position is correct. Inland Revenue would usually have to seek documentation from foreign tax jurisdictions using information exchange facilities in a DTA w hich can be a time consuming process. I f New Zealand does not have a DTA w ith a foreign country it would be m uch more difficult, if not impossible, to obtain this documentation. 107. A further complication is the low value o f many AIL payments. For example, during the 2014 calendar year there were 1,667 taxpayers who paid AIL; however, 1,299 o f these paid less than $1,000 and 1,468 paid less than $5,000. Option 8: AIL registration changes 18 19 108. This option would have a lower impact on the cost o f capital for the limited number o f borrowers who are borrowing from third parties but will not meet any o f the categories in the approved list. However, it would impose much m ore significant compliance and administration costs on all borrowers, including those who would easily m eet the categories in the approved list. 109. Although this option is likely to result in a small increase in tax paid this would be more than offset by the additional resource requirements to implement it which would either require additional funding or the refocusing o f resources from other areas where they can be more cost effectively employed. Assessment against criteria - option 9 110. This option would m eet the economic efficiency and fairness criteria provided the review by Inland Revenue is comprehensive and arrives at the correct outcome. It would provide certainty to taxpayers who should be aware that they are borrowing from associated parties and the lender is liable for NRWT. To the extent Inland Revenue is unable to accurately determine w hether all borrowers and lenders are associated (as is currently the case) the economic efficiency and fairness criteria would not be satisfied. Therefore, this option would only partially meet these criteria. 111. To the extent the review by Inland Revenue is comprehensive this option would increase certainty as all approved issuers would be aware their securities would be reviewed to ensure they are not w ith related parties. Therefore, this criterion would be met. H ow b ran ch es in te ra c t w ith th e N R W T rules 112. A n interest paym ent is not non-resident passive income i f the non-resident recipient has a N ew Zealand branch. This rule is know n as the onshore branch exemption, which has existed since the introduction o f NRW T in 1964. The exemption was intended to cover the situation at the time w hen m ost o f N ew Z ealand’s banking sector operated as N ew Zealand branches o f foreign parents. This m eant that N ew Zealand m ortgage borrowers did not need to have a different tax treatment depending on whether they borrowed from a N ew Zealand bank or a New Zealand branch o f a foreign bank. 113. However, the legislation did not take into account borrowing from a foreign company w ith a New Zealand branch that was not involved in the lending transaction. Under the current legislation the existence o f the N ew Zealand branch that is not involved in the arrangement means interest payments w hich are not to the branch are not subject to AIL or NRW T. This is the case even w hen the structure is otherwise identical to a structure that would generate non-resident passive income and the lack o f non-resident passive income results in a permanent reduction o f N ew Z ealand’s tax base. 114. The branch rules create an incentive for a foreign lender to establish a N ew Zealand branch or to channel funding through a foreign company that has a N ew Zealand branch. As these transactions are economically equivalent to lending by a foreign company that does not have a N ew Zealand branch officials consider the tax treatment o f the two transactions should be the same. 7 Separate rules would apply to New Zealand branches of non-residents which held a banking licence. This is discussed further below, and is also considered in the AIL RIS (NRW T: Related party and branch lending - bank and unrelated party lending). 8 It also requires the New Zealand borrower to not have a permanent establishment in that other country, which will be the case in most instances. 20 115. In certain instances, a specific anti-avoidance rule (option 2) could be effective as it would correctly tax a structure that had been entered into to avoid NRW T or AIL. However, there would be m any arrangements that have legitimate commercial reasons for w hy a particular structure was entered into. Option 2 would not be economically efficient or fair if it did not apply to all transactions and would not certain or simple i f there was an uncertain boundary betw een where the anti-avoidance rule applied and where it didn’t. Option 2 would not less efficient compared w ith measures aimed at correcting the legislation that causes the issue. Option 10: Onshore branch changes 116. Option 10 would alter the onshore branch exemption so that non-resident passive income arises on an interest paym ent to a foreign company, unless the interest is paid to the N ew Zealand branch o f the foreign company7. 117. Additional tax would only be imposed on transactions involving non-residents w ith New Zealand branches that are not involved in the transaction that are economically equivalent to transactions that are already subject to tax. This option would raise additional revenue. Assessment against criteria option 10 118. This option would be economically efficient and fair as all interest payments by a New Zealand resident to a non-resident would be subject to NRWT or AIL irrespective o f w hether the non-resident had a N ew Zealand branch that is not involved in the transaction. At tim e the cost o f capital m ay rise but only to the level that applies to economically equivalent transactions. 118. Borrowers from lenders w ith a branch would be aware they were borrowing from the branch i f this is the case and the existence o f a branch not involved in the transaction would become irrelevant. Therefore, the certainty criterion would be met. Scope o f option - borrowing from foreign banks 119. The onshore branch exemption also applies w hen a New Zealand resident borrows from a foreign bank w ith a New Zealand branch8 (usually to acquire or refinance foreign property). The onshore branch exemption in this situation means the N ew Zealand borrower does not have to pay AIL or withhold NRW T and instead the foreign bank pays New Zealand income tax on the lending m argin on that loan. Officials estimate that there are approximately 3,000 borrowers who do not have an AIL or NRWT obligation because o f the onshore branch exemption. 120. Officials consider that the application o f the onshore branch exemption is not a permanent solution to this issue as the m ajority o f foreign banks do not have a New Zealand General options branch9. However, officials do not consider it is possible to develop a robust solution to this issue as part o f the current project. Therefore, the option to restrict the onshore branch exemption as covered above should not apply i f the New Zealand branch holds a banking licence and the borrow er is not associated with the non-resident. Summary of impact analysis Option M ain objective and criteriaBenefitsCosts/risks Option 1 status quo • Does not meet main objective • Does not meet criteria (a), (b) or (c) • Fiscal cost - neutral • Avoids adding additional complexity to the tax system • NRWT is perceived as a voluntary tax by those with the resources and desire to avoid it Option 2 - specific anti­ avoidance rules • Meets main objective • Partially meets criteria (a) and (b) • Does not meet criterion (c) • I f successfully applied this option would achieve policy intent • Taxpayers will have limited certainty whether rules apply which will increase compliance costs • Will be difficult to apply where there are non-tax reasons for a particular structure) Option 3 - extend definitions applying to the NRWT rules (preferred option) • Meets main objective • Meets criteria (a), (b) and (c) • More closely aligns with income tax treatment which will assist taxpayers to comply • Prevents structuring around existing definitions • Limiting scope to related parties results in a wider definition for related parties than third parties Option 4 more closely align NRWT with the financial arrangement rules (preferred option) • Meets main objective • Meets criteria (a), (b) and (c) • More closely aligns with income tax treatment and economic incidence o f interest • De minimis and allowing payments in year after deductions will limit application • Complex and internationally novel • Taxpayers with revenue derived towards end of investment will have to finance tax payments in advance o f interest Option 5 defer income tax deductions until NRWT is paid • Does not meet main objective • Partially meets criteria (a) and (b) • Does not meet criterion (c) • No need to change NRWT rules • Addresses cash flow concerns for businesses with revenue derived towards end of investment • Very complex and internationally novel • Deductions will no longer match economic incidence which causes problems for thin capitalisation and continuity • May breach anti- discrimination clauses in some DTAs • Not particularly effective for taxpayers with a tax loss 9 Although very few foreign banks have a New Zealand branch these branches represent the foreign banks that New Zealand residents are most likely to borrow from. Therefore, officials consider it likely that the majority of lending by foreign banks to New Zealand residents when measured by the value of lending is covered by the onshore branch exemption. 2 1 Option 6 thin capitalisation style acting together test (preferred option) Meets main objective • Meets criteria (a), (b) and (c) • Treats groups that act like a single investor the same as a single investor • Broadly consistent with existing thin capitalisation test • Some taxpayers may be uncertain whether they are acting together Option 7 - back-to-back and multi-party reconstruction rules (preferred option) • Meets main objective • Meets criteria (a), (b) and (c) • More certainty than an anti-avoidance rule • Reduces complexity for taxpayers who know they can no longer structure around the rules • May impose obligations on interposed party that is not aware of wider arrangement Option 8 AIL registration changes (preferred option) • Meets main objective • Meets criteria (a), (b) and (c) • Supports policy intention of AIL/NRWT boundary • Very low compliance and admin costs for borrowers who can meet approved criteria • A small number of genuine third party borrowers will be unable to pay AIL Option 9 requiring upfront proof of non-association before allowing AIL • Does not meet main objective • Partially meets criteria (a) and (b) • Meets (c) • All genuine third party borrowers will continue to be able to pay AIL • Will cost far more to enforce and will impose higher compliance costs on all borrowers than the additional revenue raised Option 10 - onshore branch changes (preferred option) • Meets main objective • Meets criteria (a), (b) and (c) • Fairer treatment by ignoring branch when that branch is not involved in the transaction • New rules will be consistent with existing rules for lenders without a New Zealand branch • Only practical solution to this issue • Requires a carve-out for third party borrowers from foreign banks for practical reasons Key: Criterion (a) - economic efficiency, criterion (b) - fairness, criterion (c) - certainty and simplicity, criterion 121. The fiscal estimate o f the preferred options is $33 m illion per annum once fully implemented. As noted in the Agency Disclosure Statement this fiscal estimate cannot be broken down into an estimate for each individual option due to data limitations as w ell as the ability for taxpayers to substitute between structures that currently circumvent the NRW T rules. In comparison the status quo would maintain the current revenue amount which in the 2014 year was $180 million. The fiscal estimate for options 2, 5 and 9 which are the non­ preferred options also cannot be individually calculated; however, we expect these would be revenue positive but to a lesser amount than the preferred options. 122. The combined effect o f the preferred options is to improve economic efficiency by applying a consistent tax treatment to economically equivalent related party funding transactions. This will rem ove the current tax incentive to enter into complex transactions to achieve a m ore beneficial tax treatment. 2 2 23 123. There would be no direct increase in administration costs from implementing preferred options 3, 4, 6, 7, and 10, as they would rely on taxpayers using existing NRWT and AIL forms and systems. Option 5, which is not a preferred option, would also have no direct effect on administration costs. Option 8 would require the A IL security registration form to be amended to include the additional information but the impact o f this measure would be minimal. The administration costs for options 2 and 9 would impose additional administration costs from the Commissioner o f Inland Revenue being required to confirm that those options are being complied with. The combined effect o f the preferred options would increase compliance w hich should reduce administration costs overall, as less resources would be required to identify and review complex funding structures. CONSULTATION 124. The m ain consultation has been through the NRWT: related party and branch lending officials’ issues paper, w hich was released in M ay 2015. Officials have consulted further w ith a number o f submitters to attempt to address the concerns raised. W e have also consulted w ith the M inistry o f Business, Innovation and Employment and Callaghan Innovation. For the m ost part, we have addressed the main feedback from consultation in the analysis section o f this RIS. 125. One o f the m ajor concerns raised by submitters was that increasing NRWT might increase the cost o f capital to N ew Zealand, on the basis that it would increase the before tax return which foreign investors would require from their N ew Zealand investments. 126. As has been noted above, the cost o f capital is only one element in a broader economic efficiency story. W hile the cost o f capital will be likely to rise in some circumstances this will only be to the level that applies in situations that are economically equivalent. The greater neutrality achieved across different investors and different transactions will tend to prom ote both fairness and economic efficiency. 127. However, a num ber o f changes have been made to the issues paper proposals which are intended to minimise their effect on the cost o f capital. These changes include: • Further refinem ent o f the safe-harbour calculations for whether NRW T is required to be paid on an accrual basis; • Limiting the acting together changes so they only apply w hen the New Zealand borrower is controlled b y non-residents that are acting together; and • Additions to who can register a security for AIL including a category for a lender which makes over $500,000 o f interest payments per annum. 128. Another m ajor concern was the ability for foreign lenders to claim foreign tax credits for NRW T paid on an accrual basis, under a DTA. Submitters did not identify any specific instances where this w ould be a problem but expressed that it m ay arise. Officials have conducted further analysis o f this and have not identified any areas o f concern over the ability to claim a foreign tax credit due to NRWT being imposed on an accrual basis. 24 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 129. It is recommended that a number o f complementary changes be introduced to the NRW T and AIL rules. Options 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 10 when considered as a package should result in a coherent NRWT system that applies to interest payments made to associated parties and other entities that are economically equivalent to associated parties. IMPLEMENTATION 130. Changes to the NRW T rules would m ainly require amendments to the Income Tax Act 2007 and Tax Administration A ct 1994. These amendments would be included in a tax amendment bill, which is currently planned for introduction in M arch 2016. 131. Implementing these changes would require updating a small range o f communication and education products. 132. The new rules will b e communicated to taxpayers by w ay o f Inland Revenue’s publication Technical Information Bulletin after the legislation giving effect to the new rules has been enacted. 133. The new rules will be administered b y Inland Revenue as part o f its business as usual processes. Application dates 134. Options 3, 4, 6 and 7 should apply to arrangements entered into after enactment o f the legislation and all arrangements entered into before the enactment date should apply the new rules from the first day o f the taxpayer’s income year after the date o f enactment. 135. Option 10 should not apply until the start o f the sixth income year after the date o f enactment for all existing arrangements entered into by a New Zealand borrower where the interest is not subject to NRWT because o f the onshore branch exemption but under the new rules would be eligible for AIL. The proposed delay is intended to recognise that the New Zealand borrow er has entered into third party funding on commercial terms w hich cannot easily be cost effectively restructured and the N ew Zealand borrower often will not have sufficient information to determine i f the onshore branch exemption will continue to apply or whether AIL will now be required. 136. The recommended application date for option 10 w hen a New Zealand borrow er is borrowing from an associated non-resident should be the enactment date o f the legislation. This option should apply to arrangements entered into both before and after the date o f enactment. 137. The AIL registration process in option 8 should apply to AIL registrations after the date o f enactment. Interest paid on arrangements registered for AIL before the date o f enactment, that do not m eet the new requirements, will be subject to AIL on any interest payments m ade more than one year after that date. 138. Appropriate transitional rules should ensure that the new rules apply to existing arrangements on a prospective basis only. 25 MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REVIEW 139. In general, Inland Revenue monitoring, evaluation and review o f tax changes would take place under the generic tax policy process (GTPP). The GTPP is a multi-stage policy process that has been used to design tax policy (and subsequently social policy administered by Inland Revenue) in N ew Zealand since 1995. 140. The final step in the process is the implementation and review stage, which involves post-im plem entation review o f legislation and the identification o f rem edial issues. Opportunities for external consultation are built into this stage. In practice, any changes identified as necessary following enactment would be added to the tax policy w ork programme, and proposals would go through the GTPP.