Regulatory Impact Statement Remission income, tax losses and insolvent individuals Agency Disclosure Statement This Regulatory Impact Statement has been prepared by Inland Revenue. It provides an analysis o f options to address inconsistencies in the taxation law relating to the carry-forward o f tax losses and the fresh-start principle o f insolvency law. The options are considered in the light o f the objectives of: • neutrality o f the tax system in relation to investment decisions; • the efficiency o f the tax system; and • the objectives o f insolvency law. For the purpose o f our analysis, we assumed that the tax system should complement the objectives o f insolvency law in relation to the fresh-start principle. The estimate o f nil fiscal impact is based on current outcomes in practice. Published data indicates about 3,000 individuals annually are subject to insolvency procedures and obtain relief from debts under the fresh-start principle o f insolvency law. Because o f data limitations in identifying all taxpayers who may benefit from the fresh-start principle, it is not possible to determine the number o f insolvent individuals who have carried-forward tax losses. However, as the objective o f the policy proposals is for the tax system to better support the objectives o f insolvency law, this limitation has not impacted on the analysis or conclusions. The policy proposals were provided to a targeted audience, but no material matters were raised in feedback. None o f the policy options considered have environmental or cultural impacts, and nor were there any significant constraints, caveats and uncertainties concerning the regulatory impact analysis, other than the data limitations noted above. None o f the policy options considered would restrict market competition, reduce the incentives for business to innovate and invest, unduly impair private property rights, or override fundamental principles o f common law. Policy Manager, Policy and Strategy Inland Revenue 9/11/2015 1 STATUS QUO AND PROBLEM DEFINITION Current regulatory environment 1. Under long-standing policy, a person is able to carry forward unused tax losses from year to year, to offset against net income in a future tax year. However, this ability to carry forward tax losses has always been contingent on the debtor fully satisfying his or her liabilities for expenses incurred that have been taken into account in calculating past tax losses. 2. Allowing a person to carry forward tax losses is based on the assumption that a person would continue in business and make sufficient profits to absorb earlier losses. This is consistent with key policy objectives for the tax loss carry-forward rules, which is to encourage entrepreneurial risk-taking and that Governments share in the rewards o f that business through taxes. 3. I f a person is unable to continue in business and be sufficiently profitable to absorb earlier tax losses, it is possible for that person to become insolvent and be unable to satisfy debt obligations as they fall due. I f an insolvent person is unable to satisfy those debt obligations, they m ay obtain relief from their debts by being declared bankrupt or by entering into arrangements under alternatives to bankruptcy, such as occurs on completion o f the “no­ asset procedure” under the Insolvency Act 2006, or under a deed o f compromise with creditors. 4. In general, the intervention o f insolvency law in contract law is intended to protect the honest, but unfortunate debtor from his or her creditors, through discharge from debts after a period to enable a fresh start (“the fresh-start principle”). 5. However, the fresh-start principle is not solely concerned w ith “resetting” the insolvent person’s financial liabilities to zero. It also involves the insolvent individual: • surrendering his or her capital for equitable distribution among creditors (subject to minimal retentions for family maintenance); and • being able to resume economic activity, free o f the burden o f past debt (other than certain debts, such as child support debt), with only a minimal level o f personal assets. 6. The basis o f the fresh-start principle is that the insolvent person surrenders rights to property they own in exchange for the subsequent cancellation o f debts on discharge from bankruptcy. The purpose o f this trade-off is to encourage insolvent individuals to again become productive, benefitting both themselves, and society as a whole. Current law and practice: income tax 7. Under current income tax law, a person is required to satisfy his or her income tax obligations in relation to income derived. Normally, it is clear that the person who derives the income is also required to satisfy those income tax obligations, including filing returns o f income. 8. On being declared bankrupt, the person receives a new Inland Revenue number. This practice is to enable Inland Revenue and the bankrupt to distinguish between income tax obligations before and during bankruptcy. 2 9. There are three sets o f income tax rules relating to carried-forward tax losses o f a person who is declared bankrupt: • First, tax losses o f an insolvent individual m ay be carried forward into the period o f bankruptcy and applied against income derived during bankruptcy. This m ay result in a refund o f tax, which is part o f the bankrupt estate. Inland Revenue is required to pay that refund to the Official Assignee who would include this in distributions to creditors. Under current tax and insolvency law, this is the only means by which creditors receive the benefit o f the bankrupt’s carried forward tax losses. • Second, the Commissioner o f Inland Revenue is obliged to write o ff tax debt that is unrecoverable from the bankrupt estate. I f tax debt o f a bankrupt is w ritten off, any carried forward tax losses are correspondingly reduced. • Third, on discharge from bankruptcy, most o f the bankrupt’s outstanding debts are cancelled (there are some exceptions to this principle, in particular, child support debt) and remission income m ay arise to the extent o f the person’s carried-forward tax losses. 10. Under remission income rules in the Income Tax Act 2007, if a bankrupt has previously carried on a business, some o f the debt cancelled on discharge from bankruptcy m ay be recovered as remission income. The intended effect o f these remission income rules is to reduce the amount o f carried forward tax losses. 11. These remission income rules apply on discharge from bankruptcy if expenses incurred by the bankrupt are included in the calculation o f past tax losses. The operation o f the rem ission income rules is consistent with the long standing policy that the carry-forward o f tax losses is contingent on satisfying debts incurred relating to deductions included in past tax losses. 12. After the application o f these rules, if a discharged bankrupt has a carried forward tax loss remaining, under current law, any rem aining tax loss is then able to be used to offset against his or her future income. Current law and practice: the insolvent individual and the O fficial Assignee 13. The Official Assignee is responsible for administering the application o f insolvency law for individuals. Under insolvency law, there are two main procedures that can result in an insolvent person being released from all debts under the Insolvency Act 2006: • bankruptcy; and • the no-asset procedure. 14. On being declared bankrupt, all assets o f the bankrupt are vested in the Official Assignee by operation o f law, and become property o f the bankrupt’s estate. During bankruptcy, any property received by the bankrupt is also vested by operation o f law in the Official Assignee and becomes property o f the bankrupt estate. 3 15. Under insolvency law, property vesting in the Official Assignee includes income derived by the bankrupt during bankruptcy. This income is usually earned from personal exertion during bankruptcy and usually consists o f salary or wages. However, this rule o f vesting is subject to the bankrupt being permitted to retain sufficient income and certain assets to a level that is necessary for family maintenance. In practice, the Official Assignee generally permits a bankrupt to retain salary or wages earned, but the bankrupt can be asked to contribute to the bankrupt estate from after-tax income. In addition, all tax refunds arising during the period o f bankruptcy belong to the Official Assignee. 16. As a matter o f practice, the Official Assignee does not file returns o f income on behalf o f the bankrupt or for the bankrupt’s estate. We understand that this practice is based on the view that the Official Assignee is not an agent for the bankrupt and that the administration o f the bankrupt estate is covered by the exemption from income tax for public authorities in the Income Tax Act 2007. 17. The no-asset procedure is an alternative to bankruptcy for insolvent individuals with low levels o f provable debt (up to $40,000) and no realisable assets (other than minimal levels o f assets for family maintenance and tools o f trade). This procedure is administered by the Official Assignee, and the insolvent individual must obtain approval to enter the procedure. Provided the individual complies w ith requirements relating to spending and credit during the term o f the no-asset procedure, on completing the term o f the no-asset procedure (usually one year), those provable debts are wiped. This procedure does not apply to student loan or child support debt. The problems 18. In general, where the tax system interfaces with non-tax policy objectives, the tax system seeks to give outcomes that are complementary to the non-tax policy objectives. 19. However, the policy and operational objectives for current tax rules for insolvent individuals are not well-aligned w ith the policy objectives o f insolvency law, and in particular the fresh-start principle. This gives rise to a number o f technical and administrative issues, as follows: • inconsistent treatment o f tax losses carried-forward into bankruptcy; • inconsistency with the policy for carrying-forward tax losses being contingent on satisfying expenses incurred that have been included in past tax losses; • some tax deduction and timing rules do not give neutral outcomes when a person is declared bankrupt; and • the carrying forward o f tax losses on discharge from bankruptcy is potentially non­ neutral in relation to both investment decisions and the treatment o f discharged bankrupts; • the insolvency law rule that treats income derived by the bankrupt as property o f the Official Assignee results in uncertainty over who is responsible for filing returns o f income for the bankrupt; and 4 5 • business records o f a person declared bankrupt are to be given to the Official Assignee and not retained by the taxpayer, which is inconsistent with the requirements o f taxation law. 20. I f the value o f carried-forward tax losses is significant and those tax losses are not fully realised during bankruptcy (through tax refunds), a discharged bankrupt has access to a valuable tax asset. Under income tax law, a tax loss that is carried-forward after discharge from bankruptcy is a tax asset that benefits the taxpayer in future years by reducing tax on income derived in the future. This retention o f a potentially valuable tax asset beyond discharge from bankruptcy is inconsistent with the fresh-start principle which holds that the cancellation o f debts on discharge from bankruptcy is in exchange for the insolvent debtor surrendering assets for the benefit o f creditors. 21. In practice, carried-forward tax losses generally result from past expenses, many o f which are funded by debt. Allowing tax losses to be carried forward, if those losses are funded by debts that cancelled on discharge from bankruptcy, would be inconsistent with the long-standing policy that tax losses should only be able to be carried forward if the taxpayer fully satisfies debts for expenses incurred relating to past tax losses. 22. On being declared bankrupt, all property o f the bankrupt vests in the Official Assignee. Some timing, valuation and deduction rules apply on disposals o f tax-base property, which would include a disposal by way o f assets vested in the Official Assignee. The technical application o f these rules can result in losses and gains being included in the bankrupt’s taxable income despite those losses and gains on vesting having no connection with the past business o f the bankrupt. It is not intended that being declared bankrupt should result in such non-neutral tax outcomes. Such an outcome w ould be inconsistent with the policy objectives of: • income tax law in relation to gains or losses arising from disposals o f tax-base property; and • insolvency law, which does not intend deductions for losses or income to arise on a person being declared bankrupt. 23. The ability for carried-forward tax losses to survive bankruptcy may also influence investment decisions. Assuming all other things to be equal, as tax losses currently survive bankruptcy, the use o f the sole trader business structure would likely be preferred over a company structure because tax losses o f a company are extinguished on liquidation. 24. This non-neutral outcome arises because the rem ission income rules that apply on discharge from bankruptcy do not apply to all forms o f debt. For example it does not apply to a fixed term loan (a financial arrangement) used to finance the purchase o f trading assets but does apply to trade debt. Therefore it is likely that a taxpayer would prefer to finance the business trading activity with a debt that would not be subject to the remission income rules (which would mean that carried-forward tax losses are not reduced on discharge from bankruptcy). This is illustrated in the example set out in paragraph 36. 25. A horizontal equity concern is that the tax system currently allows the future tax benefit o f carried-forward tax losses (an asset) to be retained following discharge from bankruptcy. This means that the discharged bankrupt with carried-forward tax losses has an advantage compared to a discharged bankrupt who does not have carried forward tax losses. This is a non-neutral outcome arising from current income tax law. 6 26. Under income tax law, it is normally clear who has derived income. However, under insolvency law, income derived by a bankrupt during the period o f bankruptcy is technically property o f the Official Assignee, but subject to the bankrupt being able to retain a sufficient amount o f that income for family maintenance purposes. This gives rise to uncertainty about who has derived that income. The main administrative problem arising is that it is unclear who is responsible for the income tax obligations for income derive by a bankrupt during the period o f bankruptcy. 27. Another administrative and compliance issue arises due to insolvency law requiring business records o f a bankrupt to be vested in the Official Assignee. The Official Assignee’s practice is not to file returns o f income on behalf o f the bankrupt individual as the Official Assignee is not the agent for the bankrupt, but serves to administer the bankrupt’s estate on behalf o f the creditors and not for the benefit o f the bankrupt. Consequently, neither the bankrupt nor Inland Revenue have ready access to the necessary information to determine whether a carried forward tax loss exists either on being declared bankrupt or on being discharged from bankruptcy. 28. Published data indicates that in each year about 3,000 individuals are subject to insolvency procedures in recent times and obtain relief from debts under the fresh-start principle o f insolvency law. Because o f data limitations in identifying all taxpayers who may benefit from the fresh-start principle, it is not possible to determine the number o f insolvent individuals who have carried-forward tax losses. However, as the objective o f the policy proposals is for the tax system to better support the objectives o f insolvency law, this limitation has not impacted on the analysis or conclusions. OBJECTIVES OF THE POLICY REVIEW 29. The main objective o f this review is to ensure that tax policy outcomes support the objectives o f insolvency law. Specifically, the review considers, and to what extent, carried- forward tax losses o f an insolvent person should be cancelled - • on discharge from bankruptcy or completion o f the no-asset procedure (Insolvency Act 2006); and • on remission o f debt occurring within alternatives to bankruptcy under statutory or common law. 30. The options considered in this RIS are evaluated against the following criteria: a. maintaining the coherency o f the tax system, including horizontal equity; b. consistency w ith the objectives o f insolvency law c. minimising tax and compliance costs for taxpayers; d. minimising administration costs for the Official Assignee; and e. minimising administration costs for Inland Revenue. 7 31. The review is not intended to alter the general tax treatment for partial rem ission o f debt under statutory or common law alternatives to bankruptcy. 32. We also note that trade-offs will inevitably be made across the various criteria. For example, clarifying that the bankrupt is responsible for satisfying income tax obligations for income derived during bankruptcy meets criterion (a) but may result in an increase in compliance costs for the taxpayer (criterion (c). REGULATORY IMPACT ANALYSIS 33. Three options, including the status quo are considered in this RIS for addressing the problems. The options are as follows: • Option 1 - A n insolvent individual who becomes bankrupt continues to apply the current remission income rules. These rules apply i f some, or all, debt is remitted or cancelled under any procedure o f insolvency law, but do not apply to all types o f debt. Tax losses m ay continue to be carried-forward on discharge from bankruptcy. • Option 2 An insolvent individual who is released from all debt under any procedure o f insolvency law will have their carried-forward tax losses cancelled. The rem ission income rules that apply on discharge from bankruptcy would no longer apply. • Option 3 - An insolvent individual who has been released from all debt under any procedure o f insolvency law will have their carried-forward tax losses cancelled, but only to the extent o f business debts that have been cancelled. The remission income rules that apply on discharge from bankruptcy would no longer apply. Analysis of options Option 1: status quo 34. Under option 1, the current law and practice would remain unaltered. Maintaining the coherency o f the tax system, including horizontal equity 35. Option 1 permits a bankrupt to carry tax losses forward after being discharged from bankruptcy, at which time debts o f the bankrupt are released and the bankrupt is given a fresh start. 36. Option 1 is inconsistent with the objective that the tax system should be neutral in relation to investment decisions. In particular, the loss carry-forward rules relating to insolvent persons provides an incentive for taxpayers to prefer: a. the sole trader business structure over a company business structure (this is because under current tax law, carried-forward tax losses survive bankruptcy o f an individual but do not survive liquidation o f a company; and b. funding their business w ith either personal savings, or debt to which the remission income rules do not apply. This is illustrated in the following example. On discharge from bankruptcy, assume a bankrupt has a carried-forward tax loss o f $500. Under current tax law, the amount o f tax losses that could be carried forward after discharge from bankruptcy would differ, according to the type o f business funding adopted, as follows: B u sin ess fu n d e d byA m o u n t o f bu sin ess fu n d in gT a x loss to carry-forw ard • p erso n a l savings$500 $500 • d eb t subject to rem ission incom e rules $500 $0 • d eb t not subject to rem ission incom e rules • debt, 60% o f w hich is $500 $500 subject to rem ission incom e rules $500$200 37. Option 1 is inconsistent with the long standing tax policy for the carry-forward o f tax losses that the carry forward o f tax losses is contingent on satisfying debts for expenses incurred that have been included in past tax losses. 38. The technical ability to carry forward tax losses beyond discharge from bankruptcy results in non-neutral tax treatment for discharged bankrupts with tax losses as compared to discharged bankrupts who do not have tax losses. This is inconsistent with the principle o f horizontal equity and consequently impacts on the coherency o f the tax system. 39. Under the status quo, it is still possible for a range o f timing, valuation, and deduction rules to apply on a person being declared bankrupt. Some market value rules may result in the bankrupt being required to include, in calculating their taxable income, the value o f property vested in the Official Assignee. This is results in a non-neutral tax treatment for the bankrupt solely from the process o f bankruptcy. Consistency with the objectives o f insolvency law 40. Continuing with the status quo, which allows tax losses to be carried forward following discharge from bankruptcy, would result in income tax law continuing to be inconsistent with the fresh-start principle and provide non-neutral outcomes as between discharged bankrupts. These problems are set out in paragraph 19 o f this RIS. Minimising tax and compliance costs fo r taxpayers 41. Currently taxpayers incur the cost o f engaging an accountant to determine if tax losses exist on being declared bankrupt or on discharge from bankruptcy. It is not possible to determine the scale o f these costs due to data limitations. 42. Outcomes from Inland R evenue’s administration o f insolvents indicate that very few taxpayers have tax losses on discharge from bankruptcy and that often there are insufficient business records available to establish whether tax losses exist. No material change is expected in tax and compliance costs for taxpayers under option 1. 8 9 43. Currently, the Official Assignee’s administration costs for insolvent individuals relate to insolvency procedures under the Insolvency Act. Due to data limitations, the scale o f these costs is not able to be determined. No material change is expected in administration costs for the Official Assignee under option 1. Minimising administration costs fo r Inland Revenue. 44. Inland Revenue’s main administration costs relate to clarifying who has the obligation to file returns o f income in relation to income derived by a bankrupt during the period o f bankruptcy. No material change is expected in administration costs for Inland Revenue under option 1. Option 2 — cancel all tax losses of an insolvent individual on being released from all debt under any procedure of insolvency law 45. Under option 2, the remission income rules in the Income Tax Act would no longer apply to a person discharged from bankruptcy or who completes the “no-asset procedure” under the Insolvency Act 2006. In addition, carried-forward tax losses o f a person released from all debts under any procedure o f insolvency law would be cancelled. Typically, this would occur on being discharged from bankruptcy or completing the “no-asset procedure” o f the Insolvency A ct 2006. 46. In addition: • The tax rules relating to disposals o f tax-base property would be amended to give a tax-neutral treatment for assets vested in the Official Assignee on a person being declared bankrupt; and • the tax rules would be clarified to ensure a bankrupt is responsible for satisfying income tax obligations relating to income derived during bankruptcy. 47. A partial release o f debt may also occur under any procedure that is an alternative to bankruptcy. These procedures are intended to assist the debtor and his or her creditors by reducing debts to a level that can be managed. Existing rem ission rules in the Income Tax Act 2007 would continue to apply to partial remissions o f debt, and carried forward tax losses may be used to offset that income. The fresh-start principle does not apply in these situations, as all debts are not fully released and the debtor is not generally required to surrender assets in exchange for that partial remission. After applying the remission income rules to partial remission o f debt, any remaining balance o f carried-forward tax losses remain available for carry-forward. Maintaining the coherency o f the tax system, including horizontal equity 48. Option 2 is consistent with the objective that the tax system should be neutral in relation to investment decisions. This option does not prefer any particular business structure as it results in carried-forward tax losses being cancelled irrespective o f whether a sole-trader or company business structure is selected. Minimising administration costs for the Official Assignee 10 49. Option 2 also does not result in a preference for any particular type o f business funding. It applies equally whether the business funding comes from personal savings, business debt, or debt that is not subject to the remission income rules. This is illustrated in the following example: On discharge from bankruptcy, assume the bankrupt has a carried-forward tax loss o f $500. Under option 2, the cancellation o f tax losses is neutral across all funding choices. Business funded by Amount of business Tax loss to carry- funding forward • person al savings $500 $0 • business debt $500 $0 50. Option 2 is consistent with the policy that the carry-forward o f tax losses is contingent on debts that relate to deductions included in past tax losses being fully repaid and improves the coherency o f the tax system. Consistency with the objectives o f insolvency law 51. Option 2 is consistent with the fresh-start principle o f insolvency law. This is because the tax benefit (a tax asset) is surrendered as part o f the process o f being discharged from bankruptcy. Minimising tax and compliance costs for taxpayers 52. Option 2 will result in taxpayers not needing to determine if tax losses exist on discharge from bankruptcy and this eliminates a potential wasted expense (the cost o f engaging an accountant to determine if tax losses exist on discharge from bankruptcy). In addition, the taxpayer would not need to determine the tax effect o f assets vesting in the Official Assignee. Minimising administration costs fo r the Official Assignee 53. The Official Assignee’s administration costs would be unchanged under option 2. Minimising administration costs for Inland Revenue. 54. Inland Revenue’s administration costs would decrease in the following areas, but due to data limitations it is not possible to determine the scale o f the overall effect: a. the law would be clarified to ensure that the bankrupt is responsible for filing returns o f income for income derived during the period o f bankruptcy; b. it would no longer be possible for disputes to arise on whether carried forward tax losses exist on discharge from bankruptcy (although in practice this rarely occurs); and c. the law would be clarified to provide that: 11 • the rules relating to vesting o f tax base property in the Official Assignee would be amended to give a tax-neutral treatment for the person declared bankrupt. This clarification is to ensure that no tax costs or benefits arise for the bankrupt as a result o f being declared bankrupt. This improves consistency with the objectives o f insolvency law; and • the bankrupt is responsible for filing returns o f income for income derived during the period o f bankruptcy. This clarification is likely to reduce the number o f contacts with bankrupts. Option 3 - cancel tax losses partially to the extent of business debts cancelled under any procedure of insolvency law 55. Under option 3, the remission income rules in the Income Tax Act would no longer apply to a person discharged from bankruptcy or who completes the “no-asset procedure” under the Insolvency Act 2006. In addition, carried-forward tax losses o f a person released from all debt under any procedure o f insolvency law would be cancelled, but only to the extent the debts released are debts o f the business activity. Typically, this would occur on being discharged from bankruptcy or completing the “no-asset procedure” o f the Insolvency Act 2006. 56. In addition: • the tax rules relating to vesting o f tax base property in the Official Assignee would be amended to give a tax-neutral treatment for the person declared bankrupt; and • the tax rules would be clarified to ensure that a bankrupt is responsible for satisfying income tax obligations relating to income derived during the period o f bankruptcy. 57. A partial release o f debt may also occur under any procedure that is an alternative to bankruptcy. These procedures are intended to assist the debtor and his or her creditors by reducing debts to a level that can be managed. Existing remission rules in the Income Tax Act 2007 would continue to apply to partial remissions o f debt, and carried forward tax losses m ay be used to offset that income. The fresh-start principle does not apply in these situations, as all debts are not fully released and the debtor is not generally required to surrender assets in exchange for that partial remission. After applying the remission income rules to partial remission o f debt, any remaining balance o f carried-forward tax losses remain available for carry-forward. Maintaining the coherency o f the tax system, including horizontal equity 58. Option 3 is inconsistent with the objectives o f the fresh-start principle and w ith the objective that the tax system should be neutral in relation to investment decisions. This inconsistency arises if carried-forward tax losses exceed business debts because that excess o f the carried tax loss m ay continue to be carried forward after the bankrupt is released from all debts under insolvency law. Therefore, this option results in a preference for: 12 • the sole trader business structure over the company business structure (because not all carried-forward tax losses are cancelled for the sole trader); and • funding for the business being from either personal savings, or from private debt. This is illustrated in the following example: On discharge from bankruptcy, the bankrupt has a carried-forward tax loss o f $500. The effect o f option 3 on carried-forward tax losses would differ as follows: B usiness fu n d e d by: A m o u n t o f business fu n d in g tax loss to carry-forw ard • p erso n a l savings $500 $500 • business debt $500 $0 59. Option 3 is inconsistent with the objectives o f horizontal equity as it results in a debtor who is released from all debt continuing to be able to carry forward tax losses. That outcome is inconsistent with the coherency o f the tax system. Consistency with the objectives o f insolvency law 60. Under option 3, some tax losses may continue to be carried-forward after the debtor is released from all debt. This would occur to the extent carried-forward tax losses exceed business debts cancelled on discharge from bankruptcy. In this respect, option 3 is inconsistent with the fresh-start principle o f insolvency law as the benefit o f carried forward tax losses (a tax asset) is still available to the discharged bankrupt. Minimising tax and compliance costs for taxpayers 61. Option 3 will result in taxpayers being required to determine which debts cancelled on bankruptcy are business debts. The fungibility o f money may make this analysis difficult to achieve or result in an incentive to treat a debt raised for personal and business purposes to be treated as being mainly on personal account. This incentive arises because the lower the level o f business debt, the lower the amount o f carried forward tax losses that are cancelled. This is an increase in compliance cost. 62. However, taxpayers would no longer be required to determine the tax effect o f assets vesting in the Official Assignee. This is a decrease in compliance cost. Overall, it is expected that the cost o f identifying the level o f business debt would outweigh the cost o f determining the tax effect o f assets vesting in the Official Assignee. Due to data limitations, it is not possible to determine the scale o f these costs. Minimising administration costs fo r the Official Assignee 63. The Official Assignee’s administration costs would be largely unchanged under option 3. However, as the bankrupt’s business records o f a business in existence prior to bankruptcy would vest in the Official Assignee, there could be some increase in compliance cost for the Official Assignee if, prior to being discharged from bankruptcy, a bankrupt seeks to determine if he or she has carried-forward tax losses. 13 Minimising administration costs fo r Inland Revenue. 64. Inland Revenue’s administration costs would be likely increased under option 3. This is because the Department would need to engage with the bankrupt in determining both the level o f debt that is business related and the amount, if any, o f carried forward tax losses. 65. Inland Revenue’s administration costs would decrease in the following areas, but due to data limitations it is not possible to determine the scale o f the overall effect: a. the law would be clarified to ensure that the bankrupt is responsible for filing returns o f income for income derived during the period o f bankruptcy; b. it would no longer be possible for disputes to arise on whether carried forward tax losses exist on discharge from bankruptcy (although in practice this rarely occurs); and c. the law would be clarified to provide that: • the rules relating to disposals o f tax base property in would be amended to give a tax-neutral treatment for the person declared bankrupt in relation to the vesting o f that property in the Official Assignee. This clarification is to ensure that no tax costs or benefits arise from being declared bankrupt for consistency w ith the objectives o f insolvency law; and • the bankrupt is responsible for filing returns o f income for income derived during the period o f bankruptcy. This clarification is likely to reduce the number o f contacts with bankrupts. Impacts of each feasible option 66. The impacts o f each feasible option against the objectives o f the review and the economic, fiscal, compliance and admin istrative impacts are summarised in Table 1: Summary o f analysis: objectives and impacts. Table 1 Summary of analysis: objectives and impacts Description Meets criteria (paragraph 30 refers) IM P A C T S R e c o m m e n d a tio n E c o n o m ic im p a c t Fiscal impact Compliance impactsAdministration impactsRisks Option 1: Status quo/ (a) and (b) are not met. (c), (d) and (e) are met. Gives preference to sole trader business structure over company business structure. Gives preference to fu nd business from personal savings and debt not subject to remission income rules. Inconsistent with policy for carrying forward tax losses. Nil Although there is a potential for wasted expenses to arise in determining whether carried forward tax losses exist, there is no change in compliance costs as this is the effect o f the status quo. Ongoing uncertainty about application o f tax law to bankrupts, including compliance obligations and the tax treatment o f assets vested in the Official Assignee. Inconsistencies between law and policy remain. Uncertainty about the application o f the law to bankrupts may give rise to wasted expenses. Does not address the problem. Not recommended. Option 2: Cancel carried forward tax losses if all debts cancelled under insolvency law/ (a) to (e) are all met. Has neutral effect. Consistent with policy for carrying forward tax losses. Nil No change in compliance costs would be expected as the outcome is largely consistent with current outcomes in practice. A potential minor decrease in administration costs, as the value o f carried forward tax losses on discharge from bankruptcy would no longer be a disputable matter. No risks identified. Addresses the problem. Consistent with policy objectives. Recommended method. Option 3: Cancel carried-forward tax losses to the extent business debts cancelled under insolvency law. (a) to (e) are not met. Gives preference to sole trader business structure over company business structure. Gives preference to fond business from personal savings and debt not subject to remission income rules. Inconsistent with policy for carrying forward tax losses. Nil. A net (small) increase in compliance costs would be expected, The scale o f this net increase is not able to be determined due to data limitations. There is a risk of increased administration costs relating to determining the value of carried-forward tax losses. Inconsistencies between law and policy remain. Risk o f dispute between administrators and taxpayer on whether carried-forward tax losses exist. Does not address the problem. Not recommended. 14 Economic impacts 67. Option 2 is the only option that is consistent with the policy objectives o f ensuring that the tax system is neutral in relation to investment decisions. This option is also the only option that is consistent with the long-standing policy that tax losses m ay only be carried forward if debts relating to deductions included in past tax losses have been fully satisfied. Fiscal impacts 68. Information provided by Inland Revenue’s administration o f insolvent individuals indicates that most taxpayers: • do not have tax losses to carry-forward on discharge from bankruptcy; or • do not have sufficient business records to determine whether carried-forward tax losses exist on discharge from bankruptcy; or • are not willing to meet the cost o f determining whether carried-forward tax losses exist on discharge from bankruptcy. 69. Consequently, option 2 is not expected to result in a fiscal impact. I f option 3 were selected, there is a potential that taxpayers m ay seek determine that carried forward tax losses exist. Our view is that the amount o f these tax losses would be immaterial. Compliance impacts 70. There is expected to be a minor reduction in compliance impact from adopting option 2. This is because the law will be made more certain in relation to: • the tax treatment o f tax-base property vested in the Official Assignee; and • the tax treatment o f carried forward tax losses on being released from all debts under procedures o f the Insolvency A ct 2006. 71. However, if option 3 were adopted, compliance costs would be expected to rise, as taxpayers are required to self-assess their tax losses. In particular, a discharged bankrupt would need to have sufficient business records o f the pre-bankruptcy business to establish: • that carried forward tax losses existed on being declared bankrupt; and • the amount o f business debt that has been cancelled on discharge from bankruptcy. Social, cultural or environm ental im pacts. 72. None o f the options have social, cultural, or environmental impacts. 15 16 CONSULTATION 73. Policy proposals were provided in a targeted consultation letter to the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC), Chartered Accountants: Australia and New Zealand (CAANZ), the New Zealand Law Society (NZLS), and the Official Assignee. The consultation was limited to interested parties on the basis that the proposal related to complex technical aspects o f the relationship between insolvency law and taxation legislation. The consultation letter set out policy proposals on the relationship between insolvency law and the carry forward o f tax losses that arose prior to insolvency by either: • a discharged bankrupt; or • an insolvent individual released from the full amount o f a debt under the “no-asset procedure” (an alternative to bankruptcy under the Insolvency Act 2006). 74. The policy proposals were: a. Whether, and to what extent, carried-forward tax losses o f an insolvent person should be cancelled: • on discharge from bankruptcy or on completion o f the no-asset procedure; and • to the extent partial remission o f debt occurs under other alternatives to bankruptcy? b. Whether the differences in the income tax treatment o f cancelled debts on discharge from bankruptcy result in an incentive to fund business activity in a particular way, in order to preserve carried-forward tax losses? c. Should timing, valuation, and deduction rules relating to disposals o f assets in the Income Tax Act 2007 apply to assets vested in the Official Assignee? d. Should there be clarification o f the income tax treatment o f the bankrupt and the Official Assignee during the period o f bankruptcy? 75. The consultation letter also set out an analysis o f the economic impact o f the status quo. That analysis indicated that under current law, the tax system was not neutral in relation to investment decisions when considering the ability to carry forward tax losses on discharge from bankruptcy. 76. The ACC submitted that it had no concerns with the policy proposals. 77. CAANZ observed that • Some practitioners were not aware that bankrupts are technically able to carry forward tax losses that arose prior to being adjudicated bankrupt. • In this respect, CAANZ noted that a person declared bankrupt receives a new Inland Revenue number (tax number). CAANZ acknowledged that the two tax numbers are to assist the Commissioner to distinguish between tax obligations o f the bankrupt for the periods before and after bankruptcy. 17 78. Given that no submissions were received opposing or suggesting modifications to the policy proposals, it was concluded that the proposals to cancel all carried-forward tax losses o f a person released from all debts under insolvency law should be preferred (option 2). CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION 79. We recommend option 2, under which: • Carried-forward tax losses o f a natural person are cancelled on discharge from bankruptcy; • The vesting o f tax base property in the Official Assignee on a person being declared bankrupt would have a tax-neutral effect for the bankrupt: • Tax administration law would be clarified to ensure that the bankrupt is responsible for filing returns o f income during his or her period o f bankruptcy. 80. The proposals would be consistent with: • the objectives o f insolvency law; • the coherency and neutrality o f the tax system; and • the long-standing policy for the carry-forward o f tax losses. IMPLEMENTATION 81. The recommended option would be included in the first available tax bill scheduled for introduction in 2016. 82. The proposal would apply to persons discharged from bankruptcy on or after the date o f Royal Assent o f the enabling legislation. No transitional provisions are considered necessary as the impacts would be prospective from the date the enabling legislation is first introduced into the House. W hen introduced into Parliament, commentary will be released explaining the amendments. Normal submission processes occur when the bill is referred to the Finance and Expenditure Committee. 83. The effect o f the law would be communicated to affected taxpayers in a Technical Information Bulletin to be released shortly after the bill receives Royal asset. 84. Inland Revenue will administer the law as part o f its business as usual process. 18 MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REVIEW 85. In general, Inland Revenue’s monitoring, evaluation and review o f new legislation takes place under the Generic Tax Policy Process (GTPP). The GTPP is a multi-stage tax policy process that has been used to design and implement tax policy since 1995. 86. The final stage in the GTPP contemplates the implementation and review stage, which can involve post-implementation review o f the legislation and the identification o f any remedial issues. Opportunities for external consultation are also built into this stage. In practice, any changes identified as necessary for the new legislation to have its intended effect would generally be added to the Tax Policy W ork Programme and proposals would go through the GTPP. 87. Inland Revenue's normal assurance activity will evaluate and review that the preferred option achieves its intended policy objectives, as set out in paragraph 30 o f this RIS.