Impact Summary: Hybrids/NRWT issue Section 1: General information Purpose Inland R evenue is solely responsible for the analysis and advice s et out in this Impact Summary, except a s otherwise explicitly indicated. This analysis and advice h as been produced for the purpose of informing policy decisions to be taken by Cabinet. Key Limitations or Constraints on Analysis This analysis has been limited by the following factors: • The scale of the problem (in term s of its fiscal costs) h as not been accurately identified b e c a u s e it will depend on the behavioural resp o n se of taxpayers, which may in turn be informed by work currently being undertaken by Inland Revenue. • No consultation with external stakeholders (including th o se who would be affected by the proposed action). Responsible Manager (signature and date): Paul Kilford Policy and Strategy Inland R evenue 22 November 2017 Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary Tem plate | 1 Section 2: Problem definition and objectives 2.1 What is the policy problem or opportunity? The problem identified arises only in a very specific s e t of fact circum stances: • There is a New Zealand branch or “perm anent establishm ent” (PE) of a non-resident company; • That PE borrows money from another non-resident in the sam e o v e rsea s jurisdiction a s the P E ’s corporate residence; • The borrowing tak es place under a “hybrid” instrument which m ean s it is treated a s one form of financing (debt) by New Zealand, but ano th er form of financing (equity) by the other country. An exam ple is s e t out in the diagram below. The view until now of Inland R evenue and m any taxpayers h as b een that New Zealand can withhold non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) on the paym ents. However, som e taxpayers have disputed this view and a s a co n seq u en ce Inland R evenue is currently reconsidering w hether it is legally correct. Inland R evenue has sought Crown Law’s advice, and h as indicated that it may well decide the law d o e s not permit NRWT to be withheld. This interpretation is b ased on a view that the paym ents are dividends for the purposes of our double tax agreem ents (DTA). B ecause double tax agreem ents over-ride dom estic law, this view would, if adopted, m ean that the taxpayer would be entitled to an interest deduction in New Zealand for the paym ents (b e c au se New Zealand treats the paym ents a s interest), but the paym ents would not be subject to NRWT (b ecau se the other country and the DTA treat them a s dividends). This is contrary to the intent of the provisions, a s deductible outbound interest should always have Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary T em plate | 2 NRWT (or its alternative, approved issuer levy (AIL)) withheld unless there is a specific exemption providing otherwise. The hybrid mismatch m easu res already proposed and approved by Cabinet (and covered by the regulatory impact analysis: http://taxpolicy .ird.govt.nz/sites/default/files/2017-other-beps- 20-ria-hybrids-july-2017.pdf) would en su re that paym ents m ade under such hybrids could not be both deductible in New Zealand and n o n -a s s e s s a b le o v erseas. In som e circum stances the m e asu res would still allow a deduction in New Zealand for the paym ents. However the m e asu re s do not cover w hether NRWT m ust be withheld from such payments. Consequently, the currently proposed hybrid m e asu re s would still permit paym ents under a hybrid financial instrument to be deductible in New Zealand, but not subject to NRWT. This contrasts with the tax treatm ent of dividends, which a re not deductible. It also contrasts with the tax treatm ent of ordinary interest, which is deductible but subject to NRWT (or AIL). As a result of this, the currently proposed hybrid mismatch m easu res would remove the incentive to use th e se types of hybrids in most, but not all c a s e s. The hybrids could still be attractive if the non-resident w as not concerned about the assessability of the paym ents in its hom e jurisdiction. For example, if the non-resident had tax losses, w as tax exempt, or simply preferred to pay tax in its home jurisdiction (as m ost Australian com panies do due to their imputation system). If no action is taken, Inland R evenue’s changed interpretation could therefore expose the New Zealand tax b a se to significant risk. It is difficult to estim ate the fiscal risk, a s it d ep en d s in part on tax p ay ers’ behaviour, and in part on w hether section BG 1 would apply to counteract the arrangem ents (section BG 1 may apply to som e arrangem ents but not others). The risk is in two parts: a risk that $60 million of previously paid NRWT or AIL might be refunded in the n ear term, and an ongoing risk th at $15 million per annum of NRWT or AIL might no longer be payable. Both risks could materialise a s a fiscal cost against existing baselines. Addressing the problem will increase baselines by $1 million per annum on a go forward basis, relative to the status quo. 2.2 Who is affected and how? The only taxpayers affected are those that enter into the structure illustrated in the response to question 2.1 above. However, a s far a s Inland R evenue is aw are, many of the taxpayers that use th e se structures already pay NRWT or AIL in accordance with the policy intent. As a result, for m ost affected taxpayers, any change in the law to align with the policy intent would only reaffirm Inland R ev en u e’s pre-existing legal interpretation - and so would not involve the imposition of additional tax or compliance costs com pared with their current position. However, the proposed approach would stop som e of th e se taxpayers from claiming a tax refund for the NRWT or AIL they paid in previous y ears if Inland R evenue’s interpretation chan g es. It would also stop som e of them from ceasing to pay AIL or NRWT in future years. A small num ber of taxpayers have disputed Inland R ev en u e’s current legal view and not paid NRWT or AIL. T h ese taxpayers would be affected by the proposed change, a s they would now be required to pay NRWT or AIL. However, this is the outcom e we want to achieve with the proposed change, a s the policy intent is for all taxpayers to be subject to NRWT or AIL Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary Tem plate | 3 on cross border deductible interest paym ents (unless there is a specific exemption providing otherwise). 2.3 Are there any constraints on the scope for decision making? Limitations in respect of stakeholder e n g ag em en t a re s e t out in section 5, below. The scope of this problem is limited by the extremely narrow fact-pattern identified. The proposed regulatory action h a s two major interdependencies: BEPS and hybrids The current problem with the NRWT rules only arises for hybrid mismatch arrangem ents. Hybrid mismatch arrangem ents are, broadly speaking, cross-border arrangem ents that create a tax advantage by exploiting differences in the tax treatm ent of an entity or instrument under the laws of two or more countries. The result of hybrid mismatch arrangem ents is less aggregate tax revenue collected in the jurisdictions to which the arrangem ent relates. In July 2017 the Government announced th at it would com prehensively adopt the OECD’s hybrid mismatch recom m endations, with suitable modifications for the New Zealand context. In addition to the regulatory impact analysis referred to in resp o n se to question 2.1, the relevant Cabinet papers can be found at: • http://taxpolicv.ird.govt.nz/sites/default/files/2017-other-beps-13-cabinet-paper- overview-july-2017.pdf (which covers the BEPS p ackage more broadly); and • http://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/sites/default/files/2017-other-beps-19-cabinet-paper- hvbrids-july-2017.pdf (which is specific to the hybrids proposals). The hybrids work is a relevant interdependency b e c a u s e it estab lish es that Cabinet wished to "... sen d the clear m e ssa g e that using hybrid mismatch arrangem ents should not produce a tax advantage ...” (see paragraph 7 of the hybrids-specific Cabinet p a p er linked above). Therefore, we consider that addressing the problem identified in this Impact Sum m ary is consistent with bringing into effect the outcom e clearly desired by Cabinet for hybrid m ism atches. As explained in 2.1 above, however, the existing hybrids m e asu res still allow for cross border financial instruments to carry paym ents which a re deductible in New Zealand, but not subject to NRWT. Accordingly, the proposed m easure would supplem ent the existing hybrids m e asu res by cancelling a further hybrid mismatch tax advantage. Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Sum m ary T em plate | 4 NRWT amendments New Zealand h as recently reviewed and updated its rules related to NRWT and its alternative, AIL. T hese reforms w ere enacted a s part of the Taxation (Annual R ates for 2016-17, Closely Held Com panies, and Remedial Matters) Act 2017. The relevant Regulatory Impact Statem ent can be found at: http://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2016-ris-archcrm-bill/nrwt- related-party-and-branch-lending-nrwt-change s As s e t out in paragraph 26 of that document, the objective of the reforms w as to “... ensure the return received by a non-resident lender from an associated borrower (or a party that is economically equivalent to an associated borrower) will be subject to NRWT and, at a time, that is not significantly later than when income tax deductions for the funding costs are available to the borrower.” In the structure that is the subject of this Impact Summary, the potential outcome is that a taxpayer will (ab sen t the proposed m easure) be entitled to a deduction but have no corresponding NRWT liability. This is contrary to the stated policy objective. Accordingly, the proposed m easure supplem ents the previous NRWT am endm ents by ensuring that NRWT cannot be avoided for deductible interest paym ents on hybrid instruments. Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary Tem plate | 5 Section 3: Options identification 3.1 What options have been considered? W e have considered four options, three of which involve addressing the identified problem by ensuring that NRWT applies in all instances where a deduction is allowed in New Zealand for an interest e x p en se and for this outcome to occur notwithstanding the effect of our double tax ag reem en ts (the “policy solution”). However, they differ in their proposed application date. The four options are: • Option 1: The status quo, which would allow Inland R evenue to finalise its legal view and allow that view to prevail on all existing and future arrangem ents. This would likely result in the problem identified in 2.1 continuing. • Option 2: Provide that NRWT or AIL applies to any deductible interest paym ent with a New Zealand source (the policy solution). The policy solution would have prospective effect. • Option 3: Enact the policy solution retrospectively to the earliest date from which taxpayers can claim refunds for AIL or NRWT overpaym ents. • Option 4: Enact the policy solution retrospectively to the earliest date from which taxpayers can claim refunds for AIL or NRWT overpaym ents, but also include a “sav in g s” provision for taxpayers that have already adopted the position that NRWT or AIL is not payable prior to the Bill containing the policy solution being introduced. Currently the potential non-applicability of NRWT or AIL a rises under New Z ealand’s DTAs. DTAs are incorporated into New Zealand law under the Income Tax Act 2007, which s tates that DTAs have effect notwithstanding any other provision of that Act (subject to som e exceptions). Accordingly, the policy solution would need to expressly override our DTAs in the am ending legislation. W e note that Australia already h as a rule that legislates the policy solution, including an express DTA override. Criteria The four options are a s s e s s e d in this Impact Summ ary against the following criteria: • Economic efficiency - the tax system should, to the extent possible, apply neutrally and consistently to economically equivalent transactions. This m ean s the tax system should not provide a tax preferred treatm ent for one transaction over another similar transaction or provide an advantage to one b usiness over another. This helps en su re that the most efficient forms of investment which provide the b est returns to New Zealand a s a whole are undertaken. At the sam e time there is a concern that tax es should not unduly raise the cost of capital and discourage inbound investment. • Fairness - the options should en su re that the law is see n a s treating people fairly and consistently and should not allow people to avoid their tax obligations (including any foreign tax obligations). • Integrity of the tax system - the options should collect the revenue required in a transparent and timely fashion while not providing opportunities for tax avoidance or arbitrary tax reductions Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary T em plate | 6 Analysis In th e following options analysis, an option having a fiscal risk is s e e n a s a negative. However, this will not automatically disqualify the option. There are times when changing the law will have a fiscal cost or risk for the Government, but this is nevertheless desirable b e ca u se of the gains in one or more of the other a s s e s s m e n t criteria. Option 1 - not preferred W e consider that the policy solution is preferable to the status quo. The status quo will likely m ean that a PE would be entitled to an interest deduction in New Zealand for paym ents on certain hybrid instrum ents (as the paym ents a re characterised a s “interest” under New Zealand dom estic law), but the paym ents would not be subject to NRWT (as the paym ents are characterised a s “dividends” under the DTA). This is contrary to the intent of the relevant DTA provisions, a s outbound interest, which is deductible in determining the profits of a PE, should always have NRWT withheld unless there is a specific exemption providing otherwise (e.g. the sovereign wealth fund exem ptions provided in som e of our DTAs). It also e x p o se s the New Zealand tax b a se to a fiscal risk, a s it allows a deduction from New Zealand tax for a paym ent without a corresponding tax liability for the recipient. Accordingly, the statu s quo negatively affects the integrity of the tax system . The general anti avoidance rule in section BG 1 might still apply to som e of the arrangem ents using th e se kinds of hybrid instruments, in which c a s e NRWT or AIL would still need to be paid. However, there is a high risk that section BG 1 would not apply to other arrangem ents we are aw are of. In addition, the status quo option negatively affects both fairness and econom ic efficiency. This is b eca u se it would give a competitive adv an tag e to a multinational firm that u s e s the relevant funding structure over a dom estic firm or another, more compliant, multinational. This is contrary to the objectives of the BEPS work more generally and the hybrids project in particular. Under the statu s quo option, Inland R evenue’s changed interpretation could expose the New Zealand tax b a se to significant risk. It is difficult to estim ate the fiscal risk, a s it dep en d s in part on taxpayers’ behaviour, and in part on w hether section BG 1 would apply to counteract the arrangem ents (section BG 1 may apply to som e arrangem ents but not others). The risk is in two parts: a risk that $60 million of previously paid NRWT or AIL might be refunded in the n ear term, and an ongoing risk that $15 million per annum of NRWT or AIL might no longer be payable. Both risks could materialise a s a fiscal cost against existing baselines. Addressing the problem will increase baselines by $1 million per annum on a go forward basis, relative to the statu s quo. Option 2 - not preferred This option would ad d re ss the policy issue identified in 2.1. It would also have ad v an tag es in term s of fairness, economic efficiency and the integrity of the tax system com pared with the statu s quo option (by eliminating the status q u o ’s disadvantages in th e se regards). However, th e se ad v an tag es would only arise for future income years. Taxpayers who used the relevant hybrid structure in previous income y ears may be entitled to request a refund of the Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary Tem plate | 7 NRWT or AIL they previously paid. W e consider that it would be unfair to allow taxpayers to claim refunds of their previously paid AIL or NRWT in th e se circum stances. It would also reduce the integrity of the tax system . It is clear that NRWT / AIL w as intended to be payable on cross border interest paym ents. This w as also Inland R evenue’s interpretation of the law until now, which w as followed by many taxpayers. The ability of so m e taxpayers to avoid NRWT AIL through the u se of a hybrid instrument is a clear loophole in the current rules, and taxpayers aw are of the issue would have perceived it a s such. Accordingly, we consider there should be no legitimate expectation for taxpayers to obtain a refund for any AIL or NRWT previously paid in resp ect of th ese hybrid instruments. W e estim ate that there is a potential one-off fiscal risk of $60 million under this option. This is b e ca u se taxpayers that are known to use this structure may be able to obtain refunds of their previously paid AIL/NRWT under this option if Inland R evenue ch an g es its current legal interpretation (and the previously paid NRWT or AIL h a s b een included in the fiscal baseline),. This option would also give rise to a potential $1 million per annum fiscal benefit com pared with the current baseline. This is b ecau se taxpayers in active disputes would be required to pay $1 million of NRWT in future tax years if the policy solution w as implemented (and this $1 million h as not been included in current fiscal baselines). Option 3 - not preferred Option 3 would ad d ress the policy issue in 2.1. As a retrospective m easure, it would also stop taxpayers from claiming a refund for any previously paid NRWT or AIL. Accordingly, it is preferable to option 2 a s it h a s ad v an tag es in term s of fairness, econom ic efficiency and integrity of the tax system , over the statu s quo option in respect of both future and p ast income years. This option also h as the lowest potential fiscal risk of all the options (equal with option 4). This option also h as the largest potential fiscal benefit. This is becau se, in addition to the fiscal benefit of option 2 in respect of future income years, this option would also require the taxpayers that have disputed Inland R evenue’s current legal interpretation to pay NRWT in respect of p ast tax years in the event that Inland R evenue’s current legal interpretation changes. This NRWT h as not been included in the current fiscal baselines. Accordingly, this gives rise to an additional potential one-off fiscal benefit of approximately $5 million. However, this option would also retrospectively ch ange the law for those taxpayers who have already taken the position that NRWT or AIL w a s not payable and entered into disputes with Inland Revenue. This would be fair, a s different taxpayers in the sam e position would be treated the sam e. In addition, excluding taxpayers who have taken an aggressive tax position from the retrospective application of the rules s ee m s to reward them for their aggressive behaviour. However, there is a wider issue of legal certainty involved. If Parliament retrospectively ch an g es a law taxpayers have relied on, then this m ean s taxpayers can never fully rely on the law (as stated at the time) in any dispute with the Government. This would erode the integrity of the tax system from a wider perspective. It would also erode perceptions of fairness, in that the Government might be perceived a s misusing its legislative power to win a Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Sum m ary T em plate | 8 dispute with taxpayers. Option 4 - preferred This option a d d re s s e s the policy problem s et out in 2.1. It also has fairness, economic efficiency and integrity of the tax system ad v an tag es over the status quo option in respect of both future and p ast income years. Although this option is slightly less fair than option 3, it b est supports the integrity of the tax system . This is b eca u se it prevents taxpayers from claiming refunds for previously paid NRWT or AIL, while preserving the legal position of taxpayers that previously adopted the position that NRWT or AIL w as not payable prior to the introduction of the Bill containing the policy solution. This option would also give rise to a potential fiscal benefit of $1 million per annum compared with current baseline. This is b eca u se taxpayers that are still disputing Inland R evenue’s current position would be required to pay $1 million of NRWT in future tax years (and this $1 million has not been included in current fiscal baselines). W e note that this option d o es have a smaller potential fiscal benefit than option 3, a s it does not require taxpayers disputing Inland R evenue’s current legal interpretation to pay NRWT in resp ect of p ast tax years. W e estim ate the reduced potential fiscal benefit to be approximately $5 million. 3.2 Which of these options is the proposed approach? W e consider Option 4 to be the b est option. This option a d d re s s e s the policy problem set out in 2.1. It also h as advantages, in term s of fairness, economic efficiency and the integrity of the tax system , over the status quo option in resp ect of both future and past income years. Although this option is less fair than option 3, it b est supports the integrity of the tax system. This is b ecau se Option 4 prevents taxpayers from claiming refunds for previously paid NRWT or AIL, while preserving the legal position of taxpayers that previously adopted the position that NRWT or AIL w as not payable prior to the introduction of the BEPS Bill. Accordingly it a d d re s s e s the policy problem without the draw backs of options 2 and 3. Option 4 also h a s the lowest equal fiscal risk. However, it lacks Option 3’s potential one-off $5 million fiscal benefit. Even so, we consider the lack of this fiscal benefit is outweighed by the importance of protecting the integrity of the law from a wider perspective. Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary Tem plate | 9 Section 4: Impact Analysis (Proposed approach) 4.1 Summary table of costs and benefits Affected partiesComment: nature of cost or benefit (eg Impact (identify)ongoing, one-off), evidence and $m present value, for assum ption (eg compliance rates), risks monetised impacts; high, medium or low for non- monetised impacts Additional costs of proposed approach, com pared to taking no action Regulated partiesThe proposed approach rem oves the ability of taxpayers to avoid NRWT or AIL for future periods. It d o es not ch ange the previously adopted position for p ast periods. W e a re aw are of several taxpayers who have entered into the hybrid structure s e t out in 2.1. W e have calculated the fiscal costs based on th ese taxpayers. If there are further taxpayers, then the impact will be increased. W e do not expect there to be other taxpayers with a significant value of such hybrid structures, but we cannot confirm this. W e note that m any taxpayers already pay NRWT and AIL under the current rules. Accordingly the proposed approach will not increase their costs com pared with their current position. However it will deprive them of a future cost saving if com pared with the status quo option if Inland R evenue ch an g es its legal view. A potential $16m per annum cost arising from additional NRWT or AIL for future y ears com pared with doing nothing if Inland R evenue ch an g es its legal view. A potential one off $60m co st arising from the denial the NRWT or AIL refunds which taxpayers may be entitled to for p ast y ears if Inland Revenue c h an g es its legal view and no action is taken. Regulators No material administrative costs for Inland Revenue. - Wider governm ent No costs. No costs O ther parties Not applicable Not applicable Total Monetised Cost For regulated parties, a potential cost of 16m of NRWT or AIL per annum plus a potential cost of $60m in respect of possible refunds for p ast y ears com pared with doing nothing. Non-monetised costs None we are aw are of. None Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary Tem plate | 10 Expected benefits of proposed approach, com pared to taking no action Regulated parties The regulated parties will be required to pay NRWT or AIL regardless of w hether they enter into hybrid structures. This will be a cost for taxpayers that have entered into such structures. However it will be a benefit for other taxpayers, a s it will en su re that taxpayers who have entered into such structures cannot obtain a competitive ad vantage over dom estic firms and more compliant multinationals. Accordingly the proposed approach will improve econom ic efficiency. No monetary value Regulators With the proposed law change, Inland R evenue will not need to consider w hether the general anti-avoidance rule in section BG 1 applies to any of the arrangem ents (other than taxpayers not subject to the retrospective application of the rule). It can be difficult and resource intensive to consider the application of section BG 1. Accordingly the proposed approach will sav e Inland R evenue administrative costs, and potentially court costs. However th e se a re impossible to quantify at this stage. Too difficult to quantify Wider governm ent The Government will be able to collect NRWT or AIL from all deductible cross border interest paym ents, in accordance with the policy intent. This will potentially sav e the Government up to $60m in one off costs for p ast years (in respect of refunds for previously paid NRWT or AIL), and 16m per annum for future years. A potential $60m one off benefit. A potential $16m benefit per annum going forward. Other partiesNot applicable Not applicable Total Monetised Benefit The total monetised benefit for the Governm ent mirrors the total monetised cost for taxpayers. A $60m one off potential benefit for the Government, plus a potential $16m per annum benefit for the Government going forward. Non-monetised benefits Administrative savings, a s the Governm ent will not have to consider the application of section BG 1 to most arrangem ents. Medium Economic efficiency benefits from an equal application of NRWT to all cross border interest payments. Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary Tem plate | 11 4.2 What other impacts is this approach likely to have? The proposed approach involves the third explicit override of New Z ealand’s DTAs in recent years. Accordingly, it may aro u se concern that New Zealand d o es not respect its DTAs. However, the proposed approach confirms the interpretive approach previously adopted by NZ, and currently adopted by som e of our DTA partners and mirrors a rule already in place in Australia. It also closes a clear loophole if Inland R evenue were to change its legal interpretation. Accordingly, we do not expect disagreem ent over the policy outcome. Section 5: Stakeholder views 5.1 What do stakeholders think about the problem and the proposed solution? B ecause this problem p o ses a base-m aintenance risk, Inland R evenue and Treasury officials have not consulted with the private sector. This m eans that the problem identification and options have been generated by officials based on the information available. It is recognised that private secto r input is an important part of the generic tax policy process. In saying this, it is not unusual for base-m aintenance chan g es to be m ade without consultation b ecau se there is a risk that publicising the existence of a perceived loophole may incentivise taxpayers to take advantage of its existence in the short term. In addition, the m easure only legislatively confirms the tax treatm ent Inland R evenue has been applying to date. It also closes what would be a clear loophole if Inland Revenue were to ch an g e that tax treatm ent. Further, there will be an opportunity for the public to submit on the m easure during the S elect Committee pro cess and feedback will be considered at that point. There may be som e private sector concern about the am endm ent, given that it applies retrospectively and will be the third explicit override of our DTAs in recent years. However, we do not expect disagreem ent over the policy outcome. Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary Tem plate | 12 6.1 How will the new arrangements be given effect? Section 6: Implementation and operation The proposed solution will be given effect by inclusion in the Taxation (Neutralising B ase Erosion and Profit Shifting) Bill 2017, which is scheduled to be introduced into the House in D ecem ber 2017. Inland Revenue will be responsible for ongoing operation and enforcem ent of the new arrangem ents. W e do not have any concern about our ability to do so. The new arrangem ents will have retrospective effect, except for taxpayers that have, prior to introduction of the Bill, taken the position th at NRWT or AIL is not payable. W e consider that this allows sufficient preparation time for regulated parties, as: • the proposed approach will only affect a small num ber of taxpayers that have disputed Inland R evenue’s current legal interpretation and not settled the dispute; • the taxpayers that have maintained their position that NRWT or AIL is not payable are aw are that Inland R evenue historically d o e s not agree, and so a re on notice that their current practice may not be acceptable; • many of those currently take the view that NRWT or AIL is payable, and so they will not need to change their current practice. W e will mitigate implementation risks by publicising the proposed approach a s part of the Commentary on the Bill. W e will also inform the taxpayers who currently take the view that no NRWT or AIL is payable of the proposed law change. Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary Tem plate | 13 Section 7: Monitoring, evaluation and review 7.1 How will the impact of the new arrangements be monitored? The new arrangem ents will be monitored through Inland R evenue’s normal risk review and audit function. This will check w hether taxpayers are complying with the proposed approach. If any follow-up legislative action is required it will go through the Generic Tax Policy P ro cess (GTPP). 7.2 When and how will the new arrangements be reviewed? The proposed approach simply closes a potential loophole and confirms the Governm ent’s intended tax treatm ent for cross border interest paym ents. Accordingly, we consider that no specific review of the arrangem ents is necessary. Stakeholders will have the opportunity to raise concerns during the S elect Committee process. The GTPP is a multi-stage policy process that h as been used to design tax policy (and subsequently social policy administered by Inland R evenue) in New Zealand since 1995. The final step in the pro cess is the implementation and review stage, which involves post­ implementation review of legislation and the identification of remedial issues. In practice, any ch an g es identified a s n ecessary following enactm ent would be added to the tax policy work programme, and proposals would go through the GTPP. Treasury:3720848v3 Impact Summary Tem plate | 14