I N C O N F I D E N C E EGI-16-SUB-0297 Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee Summary This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. First 2017 Omnibus Tax Bill: Miscellaneous Items Portfolio Revenue Purpose This paper seeks agreement to several miscellaneous amendments to tax legislation for inclusion in the next omnibus tax Bill. Previous Consideration On 15 June 2016, EGI made a number of decisions relating to pay period reporting and the due date for filing PAYE information \[EGI-16-MIN-0136\]. Summary Amendments to tax legislation are proposed to: Following further consultation with stakeholders, agreement is also sought to rescind earlier decisions relating to pay period reporting and the due date for filing PAYE information. Specifically, it is proposed that: rather than being required to file on a pay period basis, employers should be required to provide PAYE information on a payday basis; the due date for PAYE information above the electronic filing threshold for payroll intermediaries and for employers using payroll software should be the second working day, rather than the first day, after payday. 1 I N C O N F I D E N C E Out of scope Out of scope I N C O N F I D E N C E EGI-16-SUB-0297 Regulatory Impact Analysis Two Regulatory Impact Statements (RIS) are attached. Inland Revenue considers that both RISs meet the quality assurance criteria. Baseline Implications The other proposals are expected to be fiscally neutral. Legislative Implications Changes will be required to the Income Tax Act 2007, the Tax Administration Act 1994, and the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. Timing Issues The next omnibus taxation Bill is scheduled for introduction in early 2017. The proposed changes will take effect from 1 April 2017 or 1 April 2018. Announcement The Minister of Revenue will mention the PAYE administration changes at the New Zealand Payroll Practitioners Association in early November 2016. The Minister will make an announcement when the Bill is introduced. A commentary on the Bill will be released at that time, and Inland Revenue will publish details on its website once the Bill is enacted. Proactive Release None. Consultation Paper prepared by Inland Revenue. Treasury were consulted. The Minister of Revenue indicates that discussion is not required with the government caucus, or with other parties represented in Parliament. The Minister of Revenue recommends that the Committee: Proposed amendments to tax legislation 2 I N C O N F I D E N C E Out of scope Out of scope Out of scope I N C O N F I D E N C E EGI-16-SUB-0297 Pay period reporting and due date for filing PAYE information 7note that on 15 June 2016, the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee: 7.1agreed that all employers be required to provide PAYE information on a pay period basis, with a minimum pay period of once a week, as follows: 7.1.1payroll intermediaries, employers at or above a threshold, and those employers using payroll software, be required to submit that information digitally on the day following the payday; 7.1.2employers below that threshold not using payroll software, and employers unable to access digital services, be required to submit that information by the 7th working day following the payday; 7.2agreed that payroll software include the requirement that PAYE information is provided on the day following payday; \[EGI-16-MIN-0136, paragraphs 3 and 5.1\] 8agree to recommend that Cabinet rescind the decisions referred to in paragraph 7 above; and instead 8.1 agree that all employers be required to provide PAYE information on a payday basis, as follows: 3 I N C O N F I D E N C E Out of scope I N C O N F I D E N C E EGI-16-SUB-0297 8.1.1payroll intermediaries, employers at or above a threshold, and those employers using payroll software, are required to submit that information digitally by the second working day following the payday; 8.1.2employers below that threshold not using payroll software, and employers unable to access digital services, be required to submit that information by the 7 th working day following the payday; 8.2 agree that payroll specifications include the requirement that PAYE information is provided by the second working day following payday; Financial implications 10 note that the other changes proposed in the paper under EGI-16-SUB-0297 do not have a fiscal effect; Legislative implications 11agree to include the above proposals in the next omnibus taxation Bill, which is scheduled for introduction in early 2017; 12 invite the Minister of Revenue to issue drafting instructions to Inland Revenue to draft the necessary amendments to give effect to the above paragraphs. Janine Harvey Committee Secretary Hard-copy distribution: Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee Deputy Chief Executive, Policy, DPMC Melleny Black, PAG, DPMC Minister of Foreign Affairs 4 I N C O N F I D E N C E Out of scope In confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS FOR INCLUSION IN THE FIRST 2017 OMNIBUS TAXATION BILL Proposal 1This paper seeks the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee’s agreement to several miscellaneous measures that require changes to tax legislation. 2Earlier decisions by Cabinet \[CAB-16-MIN-0283 refers\] relating to pay period reporting and the due date for filing PAYE information should be rescinded and replaced. 3If approved, I propose including the necessary legislative amendments in the next omnibus taxation bill, scheduled for introduction in early 2017. Executive summary 6Following further consultation by Inland Revenue with stakeholders on its Business Transformation programme (Better administration of PAYE and GST), I am also recommending that earlier decisions by Cabinet \[CAB-16-MIN-0283 refers\] in June relating to pay period reporting and the due date for filing PAYE information be rescinded and replaced: Rather than being required to file on a pay period basis, employers should be required to provide PAYE information on a payday basis. Out of scope 2 The due date for PAYE information employers above the electronic filing threshold, for payroll intermediaries and for employers using payroll software should be the second working day, rather than the first day, after payday. 7These changes to the PAYE rules should allow for better integration with payroll software and should improve the accuracy of the information sent to Inland Revenue. Amendments to the Tax Administration Act 1994 are necessary to implement this change. 8I recommend these miscellaneous changes to tax legislation be included in an omnibus taxation bill, scheduled for introduction in early 2017. Out of scope 3 Out of scope 4 1 Figures for 2015. Out of scope 5 Out of scope 6 2 Page 7 refers. Out of scope 7 Out of scope 8 Out of scope 9 Better Administration of PAYE and GST 63In June 2016, Cabinet approved a number of decisions arising out of the Inland Revenue’s Business Transformation project Making Tax Simpler - Better Administration of PAYE and GST. The decisions were made by the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee on 15 June 2016 \[EGI -16-Min-0136 and CAB-16-MIN-0283\]. 64Following further consultation by Inland Revenue with stakeholders, I am now recommending the changes below: Out of scope 10 I recommend that the requirement that employers provide PAYE information on a pay period basis with a minimum period of a week, should be rescinded and replaced with a requirement that employers provide such information on a payday basis. Large employers frequently do ‘ad-hoc pays’ and the proposed change would require information from these payments to be provided at the time the payment was made rather than being held over and included with the next regular payroll. The recommended change would eliminate a minimum reporting period, allow for better integration with payroll software, and simplify the process of reconciling PAYE information and payments. It may be necessary to make special arrangements for some taxpayers who pay on a daily basis such as the Ministry of Social Development; such variation is permissible under current law. I further recommended that the due date for PAYE information, from payroll intermediaries, employers at or above the electronic filing threshold and employers using payroll software, should be changed from one day following payday to the second working day following payday. This change would better allow employers and payroll intermediaries with complex payrolls to update their payroll systems for errors and adjustments arising from the pay and as a consequence would improve the accuracy of the information sent to Inland Revenue. It is not considered necessary to change the filing due date for employers below the electronic filing threshold and not using payroll software as these employers are unlikely to deal with complex payrolls. 65The effect of these changes to the PAYE rules should reduce compliance costs on employers and PAYE intermediaries as the timing of the requirement better integrates with payroll software and should improve the accuracy of the information sent to Inland Revenue. Consultation 66The Treasury was consulted on the proposed changes recommended in this paper. Out of scope 11 Financial implications Compliance cost implications Out of scope Out of scope Out of scope 12 Administrative cost implications 71No material administration impacts arise from the measures I am recommending in this paper. Apart from my recommendation to change the timing when PAYE information is provided to Inland Revenue by employers and PAYE intermediaries, the measures for inclusion in the first taxation bill for 2017 do not impact on Inland Revenue’s Business Transformation programme. Economic impacts 72The measures I am recommending in this paper are intended to improve the efficiency of tax legislation by reducing compliance and administration costs. No other economic impacts, apart from those already mentioned in this paper, have been identified. Human rights 73The changes I am recommending in this paper are not inconsistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 or the Human Rights Act 1993. Legislative implications 74Implementing the changes in this paper requires changes to the Income Tax Act 2007, the Tax Administration Act 1994 and the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. I recommend that the necessary amendments be included in the next omnibus taxation bill, which is scheduled for introduction in early 2017. Regulatory impact analysis 78The remaining policy items recommended in this paper do not require a RIS. The changes are either machinery in nature or do not have material impacts. Out of scope Out of scope 13 Publicity 79I propose to mention the changes to the administration of PAYE at the New Zealand Payroll Practitioners Association in early November 2016. 80I will make an announcement on the contents of the proposed omnibus taxation bill for early 2017 when it is introduced in the House. A Commentary on the bill explaining the changes recommended in this paper will be released at the same time. Inland Revenue will publish details of the new legislation in its Tax Information Bulletin series once the bill is enacted. Recommendations 81I recommend that the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee: Out of scope 14 11. Rescind recommendations 3 and 5.1 of EGI -16-Min-0136 \[CAB-16-MIN-0283\]: 3. agreed that all employers be required to provide PAYE information on a pay period basis, with a minimum pay period of once a week, as follows: 3.1. payroll intermediaries, employers at or above a threshold, and those employers using payroll software, be required to submit that information digitally on the day following the payday; 3.2. employers below that threshold not using payroll software, and employers unable to access digital services, be required to submit that information by the 7th working day following the payday; 5. agreed that payroll software specifications include the following: 5.1 the requirement that PAYE information is provided on the day following payday. 12. Replace recommendations 3 and 5.1 of EGI -16-Min-0136 \[CAB-16-MIN-0283\] with: 3. agree that all employers be required to provide PAYE information on a payday basis, as follows: 3.1. payroll intermediaries, employers at or above a threshold, and those employers using payroll software, are required to submit that information digitally by the second working day following the payday; 3.2. employers below that threshold not using payroll software, and employers unable to access digital services, be required to submit that information by the 7th working day following the payday; 5. agree that payroll specifications include the following: 5.1. the requirement that PAYE information is provided by the second working day following payday. 14.Note that the other changes recommended in this paper do not have a fiscal effect. Out of scope 15 15.Agree that legislation to give effect to the changes recommended in this paper be included in the next omnibus taxation bill, which is scheduled for introduction in early 2017. 16.Invite the Minister of Revenue to instruct Inland Revenue to draft the necessary amendments to give effect to the changes recommended in this paper. Authorised for lodgement Hon Michael Woodhouse Minister of Revenue \_\_\_\_/\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_/ 2016 Released in part, i nformation withheld under section 18(d) of the Official Information Act 1982 as it is already publically available. •T he regulatory impact statements are available at http://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2017-ris -areiirm-bill/overview I N C O N F I D E N C E EGI-16-MIN-0297 Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. First 2017 Omnibus Tax Bill: Miscellaneous Items PortfolioRevenue On 2 November 2016, the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee (EGI): Proposed amendments to tax legislation 1 I N C O N F I D E N C E Out of scope I N C O N F I D E N C E EGI-16-MIN-0297 Pay period reporting and due date for filing PAYE information 7noted that on 15 June 2016, EGI: 7.1agreed that all employers be required to provide PAYE information on a pay period basis, with a minimum pay period of once a week, as follows: 7.1.1payroll intermediaries, employers at or above a threshold, and those employers using payroll software, be required to submit that information digitally on the day following the payday; 7.1.2employers below that threshold not using payroll software, and employers unable to access digital services, be required to submit that information by the 7th working day following the payday; 7.2agreed that payroll software include the requirement that PAYE information is provided on the day following payday; \[EGI-16-MIN-0136, paragraphs 3 and 5.1\] 8agreed to recommend that Cabinet rescind the decisions referred to in paragraph 7 above; and instead 8.1agree that all employers be required to provide PAYE information on a payday basis, as follows: 8.1.1payroll intermediaries, employers at or above a threshold, and those employers using payroll software, are required to submit that information digitally by the second working day following the payday; 8.1.2employers below that threshold not using payroll software, and employers unable to access digital services, be required to submit that information by the 7 th working day following the payday; 8.2agree that payroll specifications include the requirement that PAYE information is provided by the second working day following payday; Financial implications 2 I N C O N F I D E N C E Out of scope Out of scope I N C O N F I D E N C E EGI-16-MIN-0297 10noted that the other changes proposed in the paper under EGI-16-SUB-0297 do not have a fiscal effect; Legislative implications 11agreed to include the above proposals in the next omnibus taxation Bill, which is scheduled for introduction in early 2017; 12invited the Minister of Revenue to issue drafting instructions to Inland Revenue to draft the necessary amendments to give effect to the above paragraphs. Janine Harvey Committee Secretary Present:Officials present from: Hon Bill English (Chair) Hon Steven Joyce Hon Amy Adams Hon Simon Bridges Hon Dr Nick Smith Hon Nathan Guy Hon Michael Woodhouse Hon Maggie Barry Hon Craig Foss Hon Nicky Wagner Hon Louise Upston Hon Paul Goldsmith Officials Committee for EGI Hard-copy distribution: Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee Melleny Black, PAG, DPMC Minister of Foreign Affairs Legislation Coordinator 3 I N C O N F I D E N C E I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB-16-MIN-0580.01 Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. First 2017 Omnibus Tax Bill: Miscellaneous Items PortfolioRevenue On 7 November 2016, following reference from the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee (EGI), Cabinet: Proposed amendments to tax legislation 1 I N C O N F I D E N C E Out of scope I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB-16-MIN-0580.01 Pay period reporting and due date for filing PAYE information 7noted that on 15 June 2016, EGI: 7.1 agreed that all employers be required to provide PAYE information on a pay period basis, with a minimum pay period of once a week, as follows: 7.1.1payroll intermediaries, employers at or above a threshold, and those employers using payroll software, be required to submit that information digitally on the day following the payday; 7.1.2employers below that threshold not using payroll software, and employers unable to access digital services, be required to submit that information by the 7th working day following the payday; 7.2 agreed that payroll software include the requirement that PAYE information is provided on the day following payday; \[EGI-16-MIN-0136, paragraphs 3 and 5.1\] 8rescinded the decisions referred to in paragraph 7 above; and instead 8.1agreed that all employers be required to provide PAYE information on a payday basis, as follows: 8.1.1payroll intermediaries, employers at or above a threshold, and those employers using payroll software, are required to submit that information digitally by the second working day following the payday; 8.1.2employers below that threshold not using payroll software, and employers unable to access digital services, be required to submit that information by the 7 th working day following the payday; 8.2agreed that payroll specifications include the requirement that PAYE information is provided by the second working day following payday; Financial implications 2 I N C O N F I D E N C E Out of scope Out of scope I N C O N F I D E N C E CAB-16-MIN-0580.01 10noted that the other changes proposed in the paper under EGI-16-SUB-0297 do not have a fiscal effect; Legislative implications 11agreed to include the above proposals in the next omnibus taxation Bill, which is scheduled for introduction in early 2017; 12invited the Minister of Revenue to issue drafting instructions to Inland Revenue to draft the necessary amendments to give effect to the above proposals. Michael Webster Secretary of the Cabinet Secretary’s Note: This minute replaces EGI-16-MIN-0297. Cabinet agreed to a recommendation from EGI to rescind an earlier Cabinet decision (paragraph 7). Hard-copy distribution: Prime Minister Minister of Finance Minister of Energy and Resources Minister of Foreign Affairs Minister of Revenue Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector 3 I N C O N F I D E N C E