February 2017 Automatic Exchange of Information Inland Revenue validations (draft) Virus scan and security threats We will reject files containing viruses or security threats (such as hyperlinks, JavaScript and executable files). CRS schema We will reject files that do not conform to the CRS XSD schema. The CRS schema is available at http://www.oecd.org/tax/automatic-exchange/common-reporting-standard/ Latin alphabet We will reject files that are not in the Latin alphabet. Invalid sending company The SendingCompanyIN element should contain the reporting financial institution’s IRD Number. This number will be validated against our system. Incorrect transmitting or receiving country The value in the TransmittingCountry and ReceivingCountry elements should be NZ. Missing contact information The Contact element should be completed with the contact details that Inland Revenue can use if they have any questions about the information provided. Missing or incorrect message reference IDs The MessageRefId element should be a unique value and should not match any previously submitted MessageRefId values. The MessageRefId value should be provided in the format \[IRD Number\].\[Unique ID\]. For example 99999999.00001 1 Mismatch between message type and document type indicators The MessageTypeIndic element should match the DocTypeIndic values used throughout the disclosure. For example, a MessageTypeIndic value of ‘CRS701’ (new data) should only be used with a DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD1’ (new data). A MessageTypeIndic value of ‘CRS702’ (corrected data) should only be used with DocTypeIndic values of ‘OECD0’ (resent data), ‘OECD2’ (corrected data) or ‘OECD3’ (deleted data). Incorrect ‘nil report’ message type indicator A disclosure with a MessageTypeIndic value of ‘CRS703’ (no data to report) should not contain any AccountReport elements. Corresponding message reference ID provided incorrectly The CorrMessageRefId element should not be used for CRS reporting. Reporting period The New Zealand reporting period should always end on the 31st March. Financial institution’s residency country code The ReportingFI/ResCountryCode element value should be ‘NZ’. Reporting group elements provided incorrectly Only one ReportingGroup element should be provided for each CRSBody element. The Sponsor, Intermediary and PoolReport elements should not be used for CRS reporting. Missing or incorrect document reference IDs The DocRefId value should be provided in the format \[IRDNumber\].\[UniqueID\]. For example 99999999.00001. When a DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD1’ (new data), ‘OECD2’ (corrected data) or ‘OECD3’ (deleted data) is used, then the associated DocRefId should be a unique value and should not match any previously submitted DocRefId values. When a DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD0’ (resent data) is used, then the associated DocRefId should match to a DocRefId value in a previously-submitted disclosure. A DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD0’ should only be used in the ReportingFI element. 2 Missing or incorrect corresponding document reference IDs When a DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD2’ (corrected data) or ‘OECD3’ (deleted data) is used, then the DocSpec should also contain a CorrDocRefId value. The CorrDocRefId value should match to a DocRefId value in a previously-submitted disclosure and should not have been used to correct a submitted record previously. When a DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD0’ (resent data) or ‘OECD1’ (new data) is used, then the DocSpec should not contain any CorrDocRefId value. Mismatch between document type indicators The DocTypeIndic values used in the AccountReport element should not contradict the DocTypeIndic values used in the ReportingFI element. For example, a ReportingFI DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD0’ (resent data) or ‘OECD2’ (corrected data) should only be used with AccountReport DocTypeIndic values of ‘OECD2’ (corrected data) or ‘OECD3’ (deleted data). A ReportingFI DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD1’ (new data) should only be used with AccountReport DocTypeIndic values that are also ‘OECD1’. A ReportingFI DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD3’ (deleted data) should only be used with AccountReport DocTypeIndic values that are also ‘OECD3’. Document type indicators used incorrectly When a DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD0’ (resent data) or ‘OECD3’ (deleted data) is used, then none of the corresponding ReportingFI/AccountReport information should have changed from the previous record submitted. Conversely, if a DocTypeIndic value of ‘OECD2’ (corrected data) is used, then at least one of the ReportingFI/AccountReport element values should have changed from the previously submitted record. Incorrect name type The value ‘OECD201’ (SMFAliasOrOther) should not be used as a name type attribute. Undocumented accounts reported incorrectly Undocumented accounts should be reported to Inland Revenue by using an individual ResCountryCode value of ‘NZ’ and an AccountNumber element’s UndocumentedAccount attribute of ‘TRUE’. The use of a ResCountryCode code value of ‘NZ’ without a corresponding UndocumentedAccount attribute of ‘TRUE’ (and vice versa) will fail our validations. Undocumented accounts should only be reported when the account holder is an individual. 3 Incorrect TIN If a TIN issued by attribute has a value of ‘NZ’, then the TIN should match to an IRD Number within our system. Nationality provided incorrectly The Nationality element should not be used for CRS reporting. Birth information provided incorrectly The BirthDate is the only sub-element within the BirthInfo element that should be provided for CRS reporting. The earliest BirthDate value that will be accepted is ‘1900-01-01’. Incorrect account number types When an account number type attribute is used, then this should match the account number format provided. For example, when the AccountNumber AcctNumberType attribute is ‘OECD601’ (IBAN), then the AccountNumber value should follow an IBAN format. When the AcctNumberType attribute is ‘OECD603’ (ISIN) then the AccountNumber value should meet the ISIN format. Incorrect or missing controlling person information The controlling person element should only be provided when the account holder is an organisation, with an AcctHolderType of ‘CRS101’ (passive NFE with one or more controlling persons). Incorrect account balance The account balance should always be greater than or equal to zero. If the account is closed and the AccountNumber element’s ClosedAccount attribute is ‘TRUE’, then the account balance should be 0.00. 4