Contact the CTG: c/o Rebecca Osborn, Deloitte PO Box 1990 Wellington 6140, New Zealand DDI: 04 470 3691 Email: rosborn@deloitte.co.nz We note the views in this document are a reflection of the views of the Corporate Taxpayers Group and do not necessarily reflect the views of individual members. Corporate Taxpayers Group c / - Rebecca Osborn l Deloitte l PO Box 1990 l Wellington l +64 (0)4 470 3691 CT G 7 April 2017 Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS C-/ Cath Atkins Deputy Commissioner, Policy and Strategy Inland Revenue Department PO Box 2198 WELLINGTON 6140 Dear Cath ENTATION OF THE MULTILATERAL CONVENTION TO IMPLEMENT TAX TREATY RELATED MEASURES TO PREVENT BEPS The Corporate Taxpayers Group is writing to submit on the Paper Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS (the Issues Paperappreciates the opportunity to submit on the Issues Paper and looks forward to further discussing the issues with officials. Summary of our submission The key points in our submission are: The Group is concerned that the MLI will see an unnecessary increase in complexity and compliance costs. As with all tax policy proposals, the Group believes that the adoption of the MLI needs to be considered in the context of the overall impact to the . attractiveness of New Zealand as an investment destination and the ease of doing business in New Zealand. New Zealand enjoys a sought after reputation as being an easy country to do business with and undertake business in. It is paramount that this reputation is protected. The Group does not support New Zealand's adoption of all the substantive provisions in the Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS (the multilateral instrument or "MLI") as is proposed in the Appendix to the Issues Paper. Most of the proposed provisions are not minimum standards (i.e., there is no requirement that they be adopted), and in some cases the costs to New Zealand of including the provision in its Double Tax Agreements ("DTAs") would outweigh the benefit. We have (in Appendix Two to this letter) replicated the Appendix to the Issues each measure. Set out immediately below is an overview of the Group's submissions. Detailed comments expanding on the overview are set out in Appendix One. #004 CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 2 of 18 CTGCTG The Group considers that its measures should be adopted by New Zealand only if they will be in New Zealand's national interest. Where proposals replicate existing anti- abuse measures (thereby increasing compliance costs, but without achieving a corresponding benefit), the Group does not consider that these measures should be adopted. Dual resident entities The Group does not support replacing the existing dual resident entity tie breaker provisions with a default rule that dual resident entities do not qualify for DTA relief unless the Competent Authorities agree. This amendment would not be in New . The mischief that the proposed rule targets is addressed by existing rules (and will be further addressed by the anti-avoidance provisions in the MLI). The proposed rule would, however, result in increased costs and uncertainty (and potentially double taxation) for companies that inadvertently become dual resident. If the amendments to the dual resident entity tie breaker provision are adopted, Inland Revenue should publish guidance on the Competent Authority process (including as to how New Zealand would apply that guidance in seeking to agree with the other affected country where a company will be resident for the purposes of the DTA). In addition, at least in the case of Australia (given the likelihood that most dual residence cases could be expected to arise between New Zealand and Australia) there should be a stream-lined application process or a self-assessment option based on published criteria for resolving dual residence cases. Anti-avoidance provisions The Group acknowledges that the treaty anti-abuse rules in Article 7 of the MLI are a minimum standard and will therefore be adopted with the MLI. The Group does, however, consider that changes need to be made to New Zealand's domestic law to reduce overlap and the possibility of parallel proceedings being brought under both a DTA and the domestic law general anti-avoidance rule ("GAAR"). The Group does not support the adoption of the dividend transfer transactions article (Article 8) of the MLI. This rule will cause administrative complexity for Inland Revenue and taxpayers. The Group considers that cases of manipulation of a shareholder's ownership interest to secure DTA relief can be addressed under Article 7 of the MLI. Article 8 would therefore add considerably to compliance costs for little, if any, benefit. The Group does not support the adoption of Article 9 of the MLI concerning land rich companies. As with Article 8, Article 9 would add considerably to compliance costs in circumstances where the cases in which it is intended to apply can be addressed by Article 7. In the alternative to our submission that Article 9 should not be adopted, if it is adopted, New Zealand should implement domestic law measures to reduce the additional compliance costs that will result (eg, by allowing quarterly asset values to be taken as representative of the asset values for each day in that quarter). CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 3 of 18 CTGCTG Artificial permanent establishment avoidance The Group submits that greater uncertainty will result from the expanded permanent establishment ("PE") definitions included in both the MLI and domestic law (see the proposed domestic law amendments in the Government discussion document "BEPS Transfer pricing and permanent establishment avoidance"). The proposed domestic law PE rule should not apply in cases in which an arrangement is subject to (but not caught by) the broader PE definition (resulting from Part IV of the MLI) or the anti- abuse provisions in Part III of the MLI. Dispute resolution The Group generally supports the amendments to the mutual agreement procedure ("MAP") and the provision for arbitration for cases not resolved by negotiation between the Competent Authorities. In order to make the amendments meaningful: ocases involving section BG 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007 ("ITA") should not be excluded from MAP and arbitration. To do so would effectively enable a country with a GAAR that is excluded from MAP and arbitration to also exclude from MA P a nd arbitration the extensive anti-abuse provisions included in the DTA, whic h w ould considerably weaken the DTA dispute resolution process; and othe Government should ensure that Inland Revenue is sufficiently resource d to m eet the additional demands on its Competent Authority personnel that wi ll res ult from the MLI. Other matters Inland Revenue should publish on its website consolidated versions of each Covered Tax Agreement. intended to be customer centric and to aid taxpayers in getting it right, first time. As such, Inland Revenue should invest the necessary resource to make consolidated versions of each Covered Tax Agreement available to all taxpayers. determine from when a Covered Tax Agreement has been modified and the effective date of amendments to particular provisions. Please contact us if you wish to discuss any of the matters raised in our submission. CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 4 of 18 CTGCTG For your information, the members of the Corporate Taxpayers Group are: 1.Air New Zealand Limited21.New Zealand Racing Board 2.Airways Corporation of New Zealand22.New Zealand Steel Limited 3.AMP Life Limited23.New Zealand Superannuation Fund 4.ANZ Bank New Zealand24.Opus International Consultants Limited 5.ASB Bank Limited25.Origin Energy New Zealand Limited 6.Auckland International Airport Limited26.Pacific Aluminium (New Zealand) Limited 7.Bank of New Zealand27.Powerco Limited 8.Chorus Limited28.Shell New Zealand (2011) Limited 9.Contact Energy Limited29.SKYCITY Entertainment Group Limited 10.Downer New Zealand Limited30.Sky Network Television Limited 11.Fisher & Paykel Healthcare Limited31.Spark New Zealand Limited 12.Fletcher Building Limited32.Summerset Group Holdings Limited 13.Fonterra Cooperative Group Limited33.Suncorp New Zealand 14.Genesis Energy Limited34.T & G Global Limited 15.IAG New Zealand Limited35.The Todd Corporation Limited 16.Infratil Limited36.Vodafone New Zealand Limited 17.Lion Pty Limited37.Watercare Services Limited 18.Meridian Energy38.Westpac New Zealand Limited 19.Methanex New Zealand Limited39.Z Energy Limited 20.New Zealand Post Limited40.ZESPRI International Limited We note the views in this document are a reflection of the views of the Corporate Taxpayers Group and do not necessarily reflect the views of individual members. Yours sincerely John Payne For the Corporate Taxpayers Group CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 5 of 18 CTGCTG APPENDIX ONE: DETAILED SUBMISSION POINTS 1. General comments 1.1The Group is concerned that the MLI will see an unnecessary increase in complexity and compliance costs. As with all tax policy proposals, the Group believes that the adoption of the MLI needs to be considered in the context of the overall impact to the New Zealan . consideration of tax take, attractiveness of New Zealand as an investment destination and the ease of doing business in New Zealand. New Zealand enjoys a sought after reputation as being an easy country to do business with and undertake business in. It is paramount that this reputation is protected. 1.2The Group considers that its measures should be adopted by New Zealand only if they will be in New Zealand's national interest. Where proposals replicate existing anti-abuse measures (thereby increasing compliance costs, but without achieving a corresponding benefit), the Group does not consider that these measures should be adopted. It is with this background that the Group makes the following submissions. 2.Changes to rules for determining residence OF (and DTA benefits available to) a dual resident entity (Article 4) Proposal is based on an incorrect assumption as to how cases of dual residence may arise 2.1The Issues Paper proposes to replace tie breaker provisions in existing DTAs with a provision requiring the Competent Authority of each state in which the dual resident entity is resident, to "endeavour to determine by mutual agreement" in which state the entity will be deemed to be resident for the purpose of the DTA. 1 The Group considers that this measure would reduce certainty, impose additional compliance costs and increase the risk of double taxation for New Zealand businesses in circumstances where the dual residence often results from inadvertence and does not secure a tax benefit. 2.2The changes to the dual resident entity tie breaker test are predicated on the assumption that cases of dual residence often involve tax avoidance. 2 This assumption is not reflective of the reality, at least in New Zealand. Cases of dual residence more commonly arise due to inadvertence or unavoidable changes in circumstances; in fact, so far as tax planning is concerned, the usual practice is for companies to plan not to be dual resident. 1 The Issues Paper at page 15, in discussing the effect of Article 4 of the MLI and the consequences of the Competent Authorities agreeing tax residence, states that "\[t\]he proposed provision will require \[Competent Authorities\] to agree the residence status of a \[dual resident entity\] and the \[dual resident entity\] will only be entitled to such treaty benefits as the CAs agree" \[emphasis added\]. This might be interpreted as suggesting that the Competent Authorities must first agree whether the dual resident should be deemed resident (for DTA purposes) in one or other country and then decide which treaty benefits will be allowed as a result of that residence status. This should be clarified in future Inland Revenue statements so it is clear that if the Competent Authorities agree that the dual resident is resident in a given country for DTA purposes, relief under the DTA is allowed accordingly, and only in cases where they do not so agree will it be necessary for them to determine to what extent, if any, DTA relief should be allowed. The necessary clarification could be achieved by replacing "and" (where emphasised in the quote from the Issues Paper above) with "or". 2 OECD, "Preventing the Granting of Treaty Benefits in Inappropriate Circumstances, Action 6: Final Report" (OECD Publishing, Paris, 2015) at \[47\] (page 72). The Report states that the view of many countries was that "cases where a company is a dual-resident often involve tax avoidance arrangements". CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 6 of 18 CTGCTG 2.3A typical scenario in which dual residence could arise due to inadvertence could involve an Australian incorporated subsidiary ("Aus. Co") of a New Zealand resident company ("NZ Co"). Aus. Co is intended to be tax resident solely in Australia, and so it holds its directors' meetings in Australia and has its senior executives located in (and making management decisions in) Australia. Subsequently, however, directors of Aus. Co who are based in New Zealand make strategic and management decisions for Aus. Co without formal directors' meetings being convened in Australia. This results in Aus. Co being resident in New Zealand under section YD 2(1)(d) of the ITA control of \[Aus. Co\] in New Zealand, even if the directors' decision-making also occurs outside New Zealand" (i.e., it is enough that some decision-making at director level occurs in New Zealand for the company to be deemed tax resident in New Zealand). The entity is therefore dual resident (in Australia due to incorporation and in New Zealand under section YD 2(1)(d)). 2.4Dual residence in the above example arises inadvertently. The scenario will often affect businesses expanding their operations across borders for the first time, who are not as experienced in managing cross-border tax issues. Presently, most DTAs will provide a solution; the entity will be deemed to be tax resident in the country where it has its place of effective management, and will be entitled to DTA relief on that basis. The result of the proposed rule is that entities like this Aus Co will be entitled to no DTA relief from double taxation unless the Competent Authorities of New Zealand and Australia agree otherwise. Proposal will lead to greater uncertainty and cost and increased incidence of double taxation 2.5Currently, most DTAs to which New Zealand is party contain a dual resident tie- breaker provision. The most common tie breaker provision, contained in both the UN Model DTA (Article 4) and OECD Model DTA (Article 4), is the place of effective management test. The place of effective management test allows a taxpayer to determine the jurisdiction in which they will be resident for the purposes of the DTA by reference to a single criterion. 2.6This has two beneficial consequences: (i) it allows taxpayers to plan appropriately and conduct risk assessments when expanding business offshore; and (ii) taxpayers can "self-assess" their tax residence for the purposes of their tax returns and pay the right amount of tax in the right jurisdiction. The adoption of Article 4 of the MLI will make it more difficult to plan and assess the risk of a proposed expansion and will make it impossible for dual resident companies to self-assess their tax liability without first approaching the Competent Authorities. 2.7The Group considers this unsatisfactory. The Government's Business Growth Agenda calls for opportunities for business to grow internationally by reducing domestic and offshore barriers to internationalisation. 3 The proposed amendments to the tie-breaker test seem counter-productive in this regard. 3 See Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment "The Business Growth Agenda: Towards 2025" (Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Wellington, 2015). CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 7 of 18 CTGCTG 2.8The uncertainty will result in additional costs for taxpayers who find themselves to be dual resident. These costs will be in the form of: (i) double taxation, and/or (ii) administrative costs in requesting the assistance of the Competent Authority. In some cases, the costs of seeking Competent Authority assistance will be such that taxpayers will instead accept the denial of DTA relief. For smaller businesses considering expanding offshore, the increased risk of double taxation will be a barrier to doing so. 2.9Further, Inland Revenue, too, will be subject to increased uncertainty if Article 4 is adopted, and will incur increased costs due to increased demands on the Competent Authority. Competent Authorities are already under pressure to resolve disputes under the general DTA resolution process the Mutual Agreement Procedure ("MAP") process. The current average time period for resolving a MAP complaint is 20 months. 4 While the Group recognises that the provision requiring Competent Authorities to agree in cases of dual residence is not strictly the same as MAP, the statistic nonetheless indicates that any process requiring the agreement of the Competent Authorities is unlikely to be rapidly concluded, and that further adding to the responsibilities of the Competent Authorities could result in longer timeframes generally. The mischief is addressed by other measures 2.10Considering the complexity of the amendments and the extra burden that would be imposed on Inland Revenue and taxpayers, the Group considers it important to identify the mischief that the proposed rule is designed to prevent, and consider whether that mischief is sufficiently problematic to justify the increased cost and compliance costs. On this basis, the Group considers that the proposal does not pass the cost-benefit test and so is not in New Zealand's national interest. 2.11Domestic law already contains measures to prevent tax avoidance by dual resident companies. Loss offsets by a dual resident company are precluded by section IC 7 of the Income Tax Act 2007 ("ITA") and the consolidation rules in section FM 31(1)(e) of the ITA preclude a dual resident company from joining a consolidated group (an alternative mechanism to offset losses). The anti-hybrid proposals also include measures to prevent double deductions and other hybrid mismatches stemming from hybrid mismatch arrangements. The Group submits therefore, that the mischief the proposed rule is trying to address is already addressed by other provisions of New Zealand's domestic law and by other proposals under consideration and should not be introduced into New Zealand's DTA network. 2.12Further, the MLI will introduce broadly worded anti-abuse provisions into DTAs to which the MLI applies. This will mean that within the DTA itself, as well as under domestic law, there will be provisions to address any cases in which dual resident companies are being used to secure DTA relief in inappropriate circumstances. 4 See OECD "Mutual Agreement Procedure Statistics for 2015" http://www.oecd.org/tax/dispute/map- statistics-2015.htm (accessed 29 March 2017). CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 8 of 18 CTGCTG Alternative submission: proposed solution if the dual resident tie breaker amendment is adopted 2.13If the Government nevertheless considers it necessary to adopt the proposed rule, the Group proposes the following suggestions with a view to reducing the cost and uncertainty that will result: (a) Inland Revenue should issue guidance to taxpayers setting out New Zealand's position as to when the New Zealand Competent Authority would consider an entity should be tie-broken into one or other country (ie, what are the factors that the New Zealand Competent Authority would consider when negotiating with other Competent Authorities on the question of where a dual resident entity should be agreed to be resident). (b) For states with which New Zealand has significant trading relations and in respect of which taxpayers are at greatest risk of becoming dual resident (eg, Australia), Inland Revenue should seek to negotiate a formal, public MAP decision which will set out the criteria by which dual resident entities can "self-assess" residence without having to be subject to double taxation or incur the costs of requesting Competent Authority assistance. The Group would be happy to discuss this proposal further with officials. 3.Treaty anti-abuse rules Overview 3.1The treaty anti-abuse rules in Article 7 of the MLI are a minimum standard. Of the three options available under the MLI, the principal purpose test ("PPT") appears to the Group to be most in keeping with New Zealand's existing DTA practice and domestic law. The Group therefore accepts the appropriateness of New Zealand opting for the PPT test in Covered Tax Agreements. 3.2The Group is concerned, however, that given the multiple layers of anti-avoidance measures being proposed, much greater uncertainty for taxpayers could result, for no demonstrable benefit for New Zealand. The Group's submissions that follow therefore suggest a rationalisation of the potential multiple layers of anti-abuse rules introduced in the MLI, and guidance as to the relationship between the PPT that will be introduced by the MLI and the domestic law general anti-avoidance rule ("GAAR") in section BG 1 of the ITA. Dividend transfer transactions (Article 8) 3.3The Group does not support the adoption of the dividend transfer transactions article (Article 8) of the MLI. This 365-day ownership requirement will cause administrative complexity for Inland Revenue and taxpayers. Any cases of manipulation of a shareholder's ownership interest to secure DTA relief can be addressed under Article 7 of the MLI. Article 8 would therefore add considerably to compliance costs for little, if any, benefit. CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 9 of 18 CTGCTG 3.4In the alternative to our submission above that Article 8 should not be adopted, if Article 8 is adopted, Inland Revenue should release guidance as to how the rule will work in practice and should consider domestic law amendments to facilitate compliance with Article 8. In particular, is it intended that the shareholder receive the benefit of the lower withholding rate at source only if it has already held the required shareholding for 365 days before the dividend is paid? In that case, where the higher rate is applied and the shareholder subsequently passes the 365- day period, the shareholder would need to seek a refund of over-deducted tax. Alternatively, can a company, when paying a dividend, rely on a representation that the shareholder intends to hold the interest for 365 days? In that case, any additional source country tax payable by the shareholder should the shareholder not hold the required interest for the full 365-day period should be the responsibility of the shareholder, not of the company that has paid the dividend. 3.5The administrative complexities associated with the proposed rule demonstrate the merit in our primary submission. That is, in view of the wide reaching PPT test, any benefit in adopting the rule is outweighed by the costs, such that it should not be adopted by New Zealand. Land rich company rules (Article 9) 3.6The land rich company test (eg, whether more than 50% of the value of shares in the company is derived from real property) is intended to permit a source country to tax gains on the disposal of shares in a company the value of which is mainly attributable to land situated in the source country. The proposal is that a land rich test be required to be applied on each day of the 365-day period preceding a disposal to which the alienation of property article in the DTA might apply. The concern apparently underlying Article 9 is that the company's assets can be manipulated prior to a disposal of its shares so the value of real property falls below the threshold (say 50%). 3.7The Group does not support the adoption of the rule in Article 9 of the MLI. As with Article 8, Article 9 would add to compliance costs in circumstances where the scenarios in which it is intended to apply can be addressed by Article 7. 3.8In the alternative to our submission that Article 9 should not be adopted, if it is adopted, New Zealand should implement domestic law measures to reduce the additional compliance costs that will result (eg, by allowing quarterly asset values to be taken as representative of the asset values for each day in that quarter). Guidance as to the relationship between the PPT and section BG 1 of the ITA 3.9Recent amendments to section BH 1 of the ITA provide that (in contrast to the usual position, that a DTA has effect despite anything in the ITA) a DTA (including its dispute resolution provisions) will not override section BG 1. Yet the MLI would introduce to Covered Tax Agreements a PPT which on the face of it is intended to operate as the DTA equivalent of section BG 1. CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 10 of 18 CTGCTG 3.10This layering of anti-avoidance provisions (one regime (the PPT) contained in the DTA, and a second (section BG 1) contained in domestic law and expressed to override the DTA) will be problematic. Countries party to a DTA which incorporates the PPT could reasonably expect that the PPT should be the reference point for determining whether an arrangement should be considered abusive such that DTA relief otherwise available should be denied. If a taxpayer satisfies (ie, is not caught by) the very broad PPT in a Covered Tax Agreement, it would be reasonable for that taxpayer to conclude that DTA relief should not then be denied unilaterally by New Zealand under section BG 1, the domestic law counterpart to the DTA's PPT. 3.11The correct policy result is that if a taxpayer satisfies (ie, is not caught by) the PPT in a Covered Tax Agreement, it should not be open for Inland Revenue to invoke section BG 1 to unilaterally deny DTA relief otherwise available. This could be achieved by: (a) amending section BH 1(4) so that the reference to section BG 1 applies "other than in the case of a double tax agreement that contains or is subject to Article 7 of the MLI or an anti-abuse rule substantially similar to Article 7 of the MLI"; and/or (b) Inland Revenue issuing guidance (in the form of a Standard Practice Statement) to the effect that Inland Revenue will not invoke section BG 1 to deny DTA relief otherwise available to a taxpayer if the DTA contains or is subject to Article 7 of the MLI or an anti-abuse rule substantially similar to Article 7 of the MLI. 4.Preventing the artificial avoidance of permanent establishment status 4.1The Group is concerned by the uncertainty (and increased risk of double taxation) that will result from layers of rules intended to extend the reach of the PE definition. For some DTAs, the MLI amendments may apply, and in respect of all DTAs, the separately proposed domestic law PE avoidance rule could apply. 4.2Further consideration should be given to the relationship between these measures and to the uncertainty that will result from multiple layers of rules with the same broad objective. The Group submits that Inland Revenue should include a provision in the proposed domestic PE avoidance rule confirming that if an entity does not have a PE under the provisions of a DTA containing the expanded PE definition (Part IV of the MLI) read with the anti-abuse provisions in Part III of the MLI, then the domestic law PE avoidance rule will not apply. 5.Improved mechanism for effective dispute resolution Greater resourcing will be required to meet the increase in cases requiring Competent Authority involvement 5.1The Group supports the amendments to MAP and the inclusion of arbitration. But for the improvements to dispute resolution to be meaningful, the Government must ensure that the Competent Authority is sufficiently resourced to meet the expected increase in cases requiring Competent Authority determination, and/or which are referred to MAP and arbitration. CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 11 of 18 CTGCTG GAAR should not be excluded from arbitration 5.2The Group also submits that cases involving the GAAR should not be excluded from the arbitration process. The introduction of the PPT will mean that affected DTAs will have embedded in them very similar concepts to the concepts underlying the GAAR. (See further the discussion at paragraphs 3.9 to 3.11 above.) Accordingly, the correct policy outcome is that any disputed denial of DTA relief, whether in reliance on the PPT (in the DTA) or in reliance on the GAAR, should be subject to the same disputes resolution process in the DTA. 5.3The OECD appears to have recognised the same point in its BEPS Action 14 Final Report, in recommending that whether DTA relief should be denied (whether under a DTA or a domestic law anti-abuse provision) should not be for one country to determine unilaterally, but rather should be able to be referred to MAP: 5 Countries should provide MAP access in cases in which there is a disagreement between the taxpayer and the tax authorities making the adjustment as to whether the conditions for the application of a treaty anti-abuse provision have been met or as to whether the application of a domestic law anti-abuse provision is in conflict with the provisions of a treaty. \[Emphasis added\] 5.4If the GAAR is excluded from arbitration, any dispute as to the application of a DTA which raises questions under a PPT could likewise be excluded from arbitration, since Inland Revenue could be expected to invoke the GAAR in parallel with the PPT. This would materially limit the value of the arbitration provision, and lead to disputes being pursued through parallel processes (some issues via MAP and arbitration, and some via the courts). Further, to exclude consideration of the GAAR from arbitration would significantly diminish the utility of MAP, since arbitration is in effect an enhancement to MAP, providing increased assurance the MAP will lead to an outcome. 5.5Excluding the GAAR from the provisions of MAP and arbitration is, in the Group's view, contrary to the purpose of MAP and arbitration as an alternative dispute resolution process. The BEPS Action 14 Final Report emphasised that the MAP was to provide a disputes resolution process which was an alternative to and "independent from the ordinary legal remedies available under domestic law". 6 5.6Many states will require that domestic law processes be stayed before they will consider a MAP complaint. If Inland Revenue invokes the GAAR in parallel with invoking the PPT, and the GAAR question cannot be subject to MAP and arbitration, then the domestic law proceedings may not be stayed, further complicating the taxpayer's access to MAP and arbitration on other issues. 5 OECD "Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective, Action 14: Final Report" (OECD Publishing, Paris, 2015) at recommendation 1.2 \[emphasis added\]. 6 OECD "Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective, Action 14: Final Report" (OECD Publishing, Paris, 2015) at \[10\]. CTG Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent BEPS 7 April 2017 Page 12 of 18 CTGCTG 5.7Finally, to exclude the GAAR from arbitration raises the prospect that New Zealand and other countries might be able to tactically invoke the GAAR as a means of preventing the taxpayer from accessing MAP and arbitration in the very cases in which those processes may be of most value to the taxpayer. This would leave the taxpayer, in such cases, without access to MAP (a process which the OECD has described as being "of fundamental importance to the proper application and interpretation of the \[DTA\]"). 7 It would also mark a less cooperative (and more unilateral) approach to international base erosion and profit-shifting concerns, in contrast to the cooperative approach New Zealand has supported to date. 6.Other matters 6.1Inland Revenue should publish on its website consolidated versions of each Covered Tax Agreement. This would be consistent with Inland Revenue's compliance model which is intended to be customer centric and to assist taxpayers in getting it right. Taxpayers should have equal access to DTAs and should not need to pay for copies in an easy to understand format or to rely on commercial publishers to make consolidated versions available 6.2Inland Revenue should maintain a list on its website of "entry into effect " for each New Zealand Covered Tax Agreement so that taxpayers can easily determine the effective date(s) of the application of the MLI for a Covered Tax Agreement. 7 OECD "Making Dispute Resolution Mechanisms More Effective, Action 14: Final Report" (OECD Publishing, Paris, 2015) at \[10\].