BEPS documents release - August 2017: #14 Withheld under section 9(2)(a) of the Official Information Act 1982 Withheld under section 9(2)(a) of the Official Information Act 1982 In Confidence Office of the Minister of Finance Office of the Minister of Revenue Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee BEPS – strengthening our interest limitation rules Proposal 1. This paper seeks Cabinet approval to strengthen New Zealand’s rules that prevent excess interest deductions being taken in New Zealand. This paper is part of a comprehensive package of measures to address base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS). Executive summary 2. The use of debt is one of the simplest BEPS strategies. Multinationals with excessive levels of debt, or with related-party debt with high interest rates, have large interest deductions leaving little taxable profit in New Zealand. Robust rules limiting the use of debt (and the interest rates of that debt) are important base protection measures. 3. We recommend that Cabinet agree in principle to two major reforms to our interest limitation rules: • a restricted transfer pricing rule for setting the allowable interest rate on related- party loans from a non-resident to a New Zealand borrower; and • tightening the rules that set the debt levels allowed in New Zealand for taxpayers with international connections (the thin capitalisation rules) – in particular, setting the allowable debt level with reference to the taxpayer’s assets net of its non-debt liabilities. 4. We also recommend several minor improvements to the rules to ensure they are robust and fit for purpose. 5. These changes follow the Government discussio n document BEPS – strengthening our interest limitation rules (March 2017). In general, submitters on the discussion document acknowledged the need to respond to BEPS concerns but most did not agree with the specific proposals put forward. 6. Some of the proposals have been modified in response to these submissions. In particular, the approach for setting the allowable interest rate on related-party loans is different to that proposed in the discussion document. We anticipate that this new approach will address many, but not all, of submitters’ concerns. 7. There are some technical elements to these reforms that could benefit from further discussion with stakeholders. We therefore request that authority be delegated to the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Revenue to finalise the reforms. Treasury:3750405v1 2 8. The forecast revenue from implementing these changes is $45m in 2018/19 and $90m per annum from 2019/20. Note, however, that one technical detail to be canvassed in the further discussion with stakeholders could reduce the forecast revenue by up to $10m per annum. Background 9. The use of debt is one of the simplest BEPS strategies. Multinationals with excessive levels of debt, or with related-party debt with high interest rates, are able to take large interest deductions. This result s in litt le taxable profit being left in New Zealand. Robust rules limiting the use of debt (and the interest rates of that debt) are important base protection measures. 10. Accordingly, in March this year the Government released the discussion document BEPS – Strengthening our interest limitation rules. There were two key proposals: one to strengthen how related-party debt is priced, and one tightening the rules governing allowable debt levels. 11. The discussion document also recommended several minor improvements to New Zealand’s interest limitation rules to ensure they are robust and fit for purpose. Comment 12. The majority of multinationals operating in New Zealand have relatively conservative debt positions, and the Government is committed to making sure New Zealand remains an attractive place for them to do business. 13. However, there are some multinationals that deliberately attempt to minimise their tax payments in New Zealand by engaging in BEPS strategies, such as by having related-party debt with excessive interest rates. These multinationals should not be allowed to exploit weaknesses in the current rules to achieve a competitive advantage over more compliant multinationals or domestic firms. 14. Accordingly, we recommend changes to New Zealand’s interest limitation rules, most significantly: • a restricted transfer pricing rule for setting the allowable interest rate on related- party loans from a non-resident to a New Zealand borrower; and • tightening the thin capitalisation rules, which set the debt levels allowed in New Zealand for taxpayers either with foreign parents (the inbound rules) or foreign subsidiaries (the outbound rules) – in particular, setting the allowable debt level with reference to the taxpayer’s assets net of its non-debt liabilities. Restricted transfer pricing 15. When borrowing from a third party (such as a bank), commercial pressure will drive the borrower to obtain a low interest rate. The same pressure does not necessarily exist in a related-party context, such as when a New Zealand subsidiary borrows from its foreig n parent. A rule to constrain the interest rate of such debt is necessary. Transfer pricing rules provide the current constraint on interest rates. 3 16. Broadly speaking, transfer pricing a loan agreement involves determining (hypothetically) the interest rate a third party lender would be willing to lend at, given the terms and conditions of the related-party loan. It is a fact specific and resource intensive exercise and can be manipulated (for example, by adding terms and conditions to the related- party loan that are not frequently seen between unrelated parties). We note that commentators such as Richard Vann, a professor of tax at the University of Sydney, have said that ordinary transfer pricing is unsuited to pricing related-party financing transactions. 17. For these reasons, the international consensus is moving away from using ordinary transfer pricing as the primary mechanism to limit the interest rates on related-party debt. The OECD, for example, has recommended that countries adopt a simple formulaic approach for limiting interest deductions, which would largely eliminate the advantage of using related- party debt with excessive interest rates (this approach was raised in consultation but was not supported by submitters as it would make a taxpayer’s allowable interest deductions volatile. Instead, as outlined below, we are recommending that the current rules for setting allowable debt levels be buttressed by rules that ensure related-party interest rates are appropriate). 18. Accordingly, we recommend that the allowable interest rate for inbound related-party loans be determined under a restricted transfer pricing methodology. Inbound related-party loans would be priced following the standard transfer pricing methodology. However, it would contain two additional elements to clarify that: • There is a rebuttable presumption that the New Zealand subsidiary would be supported by its foreign parent; and • All circumstances, terms, and conditions that could result in an excessive interest rate will be required to be ignored – unless the taxpayer can demonstrate that they have substantial third party debt featuring those terms and conditions. 19. The combined effect of these additional elements is that the interest rate on related-party debt will generally be in line with the interest rate facing the New Zealand borrower’s foreign parent. 20. This restricted transfer pricing rule would be coupled with a safe harbour, which would be based on the interest rate cap as initially proposed. This could be provided administratively. A related-party loan with an interest rate that is the same as the interest rate facing the borrower’s foreign parent would automatically be considered acceptable. This safe harbour would be attractive to many companies as it is both simple and provides certainty. 21. We note that the Australian Taxation Office has recently released administrative guidelines which outline a similar approach for limiting related-party interest rates (albeit Australia is implementing this approach as an operational policy, rather than a law change). Private sector consultation 22. This restricted transfer pricing rule is different to the proposal suggested in the March discussion document. The original proposal was a hard rule to cap the interest rate a foreign parent could charge its New Zealand subsidiary based on the foreign parent’s credit rating (an “interest rate cap”). 23. We consider that the restricted transfer pricing rule is a more workable way of achieving essentially the same objective – ensuring the interest rate on related-party debt is in line with what would actually be paid on third party debt. While the methods (restricted 4 transfer pricing and the interest rate cap) are different in approach, the outcome of both will generally be the same – with differences only at the margin. Accordingly, both approaches have the same revenue impact. 24. Submitters on the March discussion document did not support the original proposal. Many submitters argued that a new approach for pricing related-party debt is unnecessary, noting that the Government proposed to strengthen the transfer pricing rules generally (in the other March discussion document BEPS – transfer pricing and permanent establishment avoidance). 25. Some submissions highlighted the consequences of adopting a blunt rule in the nature of the cap. These include concerns that: • the cap is not a good proxy for an arm’s length interest rate in some situations and so could result in double taxation; • the cap would deny deductions even when the amount of debt in the subsidiary was low; • the cap may increase compliance costs, for example, where a foreign parent has no credit rating (about half of New Zealand’s largest foreign-owned businesses are owned by companies with no credit rating); and • the proposal involves different rules for firms owned by a group of non-residents rather than a single foreign parent, which creates perceptions of unfairness. 26. It should be noted that the restricted transfer pricing rule we are recommending will address many, but not all, of submitters’ concerns because it is still a significant departure from using ordinary transfer pricing. Accordingly, we expect it will be more acceptable compared to the originally proposed interest rate cap because: • it allo ws for some limit ed flexibilit y – meaning the allowable interest rate can depart from the cost of funds facing the foreign parent if that is appropriate in the circumstances; and • it would be subject to the Mutual Agreement Procedure under New Zealand’s Double Tax Agreements, meaning taxpayers who consider that the new rule is inconsistent with the relevant treaty could seek resolution. This will address double taxation concerns. We do not, however, expect this will occur with any frequency because of the shift in the international consensus on what is acceptable in relation to the pricing of related-party debt. Allowable debt levels in the thin capitalisation rules 27. New Zealand has rules to prevent the excessive use of debt by foreign-owned ent it ies operating in New Zealand (inbound investment) and New Zealand-owned ent it ies wit h international operations (outbound investment). Interest deductions are denied to the extent that the entity’s debt level with reference to its assets is determined to be excessive. 28. The March discussion document proposed changing this, so that a taxpayer’s maximum debt level is set with reference to the taxpayer’s assets net of its non-debt liabilities (that is, its liabilities other than its interest bearing debts). Some common examples of non-debt liabilities are accounts payable, reserves and provisions, and deferred tax liabilities. 5 29. The core objectives of the thin capitalisation rules are better served with the non-debt liability adjustment. Under the current rules, where non-debt liabilities are ignored, companies are able to have high levels of debt (and therefore high interest deductions) relative to the capital invested in the company. The current treatment of non-debt liabilities also mean the rules apply unevenly across companies: companies with the same level of profit or loss can have very different thin capitalisation outcomes, depending on their non-debt liabilities. 30. In addition, one of the objectives of the thin capitalisation rules (ensuring that a taxpayer is limited to a commercial level of debt) is undermined by the current treatment of non-debt liabilities. A third party lender, when assessing the credit worthiness of a borrower, would take into account its non-debt liabilities. 31. Australia requires this same adjustment for non-debt liabilities. Private sector consultation 32. This proposal was accepted by some submitters but opposed by others who argued, for example, that the proposal amounts to a substantial reduction in the amount of deductible debt allowable under the thin capitalisation rules. Overall, this proposal was much less contentious than the interest rate cap. 33. None of the submissions against the core proposal convinced us that the analysis above, suggesting that the non-debt liability adjustment is appropriate, is incorrect. Accordingly, we recommend that the proposed adjustment to the allowable debt level under the thin capitalisation rule proceed. That is, a taxpayer’s allowable debt level under the rules should be set with reference to their assets net of their non-debt liabilities. 34. A near-universal comment from submitters was that certain non-debt liabilities – most significantly deferred tax liabilities – should be carved out from the proposed non-debt liability adjustment. Deferred tax is an accounting concept. Accounting standards require that companies recognise deferred tax on their balance sheets in certain situations. In principle, a deferred tax liability is supposed to represent future tax payments that a taxpayer will be required to make. Submitters argued that this is often not the case – deferred tax liabilities are frequently technical accounting entries and do not reflect future tax obligations. Submitters also pointed to the rules in Australia, which do include a carve-out for deferred tax liabilities and assets. 35. We recommend further consultation on whether deferred tax should be carved-out from this non-debt liability adjustment. Many, but not all, deferred tax liabilities represent a genuine requirement that tax on current accounting profits will be payable in the future. Given the concerns raised by submitters, further consultation on this technical detail would be beneficial. Other changes 36. We recommend five other changes to the thin capitalisation rules: • a special rule for infrastructure projects (such as public private partnerships) that are controlled by a single non-resident; • a de minimis for the inbound thin capitalisation rules; • reducing the ability for companies owned by a group of non-residents to use related-party debt; 6 • removing the ability to use asset valuations for the thin capitalisation rules that differ from those reported in a firm’s financial accounts; and • removing the ability to measure assets and debts on the final day of a firm’s income year. 37. These measures were all discussed in the March discussion document. Some were supported by submitters, while others were opposed. Where they were opposed, we are recommending changes to the proposals which will, in general, address submitters’ concerns. Rule for infrastructure projects 38. We recommend a special rule that allows all of a taxpayer’s third party debt to be deductible even if the debt levels exceed the normal thin capitalisation limits, provided the debt is non-recourse with interest funded so lely from pro ject inco me. 39. This will allow a wider group of investors to participate in public-private partnerships without interest expense denial than has been possible previously. 40. This rule was well received by submitters; however, some technical issues have been raised which we will consult further on. De minimis for the inbound rules 41. The thin capitalisation rules that apply to New Zealand-owned taxpayers with foreign operations (the outbound rules) has a de minimis (the rules do not apply if a taxpayer has interest deductions of less than $1 million). The thin capitalisation rules that apply to foreign- owned taxpayers (the inbound rules) do not have a similar de minimis. 42. We recommend the current de minimis in the outbound rules be extended to taxpayers subject to the inbound rules, provided the taxpayer has only third party debt. This proposal is to reduce compliance costs for small foreign-owned entities that have a low risk of BEPS. 43. This proposal was generally supported by submitters. Allowable debt levels for companies owned by a group of non-residents 44. At present, when an entity is controlled by a group of non-residents acting together, its allowable debt level is the greater of: • 60 percent; and • 110 percent of its third party debt. 45. However, this means that a taxpayer with high levels of third party debt can be funded with almo st no equit y. For example, a project funded 90 percent with third party debt could have 9 percent shareholder debt and only 1 percent equity. 46. To address this, we recommend changing this test so that, if an entity has a debt level in excess of 60 percent, the interest deductions on its related-party debt should be denied to the extent the entity’s debt level exceeded 60 percent. This proposal was generally accepted by submitters. 7 47. The March discussion document proposed that this change be grandparented, as the rules it relates to (for non-residents acting together) have only just taken effect. We recommend that the precise design of this grandparenting be subject to further consultation with stakeholders, with decisions on its final design being delegated to the Ministers of Finance and Revenue. Asset valuations 48. In general, the thin capitalisation rules are based on the value of a company’s assets as reported in its financial statements. However, a company may use the net current value of an asset as an alternative to its financial statement value, provided that would be allowable under generally accepted accounting principles. 49. While it is permissible to use an asset’s net current value, the thin capitalisation rules set out what is required if taxpayers utilise this option. Accordingly, we recommend that this new net current valuation option be available only if certain criteria are met – such as if the valuation is from an independent expert valuer. Agency consultation 50. Inland Revenue and Treasury officials have consulted with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment on this Cabinet paper. Financial implications, human rights, administrative impacts, legislative implications, and publicity 51. These are set out in the accompanying covering Cabinet paper for the overall BEPS package (Tax measures to prevent base erosion and profit shifting). Impact Analysis Requirements 52. Cabinet's Impact Analysis Requirements apply to these proposals and a Regulatory Impact Assessment is required. This has been prepared by Inland Revenue and is attached. 53. The Quality Assurance reviewer at Inland Revenue has reviewed the Regulatory Impact Assessment and considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Regulatory Impact Assessment meets the Quality Assurance criteria. 8 Recommendations 54. We recommend that the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee: 1. Note that in March this year the Government released a discussion document called BEPS – strengthening our interest limitation rules which proposed some detailed measures to improve our ability to tax multinationals that operate in New Zealand. 2. Note that in response to submissions we have made the proposed measures better targeted at the BEPS concerns without reducing their overall effectiveness. 3. Agree that the interest rate on inbound related-party loans should be set using a restricted transfer pricing rule, whereby the interest rate is set under transfer pricing but ignoring all surrounding circumstances, terms, and conditions that could result in an excessive interest rate unless similar terms apply to significant amounts of third party debt, and with the rebuttable presumption that the borrower would be supported by its foreign parent. 4. Agree that a taxpayer’s allowable debt level in the thin capitalisation rules should be set with reference to its assets less its non-debt liabilities. 5. Agree that the de minimis in the outbound thin capitalisation rules, which provides an exemption from the rules for groups with interest deductions of $1 million or less, be made available also to foreign-controlled taxpayers provided they have no owner-linked debt. 6. Agree that an exemption should be provided from the thin capitalisation rules for certain infrastructure projects funded entirely with third party limited recourse loans. 7. Agree that, when an entity is controlled by a group of non-residents acting together, interest deductions on any related-party debt should be denied to the extent the entity’s debt level exceeds 60 percent. 8. Agree that clear legislative requirements be developed for when taxpayers choose to value their assets for thin capitalisation purposes on a basis other than that used in their financial accounts. 9. Agree that an anti-avoidance rule should be inserted into the thin capitalisation rules, to apply when a taxpayer substantially repays a loan just before the end o f the year. 10. Note that the fiscal consequences of the above measures are set out in the covering Cabinet paper for the overall BEPS package (Tax measures to prevent base erosion and profit shifting). 11. Delegate authority to the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Revenue to make final decisions on the detailed design of the above measures. 12. Authorise the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Revenue jointly to take final decisions on the extent to which deferred tax liabilities are included in non- debt liabilities, up to a limit of reducing the level of expected revenue increases 9 anticipated by the BEPS measures as set out in recommendation 7 in the accompanying Cabinet paper Tax Measures To Prevent Base Erosion And Profit Shifting by up to $10 million per annum 13. Agree that the results of the decisions in recommendations 3-12 be included in a BEPS taxation bill to be introduced to Parliament before the end of 2017. Authorised for lodgement Hon Steven Joyce Minister of Finance Hon Judith Collins Minister of Revenue In Confidence Office of the Minister of Finance Office of the Minister of Revenue Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee BEPS – transfer pricing and permanent establishment avoidance Proposal 1. This paper seeks Cabinet approval to introduce new tax rules to prevent permanent establishment avoidance, strengthen our transfer pricing rules, and help Inland Revenue investigate uncooperative multinationals. This paper is part of a comprehensive package of measures to address base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS). Executive summary 2. Some large multinationals are currently using tax arrangements which allow them to report low taxable profits in New Zealand despite carrying on significant economic activity here. 3. In March this year, the Government released a discussion document called BEPS – Transfer pricing and permanent establishment avoidance to consult on proposals to combat these arrangements. Many of these proposals are similar to tax reforms that Australia has introduced in recent years. They are also broadly consistent with the OECD’s Action Plan on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS Action Plan). 4. Submissions and workshops with the private sector were used to refine the proposals and better target them at the BEPS activities we are concerned about, whilst reducing the compliance costs and other unintended impacts on taxpayers engaging in ordinary, commercial dealings. 5. We recommend that nearly all of the proposals in the discussion document proceed, subject to some changes following consultation. The most significant changes made to the original proposals as a result of consultation were: • The proposed permanent establishment (PE) avoidance rule should be more narrowly targeted at avoidance arrangements. We would like to consult further as to how best to achieve this. • Clarificat ion of the circumstances in which Inland Revenue would be able to reconstruct a taxpayer’s transfer pricing position. We recommend clarifying that the test for reconstructing an arrangement would be based on the corresponding test in the OECD’s transfer pricing guidelines. • The proposal to require disputed tax to be paid earlier should not proceed. This is because we consider it to be unnecessary in light of the current “use of money” interest rate regime. 6. These changes are likely to be welcomed by submitters and do not reduce the overall effectiveness of the proposed reforms. 2 7. We recommend Cabinet delegate authority to the Ministers of Finance and Revenue to make final decisio ns on the detailed design of the proposed rules. As we continue to design the detail of the proposals there will be further targeted consultation with interested parties. 8. The forecast tax revenue from implementing the transfer pricing and PE avoidance measures is $25m in 2018/19 and $50m per annum from 2019/20. Some o f this revenue has already been included in the Budget 2017 forecasts. Background 9. In February this year, Cabinet agreed to release the Government discussion document BEPS – Transfer pricing and permanent establishment avoidance (CAB-17-MIN-0041 refers). 10. The discussion document, which was released in March 2017, consulted on proposals to combat aggressive tax strategies which allow some mult inat ionals to report low taxable profits in New Zealand despite carrying on significant economic activity here. These strategies involve: • Tax structuring: In order for New Zealand to tax a non-resident on its sales here, the non-resident must have a taxable presence (a permanent establishment or “PE”) in New Zealand. However, non-residents can structure their affairs to avoid such a taxable presence, even when they are involved in significant economic activity here (PE avoidance). Non-residents can also enter into arrangements with related parties that reduce their taxable profits in New Zealand, but lack economic substance (transfer pricing avoidance). • Creating enforcement barriers: It is difficult and resource intensive to assess and engage in disputes with mult inat ionals in pract ice. This is due to the highly factual nature of the issues and the difficulties Inland Revenue faces in obtaining the relevant information. 11. The OECD and the G20 are also concerned about these kinds of BEPS strategies, and have recommended measures to address them in their 15 point BEPS Action Plan. These include: • a widened definit ion of “permanent establishment” for double tax agreements (DTAs), to counter PE avoidance (however this will only be included in a DTA if both countries agree); and • updated transfer pricing guidelines, to counter profit shifting. Comment 12. We have developed a package of proposed tax law changes to combat transfer pricing and PE avoidance. The main elements of the proposed reform package are: • The introduction of a new PE avoidance rule that will prevent multinationals from structuring their operations to avoid having a PE in New Zealand where one exists in substance. • Stronger “source rules” so New Zealand has a greater ability to tax New Zealand- sourced income. • Stronger transfer pricing rules which will adjust related party transactions if they do not align with the actual substance of the multinational’s economic activities. We also 3 propose shifting the burden of proof onto the taxpayer (rather than Inland Revenue) for proving that their related party dealings are consistent with those that would be agreed by third parties operating at arm’s length, and extending the time bar (the period of time which Inland Revenue has to reassess a taxpayer) from four years to seven years for transfer pricing. • A range of administrative measures that will strengthen Inland Revenue’s powers to investigate large mult inat ionals (with at least EUR €750m o f glo bal revenues). These are similar to some of the administrative powers provided under the UK and Australia’s Diverted Profit Taxes but New Zealand’s administrative measures are more targeted at the practical barriers faced by tax investigators as they will only apply when a mult inat ional does not cooperate with a tax investigation. 13. Many of these proposals are similar to tax reforms that Australia has introduced in recent years. They are also broadly consistent with the OECD’s BEPS Action Plan, although the specific proposals are tailored for the New Zealand environment to address issues that Inland Revenue has identified when investigating multinationals. Private sector consultation 14. 15 submitters provided written submissions on the discussion document. The Treasury and Inland Revenue also met with six of these submitters to discuss their submissions. General reaction 15. Overall, most submitters accepted in principle the need for measures to address the transfer pricing and PE avoidance issues identified in the discussion document. However, they did raise issues with certain features of the proposed measures and made suggestions to make them more certain and better targeted. 16. Two of the 15 submitters welcomed the proposals as a positive step by the Government to ensure that all large multinationals are paying their fair share of tax. 17. The other 13 submitters were tax advisors or represent mult inationals that could be negatively affected by the proposals. Their submissions were critical of some of the measures. 18. Some submitters argued that the proposals could have a detrimental effect on New Zealand being an attractive investment destination and should not be implemented. As noted in the accompanying covering Cabinet Paper (Tax measures to prevent base erosion and profit shifting), there will be additional tax and compliance costs for some investors but these additional costs will mostly be borne by taxpayers engaging in BEPS activities and the overall benefits to New Zealand of addressing BEPS outweigh these costs. 19. As expected, most of the submitters opposed the administrative proposals to increase Inland Revenue's powers to investigate multinationals. However, we consider these new powers are necessary to ensure Inland Revenue can effectively enforce the new rules. These new powers include: • Expanding Inland Revenue's ability to request information that is held by a related group member offshore. Submitters considered this proposal could unfairly penalise a New Zealand entity that may not be able to get the informat ion fro m their mult inat ional group members. However, we consider it is unacceptable for Inland Revenue’s investigations to be frustrated because a multinational group fails to provide information that is under its control. 4 • Shifting the burden of proof for transfer pricing onto the taxpayer (rather than Inland Revenue) for proving that their related party dealings are consistent with those that would be agreed by third parties operating at arm’s length. Submitters considered Inland Revenue had information regarding comparable transactions and should bear the burden of proof. However, shifting the burden of proof is consistent with the fact that the taxpayer holds the relevant information on their own transfer pricing practices. The burden of proof is already on the taxpayer for other tax matters and is also on the taxpayer for transfer pricing matters in most other OECD and G20 countries, including Australia. Because most multinationals already prepare transfer pricing documentation that satisfies the burden of proof for other countries, the additional compliance costs from this change are not expected to be substantial. • Extending the time bar (the period of time which Inland Revenue has to adjust a taxpayer’s transfer pricing position) from four years to seven years for transfer pricing. Submitters opposed this extension on the basis that it increased uncertainty and was out of step with the general time bar, which applies to other areas of tax. However, we are continuing to recommend the seven year rule. Having a longer time bar for transfer pricing cases is consistent with both Australia and Canada (who also have a special seven year time bar for transfer pricing) and reflects the information asymmetry that exists in transfer pricing cases (especially where taxpayers may hold relevant information offshore). Changes made as a result of consultation 20. In response to submissions, we have updated the proposals to address many of the submitters’ concerns while ensuring the measures are just as effective at combatting BEPS. 21. Many submissions focused on when the PE avoidance rule would apply. Submitters considered the proposal outlined in the discussion document applied too broadly and could have unintended impacts on compliant taxpayers engaging in ordinary, commercial dealings. 22. We consider the PE avoidance rule should be more narrowly targeted at avoidance arrangements. We would like to consult further as to how best to achieve this. 23. Submitters also pointed out that the OECD has updated their model DTA to address PE avoidance and New Zealand is currently in the process of adopting this into some of our tax treaties by signing the OECD’s Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent Base Erosion and Profit Shifting and through negotiating new tax treaties. We agree that the domestic law PE avoidance rule will only be necessary when the relevant tax treaty does not yet include the OECD’s new recommendation and propose narrowing the application of rule accordingly. 24. The PE avoidance rule would apply notwithstanding the relevant DTAs (that don’t yet include the OECD’s new model PE rule). We consider that this is acceptable for two reasons: • The OECD’s commentary to their model DTA contemplates that countries can adopt anti-avoidance rules and states that, as a general rule, there will be no conflict between such anti-avoidance provisions and the provisions of a DTA. An existing example of this is New Zealand’s General Anti-Avoidance Rule which explicitly overrides our DTAs to allow New Zealand to combat tax avoidance arrangements. The PE avoidance rule would be a specific anti-avoidance rule, which would also be consistent with the principle in the OECD’s commentary. 5 • The UK and Australia have already implemented similar PE avoidance rules in their domestic laws which override their DTAs and their treaty partners have not challenged this. 25. Another major point raised by submitters was the need to clarify the circumstances in which Inland Revenue would be able to reconstruct a taxpayer’s transfer pricing position. We recommend clarifying that the test for reconstructing an arrangement would be based on the corresponding test in the OECD’s transfer pricing guidelines. 26. Other significant changes made as a result of consultation were: • The anti-avoidance source rule will be more narrowly targeted at the existing issues Inland Revenue has identified with the source rules. • We have decided not to proceed with the proposal to require multinationals to pay disputed tax upfront as we agree with submitters that the existing “use of money” interest rates that Inland Revenue charges on unpaid tax provide a sufficient incentive to pay tax that is in dispute. 27. The above changes will make the rules more certain and better targeted and are likely to be welco med by submitters. 28. We also recommend widening the scope of the original proposal to deem an amount of income to have a New Zealand source under our domestic legislation if we have a right to tax the income under a DTA. The rule proposed in the discussion document was limited to income covered by the PE and royalty articles of our DTAs. We should extend the rule to all types of income that we can tax under a DTA – as Australia does. This ensures we can exercise a taxing right that we have negotiated under a DTA. We will consult further on this wider proposal in the next round of consultation. 29. These recommended changes will not affect the originally forecast revenue from implementing the transfer pricing and PE avoidance measures, which is $25m in 2018/19 and $50m per annum from 2019/20 (some of this revenue has already been included in the Budget 2017 forecasts). 30. We recommend Cabinet delegate authority to the Ministers of Finance and Revenue to make final decisions on the detailed design of the proposed rules. As we continue to design the detail of the proposals there will be further targeted consultation with interested parties. Agency consultation 31. Inland Revenue and Treasury officials have consulted with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment on this Cabinet paper. Financial implications, human rights, administrative impacts, legislative implications, publicity 32. These are set out in the accompanying covering Cabinet paper for the overall BEPS package (Tax measures to prevent base erosion and profit shifting). 6 Impact Analysis Requirements 33. Cabinet's Impact Analysis Requirements apply to these proposals and a Regulatory Impact Assessment is required. This has been prepared by Inland Revenue and is attached. 34. The Quality Assurance reviewer at Inland Revenue has reviewed the Regulatory Impact Assessment and considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Regulatory Impact Assessment meets the Quality Assurance criteria. Recommendations 35. We recommend that the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee: 1. Note that in March this year the Government released a discussion document called BEPS – transfer pricing and permanent establishment avoidance which proposed some detailed measures to improve our ability to tax mult inationals that operate in New Zealand. 2. Note that in response to submissions we have made the proposed measures better targeted at the BEPS concerns without reducing the overall effectiveness of the proposed reforms. 3. Agree to introduce a new PE avoidance rule that will apply to large multinationals that structure their businesses to avoid having a PE (taxable presence) in New Zealand. 4. Agree to expand and strengthen the rules for taxing New Zealand-sourced income by: • deeming certain amounts of income to have a source in New Zealand if New Zealand has a right to tax that income under any applicable DTA; • introducing an anti-avoidance source rule which will broadly provide that, where another group member carries on a non-resident’s business in New Zealand, the non-resident will be deemed to carry on that business itself for the purpose of determining whether its income from New Zealand customers has a New Zealand source; and • addressing a potential weakness of the life insurance source rules by ensuring that no deductions are available for the reinsurance of life policies if the premium income on that policy is not taxable in New Zealand, including where the income is not subject to New Zealand tax by operation of a DTA. 5. Agree to strengthen the transfer pricing rules so they align with the OECD’s transfer pricing guidelines and Australia’s transfer pricing rules. This involves amending New Zealand’s transfer pricing rules so that: • they disregard legal form if it does not align with the actual economic substance of the transaction; • they provide Inland Revenue with a power to reconstruct transfer pricing arrangements which are not commercially rational because they include unrealistic terms that third parties would not be willing to agree to; • the legislation specifically refers to arm’s length conditions; 7 • they refer to the latest OECD transfer pricing guidelines as guidance for how the rules are applied; • the new legislation codifies the requirement for large multinationals to provide Inland Revenue with the information required to comply with the OECD’s country-by-country reporting initiative; • the time bar that limits Inland Revenue’s ability to adjust a taxpayer’s transfer pricing position is increased to seven years (in line with Australia); • the burden of proof for demonstrating that a taxpayer’s transfer pricing position aligns with arm’s length conditions is shifted from Inland Revenue to the taxpayer (consistent with the burden of proof being on the taxpayer for other tax matters); and • in addition to applying to transactions between related parties, the transfer pricing rules will also apply when non-resident investors “act in concert” to effectively control a New Zealand entity, such as through a private equity manager. 6. Agree to strengthen Inland Revenue’s powers to investigate large mult inationals (with at least EUR €750m of global revenues) that do not cooperate with a tax investigation by amending the Tax Administration Act 1994 to allow Inland Revenue to: • more readily assess the multinational’s tax position based on the information available to Inland Revenue at the time; • collect any tax owed by a member of a large multinational group from any wholly-owned group member, provided the non-resident fails to pay the tax itself; • use section 17 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 to request information that is held offshore by another group member of the large multinational group; • use section 21 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 to deem an amount of income to be allocated to a New Zealand group member or PE of a large multinational group in cases where they have failed to adequately respond to an information request in relation to New Zealand sourced income (currently the existing power only applies in respect of deductible payments); and • impose a new civil penalty of up to $100,000 for large multinational groups which fail to provide requested information (which replaces the current $12,000 maximum criminal penalty). 7. Note that the fiscal consequences of the above measures are set out in the covering Cabinet paper for the overall BEPS package (Tax measures to prevent base erosion and profit shifting). 8. Delegate authority to the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Revenue to make final decisio ns on the detailed design of the above measures. 9. Agree that the results of the decisions in recommendations 3-6 and 8 be included in a BEPS taxation bill to be introduced to Parliament before the end of 2017. 8 Authorised for lodgement Hon Steven Joyce Minister of Finance Hon Judith Collins Minister of Revenue In confidence Office of the Minister of Finance Office of the Minister of Revenue Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee BEPS – addressing hybrid mismatch arrangements Proposal 1. This paper seeks Cabinet approval to introduce new tax rules to address the problem of hybrid mismatch arrangements. This paper is part of a comprehensive package of measures to address base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS). Executive summary 2. Hybrid mismatch arrangements are, broadly speaking, cross-border arrangements that exploit differences in the tax treatment of an entity or instrument under the laws of two or more countries. The result of hybrid mismatch arrangements is less aggregate tax revenue collected in the jurisdictions to which the arrangement relates. 3. The OECD, as part of its base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) Action Plan, published in late 2015 its final report on hybrid mismatch arrangements. This report recommended that countries enact a comprehensive set of rules to neutralise the benefit of hybrid mismatch arrangements affecting their tax base. 4. The UK has legislated the OECD recommendations into their domestic law and Australia is committed to do the same. The EU has also issued a directive requiring its 28 member states (including the UK) to introduce anti-hybrid rules. We are not aware of any other countries intending to adopt a comprehensive set of rules, although many countries have more targeted anti-hybrid rules. 5. The OECD recommendations will not apply to the vast majority of taxpayers. They will not apply to purely domestic firms. They apply mainly to related parties of multinational groups and planned arrangements. The expected outcome of the OECD recommendations is that the tax benefit of hybrid mismatch arrangements is eliminated, in most cases influencing taxpayers to switch to more straightforward cross-border financing instruments and structures. 6. The Government released a discussion document in September 2016 called Addressing Hybrid Mismatch Arrangements which proposed that the OECD recommendations be adopted in New Zealand and asked for feedback on how that should best be done. Since receiving submissions to this document, officials have engaged stakeholders in targeted consultation on specific design issues relating to the proposal. Consultation has resulted in some of the proposals being modified, such as a proposed exclusion from the rules for New Zealand businesses that operate offshore only through a simple branch structure. Nevertheless, many taxpayers affected by these proposals will still oppose them. Some would prefer to see a targeted approach, which would only tackle hybrids that have already been observed in New Zealand. 2 7. However, in order to send the clear message that using hybrid mismatch arrangements should not produce a tax advantage, we are recommending that Cabinet agree to a comprehensive adoption of the OECD recommendations on hybrid mismatch arrangements with suitable modifications for the New Zealand context. To do otherwise may simply encourage the ongoing use of hybrids not covered by any targeted proposal. Other issues raised through the consultation process, and which are likely to attract the most comment (such as the application of the rules to foreign trusts) are set out in paragraphs 24-38 of this paper. 8. We are further recommending that hybrids rules be included in a BEPS taxation bill to be introduced to Parliament before the end of 2017. Background BEPS 9. New Zealand’s BEPS work programme has largely been driven by a wider momentum that has developed since 2012, when the OECD/G20 began work on their BEPS Action Plan,. Its final package of reports was released in October 2015. The Action Plan is a multifaceted approach intending to encourage countries to close many (but not all) of the avenues multinational companies currently use to reduce their worldwide tax liability, and to improve the information available to governments when they deal with multinational companies, without changing the fundamental principles for the taxation of international trade and investment. 10. As a member of the OECD Council, New Zealand approved the 2015 BEPS final package and has supported the BEPS Action Plan since the OECD’s first declaration on BEPS in 2013. Hybrid mismatch arrangements 11. Hybrid mismatch arrangements are a significant base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) strategy used by some multinational companies to pay little or no tax anywhere in the world on some or all of their income. They are, broadly speaking, cross-border arrangements that exploit differences in the tax treatment of an entity or instrument under the laws of two or more countries to achieve double non-taxation. 12. One way in which this double non-taxation can arise is through a payment being deductible for a payer in one country but not included as taxable income for the payee in the other country. Another way double non-taxation can arise is by way of a single payment being deducted against different income streams in two countries. 13. Double non-taxation of this kind is difficult to deal with, because it can be achieved even though both countries’ tax rules are being complied with. However, it clearly reduces fairness, causes harmful distortions in investment patterns, and results in an unintended reduction in aggregate tax revenues. It is often difficult to determine which of the countries involved has lost tax revenue through the use of a hybrid mismatch arrangement, but there is undoubtedly a reduction of worldwide tax paid. 3 The OECD’s response 14. The OECD has made a number of recommendations as to how countries can improve their domest ic rules to prevent mismatches arising and neutralise their effect when they do arise. These recommendations relate to Action 2 of the OECD/G20 BEPS Action Plan: Neutralising the Effects of Hybrid Mismatch Arrangements. 15. The OECD recommends two kinds of rules. The first are rules specifically designed to reduce the likelihood of hybrid mismatches arising. The second are “linking rules”, which apply to payments that give rise to a deduction in more than one country, or which give rise to a deduction in one country but are not taxed as income in another country due to a hybrid mismatch. These generally only apply to: • arrangements between related parties (25% or more commonly owned) or control groups (50% or more commonly owned); or • structured arrangements - generally, arrangements between non-associated parties which intentionally exploit such mismatches. 16. These linking rules are divided into “primary” and “secondary” responses. Primary responses have precedence, with secondary responses being used if the country that has the primary right does not have hybrid rules. This primary/secondary structure is important for ensuring that all hybrids with a connection to New Zealand are effectively countered irrespective of where the counterparty is based. 17. The OECD has also developed an addit io nal BEPS Act ion 2 report that makes a number of recommendations as to how countries can deal with the problem of branch mismatch arrangements which is closely related to the hybrid mismatches issue. Other countries 18. The UK has introduced into its domestic law rules that reflect a broad adoption of the OECD recommendations. Australia has proposed to do the same and, as part of its 2017 Budget, committed to introduce rules that are effective by 1 January 2018 or six months following Royal assent. 1 The EU has issued a directive requiring its 28 member states (including the UK) to introduce anti-hybrid rules by 1 January 2020. We are not aware of any other countries intending to adopt a comprehensive set of rules, although many countries have more targeted anti-hybrid rules. Hybrids discussion document 19. On 6 September 2016, the Government released a discussion document ent it led “Addressing hybrid mismatch arrangements” seeking feedback on proposals to address hybrid mismatch arrangements in line with the OECD recommendations \[CAB-16-MIN-0442\]. 20. 20 submissions were received on the discussion document. Most submitters accepted the need for some hybrid rules, with some submitters expressing support for New Zealand to take action in line with the OECD hybrids package, subject to various provisos, including that it was done in a co-ordinated fashion with other jurisdictions and/or that there should be concessions for hybrid regulatory capital. The majorit y of submissio ns argued that we should only implement rules to counter hybrid mismatches actually observed in New Zealand, rather than the full suite of OECD recommendations. 1 As set out in paragraph 59, Australia has indicated that it is unlikely to implement OECD recommendation 5 at this stage, but may do so in the future if integrity concerns arise. 4 Comment Implementing the full OECD hybrids package 21. As set out in the cover Cabinet paper (Tax measures to counter base erosion and profit shifting), we are recommending that Cabinet agree to a comprehensive implementation of the OECD’s proposed solutions to the hybrid and branch mismatch problem, , even though there was limited evidence of some of the structures being used in New Zealand. We are of the view that the OECD proposals are in New Zealand’s best interests, as enacting these recommendations will improve fairness, reduce harmful distortions in investment patterns, increase tax revenue, and will also address the risk of taxpayers using new hybrid mismatch opportunities if only the more common techniques are addressed initially. 22. In making this recommendation, we recognise that these proposals involve considerable complexity, which will not generally be welcomed by those taxpayers affected. However, we are comfortable that there are a number of factors that outweigh these concerns: • We are proposing to modify the OECD recommendations when it is appropriate to do so for the New Zealand context. Examples are ensuring New Zealand companies with simple foreign branch structures are not caught by the rules (see “application of hybrids rules to foreign branches” below), not applying the rules to purely domestic firms, and not introducing rules when an adequate New Zealand provision already exists. • We are recommending that officials continue to consult on a few particular issues that have the potential to ease the compliance costs of the proposals before we make a final decision on them under Cabinet delegated authority. These consist of elective options which would in effect allow existing hybrids to be treated as simple equity investments. • Despite the necessary complexity, the underlying principle is clear – using hybrid mismatches as a tax-efficient means of inbound, outbound or conduit investment is not appropriate. • We are recommending that relevant parties be consulted on exposure drafts of key aspects of the legislation. This is intended to facilitate workable legislation that is understandable to those applying it. • In almost all cases, the complexity will be optional. Taxpayers can avoid having to deal with these rules by undertaking simple debt or equity funding. 23. Some o f the other more significant issues relating to this proposal are set out below. Those are followed by a brief explanation of each of the OECD recommendations and the principles behind them. The appendix contains a series of detailed aspects of the proposals that we are also seeking Cabinet’s agreement to. These details have been consulted on wit h interested parties, and are consistent with the general recommendations set out below. 5 Significant issues Foreign trusts 24. As set out in the cover Cabinet paper, we are recommending that foreign trusts be included within the scope of these rules in circumstances where their treatment outside of New Zealand means income of the trust is not included in a tax calculation anywhere in the world. This is not because they are foreign trusts, but because in those circumstances they are “reverse hybrids” according to the OECD recommendations (see the discussion on OECD Recommendation 5.2, below). The same rule would equally impose tax on New Zealand limited partnerships that fit within the reverse hybrids definition. 25. We are aware that foreign trusts have recently had a new set of disclosure rules apply to them following the 2016 Government Inquiry into Foreign Trust Disclosure Rules. In this respect, adding another regulatory regime to the industry now is unfortunate timing. To reflect the fact that these trusts have recently undergone significant compliance costs, and to give the foreign trust and limited partnership industries more time to understand the implications of the proposed rules, we are recommending a delayed effective date for New Zealand reverse hybrids of 1 April 2019. Application of hybrid rules to foreign branches 26. The way in which the OECD recommendations are written would in some circumstances deny a New Zealand company the ability to offset a loss from its foreig n branch against its New Zealand income. This is an issue that some submitters have been very concerned about. 27. We have made various modifications to the OECD recommendations to address this issue, including clarifying that taxpayers who have simple offshore branch structures do not present a hybrid mismatch problem and so are not covered by the rules. Imported mismatches 28. OECD recommendation 8 suggests countries include an “imported mismatch” rule when implementing hybrid and branch mismatch rules. Imported mismatch rules apply when the New Zealand resident is not directly involved in the hybrid mismatch, but the benefit of a mismatch is “imported”. Some submitters on the discussion document viewed this particular recommendation as over-reach, highly complex and impractical. 29. To address these concerns, we recommend that the introduction of the imported mismatch rule be different for “structured” and “unstructured” arrangements. Structured arrangements are deliberately entered into to obtain a tax advantage, so should be implemented at the same time as the rest of the hybrid rules. By contrast, unstructured arrangements are ones where the New Zealand benefit is not the primary reason for entering into the arrangement. We recommend that the unstructured rule has a delayed implementation date of 1 January 2020. By this date, we expect that the EU countries, the UK, and Australia will all have hybrid rules. Delaying the implementation of the unstructured rule until those countries have similar rules will reduce the costs involved in complying with the rule in New Zealand because, by that time, multinationals that are also operating in those countries should already be complying with their equivalent rules, and also because payments 6 to those countries will not be subject to the imported mismatch rule at all. More details regarding the imported mismatch rule are contained later in this paper. Over-taxation by reason of the imposition of NRWT 30. The OECD recommends that countries apply the hybrid rules without regard to any withholding tax collected on the relevant payments. In situations where New Zealand imposes non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) on an interest payment that is also denied a deduction under the hybrid rules, there may be over-taxation. 31. As far as our officials are aware, Australia is not planning on departing from the OECD approach. An argument for this approach is that in the majority of cases taxpayers can simply switch to simpler structures and arrangements and be subject to only single taxation. The OECD approach is also less complicated. Nevertheless, there has been an argument from some submitters that the hybrid rules should be modified in New Zealand so as to remove this potential over-taxation for taxpayers that choose to remain in hybrid structures. 32. We recommend that in the case of a hybrid financial instrument, there needs to be further consideration of the possibility of letting taxpayers treat the payment as a dividend. This would allow them to eliminate NRWT by attaching imputation credits to the payment. We recommend that Cabinet delegate the authority to determine the appropriateness of such an approach to us to decide after receiving further advice. For hybrid arrangements other than financial instruments, we are less concerned about the imposition of NRWT. Although there may be some over-taxation, in many cases this will simply be a timing issue. Grandparenting for certain instruments issued by banks to the public 33. We recommend that there be an exception to the rules for certain hybrid instruments (“hybrid regulatory capital”) issued by banks and insurance companies eit her directly or indirectly to third party investors, in partial satisfaction of the capital requirements imposed on those companies by regulators (such as the Reserve Bank and its Australian equivalent, APRA). We recommend that such instruments issued before the date of the discussion document release (6 September 2016) should not be subject to the hybrid rules until the first date on which the issuer has an unconditional right to call or otherwise cancel the instruments without penalt y. 34. This grandparenting date is different to the date proposed in Australia, which is 8 May 2017 (the day before their Federal Budget). We consider differing from Australia is justified in this case. The Australian Government had made public the fact that it was considering how such instruments should be taxed, and did not make an announcement until its 2017 Budget. In New Zealand the hybrids discussion document released on 6 September stated that such instruments would be subject to the hybrid rules. To grandparent instruments issued after the New Zealand discussion document may be seen as encouraging taxpayers to enter into aggressive structures after the government has stated an intention to change the rules but before that change is enacted. We are wary of creating an expectation that such arrangements will be grandparented. Opaque election for foreign hybrid entities 35. The private sector has proposed that a New Zealand investor in a foreign hybrid entity be entitled to elect to treat the entity as tax opaque (like a company) in New Zealand to remove the hybridity and put that entit y outside the scope of the rules. Our initial view is that 7 excluding simple branch structures from the rules, and the ability of hybrid participants to restructure their arrangements, may make such an election redundant. Nevertheless, we have asked officials to continue their consideration of how such an election may work in practice, including whether the costs of administering it for what may be a relatively small group are justified. We recommend that Cabinet delegate to us the authorit y to decide on the appropriateness of an opaque election. Application of rules to branch mismatch arrangements 36. Consultation on branch mismatches has taken place but has not been as comprehensive as that for the remainder of the hybrid proposals. In part this is because such mismatches are less significant for New Zealand, and in part because the OECD draft report on branches was released at around the same time as the New Zealand discussion document, and the proposal was therefore less well developed. Nevertheless, we recommend that New Zealand implement rules that are consistent with the OECD recommendations on branch mismatches (this is also consistent with the approach that has been taken by the UK and which we understand will be taken by Australia). Branch mismatches arising from foreign branch losses are a double non-taxation risk and to leave them out of these proposals would expose the tax base to future risk. The remainder of the branch mismatch concerns addressed are very unlikely to arise in a New Zealand context. They will apply mostly to deny a deduction for a payment made by a New Zealand taxpayer to a foreign member of the same control group, if that payment is not taxed to the foreign member due to conflicts in branch tax rules between two countries other than New Zealand. De minimis rule 37. We recommend that there be no general de minimis for the hybrid rules. We believe that a de minimis may cause additional complexity given that other countries are not proposing a de minimis in their hybrid mismatch rules. This means that any de minimis would likely be ineffective in practice because the other country would still counter the hybrid mismatch using their secondary response right. Also, our proposals will ensure that simple branch structures (the most likely beneficiaries of a de minimis) are not within the scope of the rules. 38. We do however recommend that there should be specific de minimis rules for reverse hybrid entities established in New Zealand (see paragraphs 55-57). OECD recommendations Hybrid financial instrument rules (Recommendations 1 and 2) 39. The following diagram illustrates a typical hybrid financial instrument issued between related parties A Co and B Co. A Co. B Co. + - H yb rid Financial Instrument Deductible Country B Country A N on-assess able 8 40. Double non-taxation arises in this situation because the payment on the hybrid financial instrument is deductible (as interest) in Country B but not taxable (because it is treated as an exempt dividend) in Country A. 41. OECD recommendation 2 is a specific recommendation that countries should amend their domestic law so that dividend payments that are deductible to the payer (B Co) should be treated as ordinary income for the payee (A Co). 42. New Zealand already has a rule that switches off the general exemption for dividends received by a New Zealand company from a foreign company, if the dividend is deductible to the payer. We recommend that this rule be expanded to also apply if the foreign payer receives tax benefits similar in nature to a deduction. 43. We also recommend introducing rules in line with the general principles of OECD recommendation 1. This means that, in relation to hybrid financial instruments that are structured or between related parties, we should deny a New Zealand payer a deduction for the payment (when New Zealand is Country B) to the extent it is not taxed to a non-resident payee. It is in respect of this aspect of recommendation 1 that we are considering the election to treat interest payments as dividends. In addit io n, when New Zealand is Country A and Country B does not have hybrid rules, we should tax the New Zealand payee on the payment as ordinary income, with no entitlement to a tax credit. 44. We also recommend that when there is a timing mismatch that allows a deduction to be claimed in one country in a period that is significantly earlier than the period in which income is included in the other country, the rules above should also apply. Disregarded hybrid payments rule (Recommendation 3) 45. A hybrid entity is an entity which is transparent for tax purposes in the country of an investor (Country A) but opaque for tax purposes in another country, generally where it is established (Country B). In the following diagram, B Co is the hybrid entity. A Co. + - InterestLoan Country B Country A B Sub 1 B Co. 46. The interest payment by B Co is deductible in the hybrid entity country (Country B) but disregarded in the investor country (Country A) because Country A sees B Co as being part of A Co and therefore not capable of making a payment to itself. However, as the interest payment by B Co is deductible in Country B, if B Co has no other income, the payment produces a tax loss, which can be grouped with the income of B Sub 1. The payment can 9 therefore reduce taxable income in Country B without giving rise to any income in Country A, because of the different treatment of B Co in each country. This is a deductible/non- includible mismatch. 47. We recommend introducing rules in line with the general principles of OECD recommendation 3 in order to prevent double non-taxation arising from a payment by a hybrid entity. We recommend that, when New Zealand is Country B and payments are deductible here but are disregarded for tax purposes in Country A (and the payments are part of a structured arrangement or made to a person in the same control group), we should deny a deduction for the payment. Similarly, if New Zealand is Country A and the non-resident payer in Country B has not been denied a deduction for the payment under similar rules, we should tax the receipt by the New Zealand payee as ordinary income. 48. We recommend that deductions denied and income included by the above rules should be reversible to the extent that the hybrid entity has earned “dual inclusion income”, being income taxed in both Country A and Country B. This is because this dual inclusion income is included as inco me in both countries so the corresponding deduction should also be allowed in both countries. The dual inclusion income can be earned in the same period as the payment is made, in an earlier period, or in a later period. Reverse hybrid rules (Recommendations 4 and 5) 49. A reverse hybrid entity is an entity which is opaque for tax purposes in the country of an investor (Country A) but transparent for tax purposes in another country, generally where it is established (Country B). In the following diagram, B Co is the reverse hybrid. A Co. - Interest Loan Country B Country A B Co. C Co. Country C + 50. If B Co (the payee) is a reverse hybrid, double non-taxation arises because the interest payment is deductible to C Co (the payer) and not taxable to either B Co or A Co (the investor). Even on distribution by B Co to A Co it may not be taxable, if protected by an exemption for cross border intra-group dividends. The double non-taxation is due to a hybrid mismatch if the payment would have been taxable had it been made directly from C Co to A Co. 51. We recommend introducing rules in line with the general principles of OECD recommendation 4 to prevent double non-taxation arising from a payment to a reverse hybrid. We recommend that, when New Zealand is Country C, the New Zealand payer be denied a deduction for a payment to a reverse hybrid if the payment would have been taxed if paid directly to the investor (A Co). This rule would only apply when the payer, payee and investor are all in a control group or the payment is part of a structured arrangement. 10 52. OECD recommendation 5.1 is that countries should change their domestic law so that they tax residents on income not taxed in another country due to its being earned by a reverse hybrid. In other words, when New Zealand is Country A, we should tax A Co on the income of B Co if Country B does not tax it (because it treats B Co as transparent for tax purposes). 53. We recommend that New Zealand should have rules that are in line with the general principles of recommendation 5.1 and other international tax principles. New Zealand already has controlled foreign companies (CFC) rules that in most cases would prevent a reverse hybrid entity mismatch outcome from occurring when a New Zealand resident is the investor (A Co). We recommend that Cabinet delegate authority to us to determine whether our current CFC rules should be enhanced to deal with any forms of reverse hybrid income not currently dealt with, in line with the general principles of recommendation 5.1. 54. OECD recommendation 5.2 is that countries should change their domestic law so that they tax income which is earned by a reverse hybrid entity established in their country. So, when New Zealand is Country B, we recommend introducing rules in line with the general principles of this recommendation. As set out in the cover Cabinet paper and in paragraphs 24-25, this will require amendments to existing law regarding New Zealand limited partnerships and foreign trusts, which can be reverse hybrid entities depending on the tax treatment in the investor country. 55. In regards to limited partnerships, we recommend taxing the partnership income of a non-resident partner if they are in a control group with the partnership and not taxed on their share of the partnership income because their jurisdiction views the income as earned by the partnership as a separate taxpayer from the partner. This rule will only apply if the limited partnership has total foreign-sourced income of greater than $10,000 or 20% of its total income. This de minimis rule, and the corresponding one for foreign trusts in the following paragraphs, is consistent with the recently-enacted de minimis rule for foreign sourced income of look-through companies. 56. In regards to foreign trusts, we recommend taxing the foreign-source trustee income of the trust, provided that the non-resident settlor and trust are all in a control group. Many family trusts would meet this requirement. Foreign source trustee income will only be taxed if the non-resident settlor is not taxed on the trustee income in their residence country simply because the income is earned by the New Zealand trustee rather than the settlor directly. This rule will only apply if the trust has total foreign-sourced income of greater than $10,000 or 20% of its total income. 57. We also recommend taxing the foreign-source beneficiary income of a non-resident beneficiary of a foreign trust if they are not taxed on the income in their residence country because that country views the income as earned by the trustee and not the beneficiary. This rule will only apply if the trust has total foreign-sourced income of greater than $10,000 or 20% of its total income, and the non-resident beneficiary is part of a control group with the trust/trustee. In relation to both beneficiary and trustee income, tax would only be imposed if there was no-one else in the same control group required to include that income in their taxable income. 58. OECD recommendation 5.3 is that countries should consider improvements to record keeping and disclosure rules for tax transparent entities established in their country. Following the 2016 Government Inquiry into Foreign Trust Disclosure Rules, the disclosure rules for foreign trusts have been enhanced. New Zealand is regularly reviewed by the OECD to ensure that we are meeting international standards in this area. The Government will 11 continue to work with the OECD and make improvements to disclosure rules as necessary to ensure compliance with best practice. 59. We note that Australia has indicated that it is unlikely to implement any of recommendation 5 at this point – this is largely because they see their existing rules as adequate. However, they have reserved the right to do so in the future if integrity concerns arise. We are not as confident that our existing rules in relation to reverse hybrids are adequate to prevent mismatches from occurring. As set out above, we are concerned that leaving ‘gaps’ in our rules exposes our tax base to risks that can be mitigated by following all of the OECD’s recommendations. Hybrid entities – double deductions (Recommendation 6) 60. In addition to being capable of generating a deductible/non-inclusion hybrid mismatch, a hybrid entity can also be used to generate a double deduction mismatch. A diagram illustrating this possibility follows, where B Co is the hybrid entity. A Co. +- Interest Loan Country B Country A B Sub 1 B Co. Bank 61. Because A Co treats B Co as fiscally transparent, in Country A the interest paid by B Co is deductible against A Co’s other income. In Country B the interest payment can offset income earned by B Sub 1, which is in a tax consolidated group with B Co. This is a double non-taxation outcome because a single payment has been deducted against different income in two countries. 62. In Budget 2017 Cabinet agreed to restrict the ability of New Zealand businesses to use double deductions of foreign hybrid entities to reduce their tax liabilities in New Zealand \[CAB-17-MIN-0164\]. This means that, when New Zealand is Country A, the deductions in B Co would not flow back to New Zealand if it is possible for that deduction to also offset Country B income that does not flow back to A Co (in this case, the income of B Sub 1). 63. Nothing in this paper is inconsistent with that specific decision. However, as mentioned in paragraph 26-27, we are recommending a slightly narrowed approach to the OECD recommendation 6, whereby simple structures involving a New Zealand company with only an offshore branch would not fall within the scope of the rules. 64. We also recommend implementing a rule that would, when New Zealand is Country B, disallow the lo sses o f a foreign-owned New Zealand hybrid entity or branch when the country of the owner (Country A) has not denied the loss. 12 65. As with the recommendation 3 rule, denial of a deduction under the recommendation 6 rule should be reversed to the extent that the hybrid entity has dual inclusion income, whether in the current period, an earlier period, or a later period. Dual resident entities (Recommendation 7) 66. OECD recommendation 7 is that countries should deny a deduction to dual resident companies except to the extent of dual inclusion income. Expenditure incurred by a co mpany that is a resident of two different countries can potentially be used in each country to offset non-dual inclusion income, which is income taxed only in that country. This would achieve the same double deduction outcomes that hybrid ent it ies can produce under recommendation 6 (above). 67. New Zealand tax law already prevents a dual resident company from grouping its losses or forming a tax consolidated group. However, it does not prevent them offsetting expenditure against non-dual inclusion income earned through a reverse hybrid, such as (potentially) a New Zealand limited liability partnership. We recommend that New Zealand amend its existing rules relating to losses incurred by dual resident companies, to ensure they are fully effective to prevent deductions being taken against non-dual inclusion income. Imported mismatches (Recommendation 8) 68. As set out in paragraphs 28-29, we recommend that New Zealand introduce rules in line with OECD recommendation 8 to deny a deduction for a payment that funds another payment under a hybrid mismatch, including a branch mismatch. This is referred to as an imported mismatch rule. An example follows. Loan A Co. + - H yb rid Financial Instrument Country B Country A Borrower Co. B Co. Country C - + 69. In this example, New Zealand is Country C. The loan between A Co and B Co generates a deduction in Country B, with no corresponding income inclusion in Country A. This is a double non-taxation outcome. However, this tax mismatch is not counteracted because neither Country A nor Country B has hybrid rules. The tax benefit of the A/B mismatch helps fund the seemingly benign arrangement between B Co and the New Zealand entity (Borrower Co). 70. The imported mismatch rule would require New Zealand, as Country C, to deny a deduction for interest payments from Borrower Co to B Co to the extend they do not exceed the payments under the hybrid financial instrument between B Co and A Co. This is an integrity measure that prevents New Zealand’s other hybrid rules from being circumvented. 13 Without this rule, businesses in Country A can simply avoid our proposed rules by going from A to C via B. 71. We recommend that the imported mismatch rule applies to both structured arrangements that are designed to produce an imported mismatch outcome, and unstructured arrangements within a control group. However, because unstructured arrangements may not be deliberately contemplated, we are recommending a delayed implementation for those arrangements until more countries, the EU countries in particular, have hybrids rules in place. Agency consultation 72. The consultation on this project has been explained in the cover Cabinet paper. Briefly, there have been two rounds of consultation: one on the proposals in the discussion document; and a further round with selected submitters on branch mismatches and some of the detailed aspects set out in this paper. Financial implications 73. The proposed hybrid rule denying double deductions for foreign hybrid entities is estimated to increase tax revenue by $50 million per year from the 2019-20 year onwards. These amounts are already included in the forecasts as per Budget 2017 (CAB-17-MIN- 0164). 74. In addit io n, the proposed approach to grandparenting certain hybrid instruments as discussed at paragraphs 33-34 is expected to generate a total of $71 million over four years which is not currently included in the forecasts. This revenue is contingent on taxpayer behaviour after the implementation of the hybrid rules. 75. The combined revenue impact of all proposals is estimated as: $ million – increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue 2016 /17 2017 /18 2018 /19 2019 /20 2020 /21 2021 /22 2022/23 and out years Foreign hybrid entity double deductions (already included in forecast) 0 0 25 50 50 50 50 Hybrid instruments – grandparenting (new adjustment to forecasts) 0 0 19 19 19 14 0 Total revenue effect 0 0 44 69 69 64 50 Human rights, administrative impacts, legislative implications, publicity 76. These are set out in the accompanying covering Cabinet paper for the overall BEPS package (Tax measures to prevent base erosion and profit shifting). 14 Impact Analysis Requirements 77. Cabinet's Impact Analysis Requirements apply to these proposals and a Regulatory Impact Assessment is required. This has been prepared by Inland Revenue and is attached. 78. The Quality Assurance reviewer at Inland Revenue has reviewed the Regulatory Impact Assessment and considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Regulatory Impact Assessment meets the Quality Assurance criteria. Recommendations 79. We recommend that Cabinet: 1. Agree that for payments under a financial instrument between related parties or that is a structured arrangement, and that results in a hybrid mismatch: a. to deny a New Zealand payer a deduction for the payment to the extent it is not taxed to a non-resident payee (OECD recommendation 1 primary rule); and b. if a non-resident payer has not been denied a deduction for the payment under similar rules, to tax a New Zealand payee on the payment as ordinary income, with no entitlement to a tax credit (OECD recommendation 1 defensive rule). 2. Agree to expand New Zealand’s current rule which denies a dividend exemption to a deductible dividend paid by a foreign company to a New Zealand company so that it also applies if the foreign payer receives tax benefits similar in nature to a deduction (OECD recommendation 2). 3. Agree that for payments made to a person in the same control group as the payee or pursuant to a structured transaction, where the payment is deductible to the payer but not recognised under the tax law in the payee country because the payment is disregarded under that law: a. to deny a deduction for the payment if made by a New Zealand payer (OECD recommendation 3 primary rule); b. if the payment is made by a non-resident, who is not denied a deduction under similar rules, to a New Zealand resident, to include the payment in ordinary income of the New Zealand resident (OECD recommendation 3 defensive rule); c. to allow any such deduction or income inclusion to be reversed to the extent that the deduction to the payer is set off against income that is included as income in both relevant countries (“dual inclusion income”). 4. Agree to deny a New Zealand payer a deduction in relation to payments made to a reverse hybrid entity in the same control group as the payer or pursuant to a structured transaction, where the payment is deductible to the payer but not included as income under the tax law in the reverse hybrid establishment country or in the country of the entity or person investing in the reverse hybrid entit y (OECD recommendation 4). 15 5. Agree that New Zealand should tax the income of a reverse hybrid established in New Zealand (such as a foreign trust or a limited partnership) to the extent that: a. the reverse hybrid income is not subject to tax in another jurisdiction (OECD recommendation 5.2); and b. the total foreign sourced income of the reverse hybrid exceeds the greater of $10,000 or 20% of the total income of the reverse hybrid. 6. Agree to the following in relation to double deduction outcomes produced by branches and hybrid entity structures: a. disallow the losses of a New Zealand-owned foreign hybrid entity or foreign branch if there is another entity in that foreign country whose income is capable of being offset against the losses of the hybrid entity or branch and that income is not taxable in New Zealand (modified OECD recommendation 6 primary); b. disallow the losses of a foreign-owned New Zealand hybrid entity or branch if the owner of the branch is not denied the loss under recommendation 6 primary rule in another country (OECD recommendation 6 defensive); and c. do not disallow losses (or reverse any previous disallowance) to the extent that the hybrid entity or branch earns dual inclusion income. 7. Agree to deny a deduction claimed in New Zealand by a dual resident company except to the extent that the dual resident company earns dual inclusion income (OECD recommendation 7). 8. Agree to deny a deduction in New Zealand for any payment that imports an offshore hybrid or branch mismatch arrangement into New Zealand, except to the extent that the payment is made to a country that has hybrid mismatch rules (OECD recommendation 8). 9. Note that, consistent with the Budget 2017 Cabinet paper (CAB-17-MIN-0164 refers), the hybrid rules should generally apply from 1 July 2018. 10. Agree that the effective date of the rule relating to unstructured imported mismatches (part of recommendation 8 above) should be delayed until 1 January 2020. 11. Agree that the application of the rule relating to New Zealand reverse hybrids (recommendation 5 above) should be for income years beginning on or after 1 April 2019. 12. Agree that there will be no general grandparenting of hybrid instruments or entities from the application of the hybrid mismatch rules, with the exception of hybrid financial instruments which are entitled to grandparented tax treatment until their next call date provided that they are: a. issued to satisfy the regulatory capital requirements imposed by New Zealand or Australian law; b. directly to, or are traceable to, issues to the public; and c. issued before the release of the Government’s Addressing Hybrid Mismatch Arrangements discussion document on 6 September 2016. 16 13. Note that the fiscal consequences of agreeing to recommendation 12 above is set out in the covering Cabinet paper for the overall BEPS package (Tax measures to prevent base erosion and profit shifting). 14. Agree to the detailed design proposals set out in the appendix to this paper. 15. Agree that the Ministers of Finance and Revenue be authorised to make decisions on further detail of these proposals, or to amend the detail in the appendix, provided any such decisions are not contradictory with the principles set out in recommendations 1 to 12, without further reference to Cabinet. 16. Agree to delegate authority to the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Revenue to make final policy decisions on the following policy issues wit hout further reference to Cabinet: a. whether New Zealand’s controlled foreign company (CFC) rules should be modified to include as attributable foreign income all inco me of a reverse hybrid entity which would have been taxed to the New Zealand investor had it derived the income directly but which is not taxed by the country of the entity because the entity is treated as fiscally transparent in that country (OECD recommendation 5.1); b. whether New Zealand can and should include a tightly targeted and simple optional regime whereby foreign hybrid entities can elect to be treated as opaque entities for New Zealand tax purposes; and c. whether, the payer under a hybrid financial arrangement for which a deduction is denied, should be allowed to treat the payment as a dividend for purposes of both (but not only one of) the non-resident withholding tax and the imputation credit rules. 17. Agree that the results of the decisions in recommendations 1-16 be included in a BEPS taxation bill to be introduced to Parliament before the end of 2017. Authorised for lodgement Hon Steven Joyce Minister of Finance Hon Judith Collins Minister of Revenue Appendix List of detailed design decisions OECD Recommendations 1 and 2 1. A person who receives a payment which is deductible to the payer in another country will not be entitled to the benefit of any imputation credit attached to the payment. 2. When the hybrid rules apply to a hybrid financial instrument issued by a New Zealand taxpayer and denominated in a foreign currency, the deduction denied will take into account any foreign currency fluctuations on the instrument which would otherwise be taken into account for tax purposes, and any net income from the instrument including any foreign currency fluctuations will be non- taxable. 3. When the hybrid rules apply to a hybrid financial instrument held by a New Zealand taxpayer and denominated in a foreign currency, the taxpayer will not take into account any foreign currency fluctuations on the instrument, unless the instrument is an interest in a FIF which is subject to the comparative value method. 4. To the extent that a payment on a hybrid financial instrument can be proven to give rise to taxation of an investor in the payee entit y under another country’s controlled foreign company (CFC) regime, the payer will be allowed a deduction for the payment. 5. If a person holds a FIF interest as part of a share repo arrangement, that person will be required to use the comparative value or attributed foreign income method to determine their income from the FIF interest. 6. If a person holds New Zealand shares as part of a share repo arrangement, where the borrower is a non-resident, the person is not entitled to the benefit of an imputation credit attached to any dividends on the shares. 7. OECD recommendation 1 will only apply to timing mismatches if: • the mismatch arises on an instrument with a term of 3 years or more or on an instrument that has been extended to beyond 3 years; and • the lender is not accounting for the payment, for tax purposes, on a reasonable accrual basis; and • it is not reasonable, having regard to the terms of the instrument and the payments made to date, to believe that the expenditure will be included in income in the payee’s accounting period beginning within 24 months 18 of the end of the period in which the expenditure is incurred. 8. Amendments be made to the non-resident withholding tax rules so that in determining whether the rules require tax to be withheld on an accrual (rather than payments) basis, amounts for which a deduction is denied or deferred under OECD recommendation 1 are not taken into account unless and until they are deducted. 9. Interest that is permanently denied a deduction under recommendation 1 and the debt under which that interest paid is disregarded for the purposes of the thin capitalisation rules. 10. There will be no exclusion for regulatory capital issued by banks and insurance companies except for some issues made before the release of the discussion document (6 September 2016). OECD Recommendation 3 11. Any foreign currency fluctuations recognised for tax purposes in relation to a financial arrangement denominated in a foreign currency will be taken into account when denying a deduction to a New Zealand payer. 12. Dual inclusion income will be calculated in accordance with New Zealand tax principles on the income of the hybrid payer from activities that are taxed in New Zealand, except that it will not include income which is protected from New Zealand tax by a foreign tax credit. 13. For the purposes of denying a deduction for a New Zealand payer, full taxation of income under a CFC regime will prevent income being treated as not taxable to a payee and will qualify income as dual inclusion income where it is not otherwise taxed to the payee and is not sheltered from tax by a foreign tax credit. 14. When an amount of deemed hybrid income is reversed in a later year because it is offset against dual inclusion income, that will be taken into account in determining the limit on the amount of foreign tax credit for which a New Zealand taxpayer applying the defensive rule is eligible. 15. The ability to claim a deduction in relation to a later year due to future dual inclusion income will be lost if there is a more than 51% change in a company’s ownership since the time the relevant deduction was incurred or deemed expenditure arose. 16. Amendments be made to the non-resident withholding tax rules so that in determining whether the rules require tax to be withheld on an accrual (rather than payments) basis, amounts for which a deduction is deferred under OECD recommendation 3 are not taken into account unless and until they are deducted. 19 17. Denial of a deduction for interest under recommendation 3 will not affect the amount of recognised interest or amount of debt for the purposes of the thin capitalisation rules. 18. A deduction would be denied where a branch is treated in the branch country as making a deductible payment to its head office which is not a simple allocation of third party costs. 19. Where a New Zealand taxpayer has recognized income as a result of receiving a disregarded payment from a foreign hybrid entity, that income will be reversed in a later year when there is dual inclusion income earned through the hybrid entity. OECD Recommendation 4 20. Diverted branch payments and payments made to a disregarded branch are included within the scope of recommendation 4. 21. Recommendation 4 deduction denial in respect of a payment under a foreign currency loan includes foreign currency gains or losses. 22. To the extent a payment to a reverse hybrid can be proven to be taxed under the CFC regime of an investor country, a deduction will be allowed. 23. Non-resident withholding tax will continue to be applied to payments, despite the denial of the deduction 24. Interest that is denied a deduction under recommendation 4 and the debt under which that interest paid is disregarded for the purposes of the thin capitalisation rules. OECD Recommendation 5.2 25. Tax the partnership income of a non-resident partner of a New Zealand limited partnership if the non-resident partner is in a control group with the partnership and the non-resident partner is not taxed on their share of the income of the partnership because their jurisdiction views the income as earned by the partnership and not by the partner. 26. Tax a New Zealand resident trustee on foreign-sourced beneficiary income allocated to a non-resident beneficiary as if the trustee were a New Zealand resident individual taxpayer to the extent that: • the beneficiary is in the same control group as the trustee; and • the beneficiary would be taxed on income from the assets giving rise to the beneficiary income if it held the assets directly; and • the income is not subject to tax as the income of any person other than 20 the trustee (such as the beneficiary or settlor). 27. Tax a New Zealand trustee of a foreign trust on foreign-sourced trustee income to the extent that: • the settlor is in the same control group as the trustee; • the settlor would be taxed on the trustee income if it held the trust assets directly; and • the income is not subject to tax as the income of any person other than the trustee. 28. Include a de minimis so that none of the above recommendation 5.2 rules apply if the total foreign sourced income of the trustee does not exceed the greater of $10,000 and 20% of the total income of the trust. OECD Recommendation 6 29. There will be a transitional rule such that a New Zealand-owned foreign hybrid entity or foreign branch’s accumulated loss is recaptured where that entity or branch’s control group acquires an interest in an entity in the foreign country except in cases where the accumulated loss cannot be offset against current and future income of the newly acquired entity. 30. A deduction will be allowed in New Zealand for losses of New Zealand-owned foreign hybrid entities or foreign branches if those losses cannot ever be used in the foreign country 31. Income which can be shown to be taxable in the foreign country and in New Zealand under New Zealand’s CFC rules can be regarded as dual inclusion income except to the extent that the income is sheltered by a foreign tax credit. 32. Double deduction amounts and dual inclusion income amounts for a foreign hybrid entity or branch will be calculated in accordance with New Zealand tax principles on the income of the foreign hybrid entity/branch/ from activities that are taxed in New Zealand, except that income which is protected from New Zealand tax by a foreign tax credit will not be regarded as dual inclusion income. 33. The ability to claim a deduction in relation in a later year due to future dual inclusion income will be lost if there is a more than 51% change in a company’s ownership since the time the relevant deduction was incurred or deemed expenditure arose. 34. Amendments will be made to the non-resident withholding tax rules so that in determining whether the rules require tax to be withheld on an accrual (rather than payments) basis, amounts for which a deduction is deferred under OECD recommendations 6 are not taken into account unless and until they are 21 deducted. 35. Denial of a deduction for interest under recommendations 6 will not affect the amount of recognised interest or amount of debt for the purposes of thin capitalisation rules. OECD Recommendation 7 36. Amend existing consolidation and loss grouping rules for dual resident company losses to ensure that those losses cannot be offset against income earned by a New Zealand reverse hybrid. 37. Double deduction amounts and dual inclusion income amounts will be calculated in accordance with New Zealand tax principles on the income of the dual resident company from activities that are taxed in New Zealand, except that income which is protected from New Zealand tax by a foreign tax credit will not be regarded as dual inclusion income. 38. The ability to claim a deduction in relation in a later year due to future dual inclusion income will be lost if there is a more than 51% change in a company’s ownership since the time the relevant deduction was incurred. 39. Denial of a deduction for interest will not affect the amount of recognised interest or amount of debt for the purposes of thin capitalisation rules. OECD Recommendation 8 40. When recommendation 8 applies to a payment that imports an offshore hybrid or branch mismatch arrangement into New Zealand, the deduction denied will ignore any foreign currency fluctuations on the instrument. 41. Interest that is denied a deduction under recommendation 8 and the debt under which that interest paid is disregarded for the purposes of the thin capitalisation rules General design and definitional matters 42. A coordination rule will be included in the hybrid rules to ensure that the hybrid mismatch rules of other countries mesh well with New Zealand’s rules. 43. A specific anti-avoidance rule will be included in the hybrid rules to allow the Commissioner of Inland Revenue to counteract arrangements that have the purpose or effect of defeating the intent or application of the hybrid rules.