Targeting serious crime: extending information sharing Summary and submission form Introduction Government agencies share specified information as part of improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the services they provide. An existing information sharing agreement between Inland Revenue and the New Zealand Police enables Inland Revenue to provide information, under certain criteria, to the New Zealand Police to detect, prevent and prosecute serious crime. In the existing agreement, serious crime is defined as an offence punishable by a term of imprisonment of four years or more. The information exchanged since the agreement’s implementation in 2014 has delivered significant benefits in tackling serious crime. The Government is proposing to extend the existing information sharing agreement to include the Serious Fraud Office and the New Zealand Customs Service, so that Inland Revenue can share informat ion with these agencies to help them investigate serious crime. Summary of proposals The Government proposes allowing Inland Revenue to share information with the Serious Fraud Office and the New Zealand Customs Service, under the same framework currently used to share information with the New Zealand Police for targeting serious crime. The existing framework and proposed model for sharing information with those agencies would allow an agency to request information, or for Inland Revenue to proactively provide information, when the agency or Inland Revenue considers there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that: • a serious crime has been committed, is being committed, or will be committed; and • the information is relevant to preventing, detecting, investigating, or providing evidence of a serious crime. In addit ion, Inland Revenue must be satisfied that: • any statutory criteria relating to the release of protected information are met; • the information is readily available within Inland Revenue; • it is reasonable and practicable to communicate the information; and • it is in the public interest to communicate it. September 2018 1 These proposals do not alter the existing information sharing agreement with the New Zealand Police. They build on that activity to allow the New Zealand Customs Service and the Serious Fraud Office to provide services more efficiently, while maintaining the privacy protections provided by the Privacy Act 1993 and the Tax Administration Act 1994. The Government’s discussion document, Targeting serious crime: extending information sharing, is available at http://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2018-dd-tsc- extending/overview. The proposals are discussed in detail in chapter 2 . Details about information sharing and the existing information sharing agreement with the New Zealand Police are set out in chapter 3. How to make a submission The Government welcomes feedback on all aspects of these proposals, including whether additional controls should be put in place. The closing date for submissions is 30 October 2018. Submissions can be made: • by completing the submission form at http://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/tsc-submission ; • by completing the attached submissio n form, and sending it to us by email or post; • by email to policy.webmaster@ird.govt.nz with “Targeting serious crime: extending information sharing” in the subject line; or • by post to: Targeting serious crime: extending information sharing C/- Deputy Commissioner, Policy and Strategy Inland Revenue Department PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 Submissions should include a brief summary of the major points and recommendations. Please also indicate whether officials from Inland Revenue, the New Zealand Customs Service and the Serious Fraud Office can contact you to discuss the points raised, if required. Submissions may be requested under the Official Information Act 1982. Any information withheld will be decided using this Act. Please indicate in your submission if there is anyt hing that you wish to have withheld. Hon Stuart Nash Hon Kris Faafoi Minister of Revenue Minister of Customs Minister Responsible for the Serious Fraud Office September 2018 2 Targeting serious crime: extending information sharing Submission form What do you think of extending Inland Revenue’s ability to share information about serious crimes with the Serious Fraud Office and the New Zealand Customs Service? Your response Should information sharing for serious offences be extended further to include other government agencies in addition to the New Zealand Police, the New Zealand Customs Service and the Serious Fraud Office? Your response Are the proposed safeguards sufficient for the protection of the information shared? What else should be considered? Your response September 2018 3 Are there any other things that should be considered as part of the proposed extension to the current information sharing agreement? Your response Your contact details Your name: Your email address: Your phone number: Please indicate if you do not wish your name to be included in any summary of submissions that we may publish. Official Information Act 1982 requests Submissions may be requested under the Official Information Act 1982. Any information withheld will be decided using this Act. Please indicate in your submission if there is anyt hing that you wish to have withheld. Sending us you submission You can send this submission to us by 30 October 2018: • by emailing the completed form to policy.webmaster@ird.govt.nz with “Targeting serious crime: extending information sharing” in the subject line; or • by post to: Targeting serious crime: extending information sharing C/- Deputy Commissioner, Policy and Strategy Inland Revenue Department PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 This form can also be completed online at https://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/tsc-submission. September 2018 4