Hon Grant Robertson, Minister of Finance Hon Stuart Nash, Minister of Revenue Information Release Refresh of the Government's tax policy work programme for 2019/20 September 2019 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s Tax Policy website at http://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2019-ir -cab-dev-19-sub-0203/overview. Documents in this information release 1.IR2019/255 – Tax policy report: 2019–20 refresh of the tax policy work programme (9 May 2019) 2.IR2019/277 – Tax policy report: Tax policy work programme refresh – options on possible packages (17 May 2019) 3.IR2019/306 – Tax policy report: Final details of the refreshed tax policy work programme 2019–20 (6 June 2019) 4.DEV-19-SUB-0203 – Cabinet paper: Refresh of the Government's tax policy work programme for 2019/20 (31 July 2019) 5. DEV-19-MIN-0203 – Minute: Refresh of the Government's tax policy work programme for 2019/20 (31 July 2019) A dditional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Cabinet Economic Development Committee on 31 July 2019 and confirmed by Cabinet on 5 August 2019. Information withheld Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act 1982 (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply are identified. Where information is withheld, no public interest was identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Sections of the Act under which information was withheld: 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people 9(2)(f)(iv) to maintain the current constitutional conventions protecting the confidentiality of advice tendered by ministers and officials 18(d) information is already publicly available or will be publicly available soon Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). IN CONFIDENCE PO LICY AND STRATEGY Tax policy report: 2019-20 refresh of the tax policy work programme Date: 9 May 2019 Priority: Medium Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2019/255 T2019/1375 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Finance Note the contents of this report Discuss report at meeting on 13 May 2019 13 May 2019 Minister of Revenue Note the contents of this report Discuss report at meeting on 13 May 2019 13 May 2019 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Emma Grigg Policy Director, Inland Revenue Mark Vink Manager, Tax Strategy, The Treasury s 9(2)(a) 1. In Confidence IR2019/255; T2019/1375: 2019-20 Refresh of the tax policy work programme Page 1 of 6 IN CONFIDENCE 9 May 2019 Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue 2019-20 Refresh of the tax policy work programme Purpose 1. This report is intended to assist Ministers’ consideration of the high-level objectives and process for the next tax policy work programme (TPWP). In particular officials would like to gauge Ministers’ views on: (a) The proposed overarching objectives of the next TPWP; (b) The approximate resource weighting for the TPWP; (c) The fiscal approach Ministers would like to take for the next work programme; and (d) The process and timing for consultation and communication. 2. We are currently undertaking a prioritisation exercise for the individual items that could form part of the work programme. We will report to you further on this. Background 3. At a meeting with you on 30 April 2019, we discussed our intention to begin reviewing potential items for inclusion in a refreshed TPWP for 2019-20. This year, we are taking a top-down approach to refreshing the TPWP. We have considered the potential objectives of the refreshed TPWP, and the possible items of work which would contribute to or support these objectives. 4. In its response to the Tax Working group (TWG) recommendations, the Government indicated that a number of TWG recommendations would be considered as high priority items on the refreshed TPWP, while others would be considered for inclusion more generally. Further, the Government noted that several recommendations were items of work which were already underway, including work involving other agencies. 5. Therefore, possible items for inclusion in the next TPWP will be drawn primarily from recommendations of the TWG, Government priorities, and a list of policy items that officials are aware of – this includes both existing items on the work programme and emerging issues. 6. An A3 is attached to this report which provides a high-level picture of what the refreshed TPWP could look like. Objectives of the refreshed TPWP 7. As the TWG found, New Zealand’s tax system is generally sound and working well. The TWG made a number of recommendations aimed at improving the fairness, balance and structure of the system. Many of these recommendations are being considered for the refreshed TPWP. To support the ongoing strength of the tax system, we consider that the refreshed TPWP needs to contain a mix of items which In Confidence IR2019/255; T2019/1375: 2019-20 Refresh of the tax policy work programme Page 2 of 6 IN CONFIDENCE ensure that the system not only functions well now but is responsive to likely future challenges. 8. In light of this, we have organised the general structure for the refreshed work programme into the following overarching objectives, which items on the TPWP could contribute to or support. These objectives are based primarily on what we understand the Government’s objectives to be, including from our conversations with Ministers. • Improving the integrity and fairness of the tax system • Ensuring the tax system contributes to economic performance • Ensuring the tax system functions well now, and is responsive to likely future challenges and opportunities • Ensuring the tax system minimises compliance and administration costs • Ensuring the tax system effectively supports and contributes to wider government priorities 9. The third objective is aimed at ensuring our tax system continues to function well for the 21 st century and beyond. While we have made this a separate objective, it cuts across all objectives, and will be a feature in all projects. Trade-off s will need to be considered within projects, and there is a need to ensure that policy solutions are fit for purpose now and for the future. For example, exploring options to make the gap between the company tax rate and top personal rate more sustainable would be an example of improving the integrity and fairness of the tax system, while at the same time ensuring that the tax system functions well now and is responsive to likely future challenges. Components of the refreshed TPWP Items that will be included TWG recommendations (high priority items) and Government priorities 10. A significant component of the next TPWP will be items that the Government has indicated, in its response to the TWG report, should be progressed as high priority items in the TPWP. These recommendations relate to: • Land and housing – this includes options for taxing vacant land by land-bankers, reviewing the current tax rules for land speculators and requiring IRD numbers when transferring a main home. • Infrastructure – this includes understanding the Government’s wider agenda on infrastructure and how the tax system could facilitate or contribute to this agenda. • Seismic strengthening – this includes considering whether the current tax settings are appropriate in relation to seismic strengthening. Progressing this will involve making decisions, for example, about the relative treatment of those who have already progressed seismic strengthening (and not received tax benefits) and those who have not. • Improving the integrity of the tax system – this includes a potential range of measures to ensure everyone pays their fair share. We will report to you further on which specific measures we recommend prioritising for this work. In Confidence IR2019/255; T2019/1375: 2019-20 Refresh of the tax policy work programme Page 3 of 6 IN CONFIDENCE 11. The refreshed TPWP will also include items which contribute to or support Government priorities, coalition and confidence and supply agreement items. Existing work programme items 12. A mix of items which are on the current work programme will be rolled over to the refreshed TPWP. Some items will be included because they are still ongoing or are non-discretionary. Others are items which are on hold – that is, they were deprioritised for higher priority projects – but we now consider that they should be reprioritised under a refreshed work programme. Examples include: • International tax – this includes the work on a potential digital services tax and the DTA programme. (Ongoing) • Business transformation (BT) – we will continue to support Inland Revenue’s BT programme and also consider opportunities to further leverage off the benefits provided by BT – for example opportunities under BT for the self-employed. (Ongoing) • Research and development tax credit. (Ongoing) • GST discussion document – GST issues arise from time to time that require a policy response. It is important for the health of the GST system to address these issues. This item has been on hold since mid-2018. We expect the discussion document to be largely revenue neutral. (May be reprioritised) Emerging issues 13. Since the last TPWP refresh, new issues or issues that were not previously on the work programme have emerged. Some of these emerging issues are non- discretionary and will need to be added to the work programme. The new issues include: • Considering the tax consequences arising from the establishment of the Housing and Urban Development Authority (HUDA) • Supporting the Government’s response to the Welfare Expert Advisory Group (WEAG) Items that will be considered for inclusion 14. The rest of the work programme will be drawn from the remaining TWG report recommendations and the list of discretionary items we are aware of (both on the current work programme and emerging issues). We are currently undertaking a prioritisation exercise of all these items and will report to you further on the outcome of this work. 15. Recommendations of the TWG that the Government has already agreed will not be progressed are not being assessed. Resourcing the work programme 16. The high priority items that will be included in the next work programme are likely to take up a significant amount of available tax policy resource. This means there are constraints on how many additional measures beyond these items that can be included, at least in the short-term. We will undertake further work on this and report back to you. 17. In addition to the high priority items, we consider it is important to commit resources to general maintenance and remedial policy items. These are necessary to ensure a well-functioning tax system. We also consider it important to carve out In Confidence IR2019/255; T2019/1375: 2019-20 Refresh of the tax policy work programme Page 4 of 6 IN CONFIDENCE some resource to focus on long-term stewardship projects. Both of these focus areas will likely require approximately 20 per cent each of total resources. 18. Our initial assessment is that we will be at capacity when taking into account: • The high priority items from the TWG; • General maintenance and remedial items; • The stewardship function; and • Any rollover items from the current work programme. 19. However, we will have the options to manage this capacity by flexing the timing of delivery of various items. Once we have direction from you on your highest priorities, we will advise you on realistic timing and, depending on how acceptable our proposed timing is, what trade-offs may be required to achieve your objectives. Fiscal implications 20. Some of the items proposed for inclusion, including some of the high priority items such as seismic strengthening and infrastructure support have with fiscal costs. We would like to discuss with you the approach to the potential fiscal implications of the work programme. 21. The following table provides you with an indication of items being considered for the refreshed TPWP that may have significant fiscal impacts: Items which could potentially raise revenue Measures is likely to significantly reduce revenue International tax issues such as the digital economy Support for nationally significant infrastructure Further integrity measures to ensure everyone pays their fair share, including: - Closely-held company issues - Options to make the gap between the company and top personal tax rate more sustainable. Research and development tax credit (already included in forecasts) Purchase price allocation Seismic strengthening Improvements to the land rules Small business compliance cost reductions Feasibility and black-hole expenditure ($5m- $50m per annum depending on design and as cost increases over time) Loss carry forwards when ownership changes (fiscal cost depends on design, costing for the TWG proposal was approximately $50 million per annum) Building depreciation (up to $300m per annum) Next steps Timelines 22. Officials would like to discuss the proposed work programme objectives with you at the Joint Ministers meeting of 13 May. If Ministers are comfortable with the direction of the work programme, we will undertake a prioritisation exercise, which will involve assessing all the possible items for inclusion on the refreshed TPWP against our resourcing capacity. We will bring the outcome of this exercise back to In Confidence IR2019/255; T2019/1375: 2019-20 Refresh of the tax policy work programme Page 5 of 6 IN CONFIDENCE you in the form of a detailed draft work programme, for your consideration at the joint meeting on 11 June. This will take into account the consultation referred to below. Consultation 23. While we have not done any formal consultation, discussions on items for possible inclusion on the work programme were heavily canvassed with stakeholders during the TWG process. We understand issues that are particularly important to business stakeholders (specifically, the Corporate Taxpayers Group (CTG) and Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand (CA ANZ)) include: • Feasibility and blackhole expenditure; • Cross-border employment 1 ; • Building depreciation; • Loss continuity; • Small business compliance costs; • Disputes. 24. Given the ongoing resource constraints on the work programme, it will be important to ensure that stakeholder expectations are managed appropriately. 25. We would like to discuss with you our proposed approach for consulting with stakeholders on the proposed refresh of the TPWP. In particular, we would like Ministers’ approval to undertake limited consultation with key stakeholders (including CA ANZ, CTG, and a representative group of civil society) on the proposed direction of the next TPWP, before our next meeting with you on 11 June. Communications 26. Once Ministers agree to a refreshed TPWP, we will prepare a Cabinet paper for Cabinet’s noting. This will likely be in July 2019. Following Cabinet consideration, we will discuss with you how you would like to publicly announce the refreshed work programme. Revenue Strategy 27. The Government will also be updating its revenue strategy as part of the Fiscal Strategy section of the Minister of Finance’s Budget document. The revenue strategy has been revised to reflect the Government’s response to the TWG and is attached to this report as an appendix. 1 This item is about ensuring that definitions of tax residency are not an undue impediment to the temporary movement of employees overseas, or temporary movement of offshore employees to work in New Zealand. In Confidence IR2019/255; T2019/1375: 2019-20 Refresh of the tax policy work programme Page 6 of 6 IN CONFIDENCE Recommended action We recommend that you: (a) Note the contents of this report Noted Noted (b) Agree to discuss this report at the next joint-tax meeting on 13 May 2019 Agreed/Not agreed Agreed/Not agreed Mark Vink Emma Grigg Manager Policy Director The Treasury Inland Revenue Hon Grant Robertson Hon Stuart Nash Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue / /2019 / /2019 In Confidence IR2019/255; T2019/1375: 2019-20 Refresh of the tax policy work programme IN CONFIDENCE APPENDIX s 18(d) IN CONFIDENCE PROPOSED OBJECTIVES FOR REFRESHED TAX POLICY WORK PROGRAMME and corresponding indicative potential areas of work Improving the integrityand fairnessof the tax system High priority items: •Improvements to the land rules •Internationaltax issues such as the digital economy •Further integrity measures to ensure everyone pays their fair share potentially including: •Closely-held company issues •Tax compliance for the self-employed •Hidden economy •Explore options to make gap between company and top personal rates more sustainable Further items for potential inclusion: •Charities •Purchase price allocation Ensuring the tax system contributes to economic performance High priority items: •Research and development tax credit •Seismic strengthening Further items for potential inclusion: •Feasibility and black hole expenditure •Loss carry forwards when ownership changes •Building depreciation Ensuring the tax system functions well now and is responsiveto likely futurechallenges Likely non-discretionary (existing items): •Regularongoing remedial and enhancement work within BBLR settings. For example: •General remedial work as issues arise •Review of donee status applications •Treaty of Waitangi settlements •DTA work programme •GST discussion document Further items for potential inclusion: •Shorter term ongoing remedial and enhancement work within BBLR settings.For example: •Māori Authoritymatters •Longer term work on challenges and opportunities. For example: •Economic effects of personal taxation •The progressivity of the tax and transfer system Ensuring the tax system minimisescomplianceand administrationcosts High priority items: •Business Transformation – ongoing support of programme and consideringfurther opportunities to leverage benefits •The next two releases of BT include: KiwiSaver, Student Loans and Child Support •Tax information, collection, sharing and transparency Further items for potential inclusion: •Small business compliance cost reduction measures •Tax disputes for smaller taxpayers Ensuring the tax system effectively supports and contributes to wider government priorities High priority items: •Supportfor nationally significantinfrastructure •Supporting and contributing to cross-agency work including: •Social policy •Ongoing WEAG work •Environmental •Information sharing •Crown debt Likely non-discretionary (emerging): •Tax issues related to the establishment of HUDA Further items for potential inclusion: •Otherenvironmental measures recommended by the TWG IN CONFIDENCE PO LICY AND STRATEGY Tax policy report: Tax policy work programme refresh – options on possible packages Date: 17 May 2019 Priority: Medium Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2019/277 T2019/1464 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Finance Agree to recommendations 24 May 2019 Minister of Revenue Agree to recommendations 24 May 2019 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Emma Grigg Policy Director, Inland Revenue Mark Vink Manager, Tax Strategy, The Treasury s 9(2)(a) 2. In Confidence IR2019/277; T2019/1464: Tax policy work programme refresh – options on possible packages Page 1 of 4 IN CONFIDENCE 17 May 2019 Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue Tax policy work programme refresh – options on possible packages Purpose and background 1. At the joint-Ministers’ meeting on 13 May 2019, you indicated that you were interested in advancing certain items on the refreshed tax policy work programme (TPWP) particularly around land, businesses and small businesses. 2. Given the time it takes to implement policy changes, we would like to check in with you on what your expectations are for implementing changes in these areas by 2020. This report therefore outlines the possible deliverables in the areas of land, businesses and small businesses over the next 12-months, and provides examples of the items that could be considered under each area. We are interested in your views on our proposed approach, including the proposed deliverables and timing under each of the packages. Potential packages of work to be progressed within the next 12 months 3. In our last discussion, we outlined some overarching objectives for the refreshed TPWP and the possible items which could be included that would contribute to or support these objectives. While you were broadly comfortable with this general approach, it was accepted that there is fluidity between the objectives and certain items of work may cross-over several objectives. Further, while the TPWP is set for 18-months, you were interested in progressing certain items of work (particularly the high priority items indicated in your Tax Working Group (TWG) response) on a faster track. 4. This has led us to consider another way of organising the work programme, which is to consider items as part of focused packages of work. We consider that the overarching objectives of the refreshed TPWP would remain, however, the packages proposed recognise that several items of work would contribute to or support multiple objectives. 5. Based on our discussion with you, we have packaged items up into the following key areas: Land 6. You have indicated that you are interested in progressing a package of work on land. We consider that a focused programme of work is possible in the short-term which would cover recommendations by the TWG around: o Reviewing the current rules relating to speculators, land banking and vacant land (noting this could include work already underway by the Productivity Commission); and o Any issues around enforcement of the current rules including whether we can do anything more operationally. 7. We do not think we would be able to conduct a wider review of the land rules in the next 12 months, especially if Ministers are interested in enacting legislation. Any consultation document could, however, fla g any potential issues that may warrant In Confidence IR2019/277; T2019/1464: Tax policy work programme refresh – options on possible packages Page 2 of 4 IN CONFIDENCE further consideration in the longer term. If Ministers are comfortable with this approach, we propose the following timeline: S eparate packages for businesses and small businesses 8. You were also interested in a potential package for businesses and small businesses. These packages would include a mix of integrity measures as well as items which have fiscal costs. In the first instance, we consider that further scoping work is required to determine what is included in these packages. This will involve talking to stakeholders to ensure the right mix of items are included – for example, any business-friendly initiatives we are considering should not only be ones that the business community see value in us progressing but should also contribute to enhancing economic performance. 9. 10. 11. A summary of our proposed approach is as follows: Other packages of work to be progressed over the 18-month TPWP period 12. We consider that the remainder of the work programme (and our resources) would be committed to the following packages of work: • Infrastructure • Information collection s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) In Confidence IR2019/277; T2019/1464: Tax policy work programme refresh – options on possible packages Page 3 of 4 IN CONFIDENCE • Environment • Government response to WEAG recommendations • Tax exemptions • Charities • General maintenance and remedial matters • Business Transformation 13. The attached table provides Ministers with further details of the possible packages of work and the approximate timing of deliverables. We note that the list of possible items for inclusion under each package is not comprehensive, but rather is intended to provide Ministers with a general sense of what could be included. Next steps 14. We are currently undertaking a prioritisation exercise of all the items for potential inclusion in the refreshed TPWP. We will provide you with a detailed draft work programme, taking into account any comments you may have on this report, in time for a discussion at the joint ministers’ meeting on 11 June. 15. Following Ministers’ approval of the refreshed work programme, we will prepare a Cabinet paper for Cabinet’s noting in July. Ministers can announce the refreshed work programme following Cabinet consideration. We will discuss with you closer to the time options for announcing the TPWP. In Confidence IR2019/277; T2019/1464: Tax policy work programme refresh – options on possible packages Page 4 of 4 IN CONFIDENCE Recommendations We recommend that you: (a) Indicate your preferences on the proposed packages for the next work programme in the following table: Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue (1) Agree to a focused package in relation land Agreed Not agreed Agreed Not agreed (2) Agree to officials developing a package for businesses Agreed Not agreed Agreed Not agreed (3) Agree to the general approach proposed for the remaining packages as outlined in the report Agreed Not agreed Agreed Not agreed (4) Note that officials will provide you with a detailed draft of the refreshed tax policy work programme in time for discussion on 11 June Noted Noted Mark Vink Emma Grigg Manager Policy Director The Treasury Policy and Strategy, Inland Revenue Hon Grant Robertson Hon Stuart Nash Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue / /2019 / /2019 s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) In Confidence IR2019/277; T2019/1464: Tax policy work programme refresh – options on possible packages Page 1 of 1 IN CONFIDENCE Proposed packages Land Business Small Business Other possible remaining packages for consideration Proposed product(s) and timing ( Examples of possible items that could be considered for inclusion • Speculators • Land banking and vacant land (noting Productivity Commission work) • Enforcement of current rules TWG recommendations including: • Seismic strengthening • Loss carry forwards when ownership changes • Feasibility expenditure and blackhole expenditure Items already underway such as: • R & D • Digital economy • International frameworks • Purchase price allocation • Cross-border employment TWG recommendations including: • Closely-held company issues • Compliance and enforcement issues • Simplifying FBT • Tax disputes for small taxpayers Items already underway such as: • Tax compliance for self- employed (accounts payable reporting) • Considering issues around the sharing economy/ pl atforms • AIM review Infrastructure Report would consider how or if tax could facilitate or contribute to the Government’s wider agenda for infrastructure and include: • Working with other agencies to understand wider issues, including current issues Inland Revenue is involved in such as the infrastructure levy • Understanding overseas experience Tax information collection Report to Ministers in this area would include: • our overall strategy for collection and use of information – what information do we collect and what information should we collect • cross agency engagement Environment Removing petroleum mining concessions – Non-resident oil-rig exemption – proposed SOP to current tax bill, completed by June 2019 Other TWG recommendations relating to environment – Government response to WEAG Likely Cabinet decisions on future work programme – Potential initiatives - • This involves cross-agency work • Includes workstream on income adequacy • Includes child support pass on Business Transformation (BT) Changes identified in next 2 releases of BT – will be included in relevant omnibus tax bill where necessary This area of work would provide ongoing support to the BT programme. Changes that will be considered in the next 2 releases include: KiwiSaver, Student Loans, child support and possible simplification of PIE rates. This area would also consider further opportunities to leverage benefits from BT. Charities Report to Ministers – Report would cover: • the outcome of DIA review, in particular accumulation of assets • Charity and not-for-profit issues • Cross-agency work across the system Tax exemptions Report to Ministers – Report would include wider discussion on competitive neutrality and consider a framework for when it is appropriate to provide tax exempt status to certain entities. General maintenance and remedial A range of items to be included in omnibus tax bills - Examples of items include: • GST issues canvassed in GST discussion document • BEPS remedials • Review of donee status applications • General maintenance and remedial work as issues arise, this includes cross-agency matters and non-discretionary work • Longer term work on challenges and opportunities, for example, progressivity of the tax and transfer system and economic effects of personal taxation s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE PO LICY AND STRATEGY Tax policy report: Final details of the refreshed Tax Policy Work Programme 2019-20 Date: 6 June 2019 Priority: Medium Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2019/306 T2019/1661 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Finance Discuss report at meeting on 11 June 2019. Agree to recommendations. 11 June 2019 Minister of Revenue Discuss report at meeting on 11 June 2019. Agree to recommendations. 11 June 2019 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Emma Grigg Policy Director, Inland Revenue Mark Vink Manager, Tax Strategy, The Treasury s 9(2)(a) 3. IR2019/306; T2019/1661: Final details of the refreshed Tax Policy Work Programme for 2019-20 IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE 6 June 2019 Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue Final details of the refreshed Tax Policy Work Programme 2019-20 Executive summary 1. We previously reported to you on our proposed approach to refresh the T ax Policy Work Programme (TPWP). This included organising the next TPWP into key packages of work around which items for consideration could be arranged (IR2019/255; T2019/1375, IR2019/277; T2019/1464 refers). We understand that Ministers are comfortable with this approach. This report, which includes the details of the proposed refreshed TPWP, has been prepared on this basis. 2. This report provides you with a detailed draft of the items, and key areas of focus, that could sit within packages of work proposed for inclusion on the refreshed TPWP \[attachment 3\]. This report also provides a high-level picture of the TPWP, including how the TPWP sits alongside wider Government strategies and objectives \[attachments 2 and 1 respectively\]. 3. We would like to discuss this report with you at the next joint meeting on 11 June 2019 and get your views on: • whether you are comfortable with the detailed draft of the next TPWP; • whether you would like us to develop land and business packages . We previously canvassed these packages in our last report to you (IR2019/277; T2019/1464 refers ); • whether there is anything further you would like to include or remove from the proposed TPWP; • the proposed key products and deliverables under each package of work; • whether you are comfortable with us providing key stakeholders with further information on the detailed draft of the refreshed TPWP, in particular details on key deliverables and timing; • how you would like to announce the refresh of the TPWP and the overall presentation of the TPWP documents that we propose to publish alongside your announcement; and • whether you are comfortable with the proposed timetable for next steps. 4. Subject to your agreement, we will prepare a Cabinet paper of the final refreshed TPWP for noting at the Economic Development Cabinet Committee (DEV) meeting on 24 July 2019 (with Cabinet consideration the following week). We propose that the TPWP be published and announced following Cabinet consideration. s 9(2)(f)(iv) IR2019/306; T2019/1661: Final details of the refreshed Tax Policy Work Programme for 2019-20 IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Recommended action We recommend that you: (a) Discuss this report at the joint-Ministers’ meeting on 11 June 2019, and indicate your preferences on final details of the refreshed TPWP for 2019-20 in the following table: Recommendation Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue (1) Agree to the final details of the proposed refreshed TPWP for 2019-20 as outlined in this report and the associated attachments. Agreed / Not agreed Agreed / Not agreed (2) Yes / No Yes / No (3) Agree to officials providing key stakeholders with further information on the detailed TPWP, in particular details on the key deliverables and timings of packages. Agreed / Not agreed Agreed / Not agreed (4) Indicate whether there are any further items of work you would like us to include or remove from the proposed TPWP. Yes / No If yes, please specify: Yes / No If yes, please specify: (5) Agree to the proposed next steps in this report, which includes a paper for noting to the DEV Committee on Wednesday 24 July 2019 and Cabinet on Monday 29 July 2019. Agreed / Not agreed Agreed / Not agreed (6) Agree to release the attachments to this report when you announce the release of the refreshed TPWP. Agreed / Not agreed Agreed / Not agreed Mark Vink Emma Grigg Manager Policy Director The Treasury Inland Revenue Hon Grant Robertson Hon Stuart Nash Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue / /2019 / /2019 s 9(2)(f)(iv) IR2019/306; T2019/1661: Final details of the refreshed Tax Policy Work Programme for 2019-20 IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE Prioritising items for the TPWP 5. Since our last discussion with you on 13 May 2019, we have undertaken an exercise to prioritise the items of work for possible inclusion in the TPWP. When considering whether to include an item of work on the next TPWP, we weighed up the following factors: • What we already know are priority items or areas you wish to progress on the refreshed TPWP, in particular: o the Tax Working Group (TWG) recommendations that the Government has indicated are high priority items for consideration; and o Ministers’ desire to advance a focused package of work around land and businesses (including small businesses). • Whether the item supports or contributes to wider Government objectives (including both social and economic objectives); • The fiscal cost of certain items of work and whether these items could be packaged together with other items of work (for example, integrity measures) to deliver a coherent package; • Feedback from stakeholders to date; • The need to ensure the TPWP contains a mix of items that are both responsive to the issues of today but also to any longer-term opportunities or challenges; • The resourcing required to deliver the packages of work; and • Whether we could phase the delivery of certain items of work or packages. Details of the refreshed TPWP 6. As a result of this prioritisation exercise, we have prepared three documents (attached to this report) which present an overall picture of the proposed TPWP for 2019-20. 7. 8. Attachment 3 – Details of the refreshed TPWP 9. This attachment provides detailed descriptions of the packages which would be progressed on the next TPWP, including the key deliverables and timings for each proposed package of work. s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) IR2019/306; T2019/1661: Final details of the refreshed Tax Policy Work Programme for 2019-20 IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE 10. Unlike previous TPWPs, we have deliberately chosen not to provide a “shopping list of items” under each package. Instead, the focus is on outlining why we are progressing with certain areas of work ( having taken into account the factors outlined above). 11. This approach would a llow us, where appropriate, to consult / engage with stakeholders during the policy development process to refine the specific items or initiatives that could be considered under each package. Where we have been able to, we have outlined examples of the types of items that could be included under certain packages of work. 12. Also attached to this report is a table illustrating how the TWG recommendations are reflected on the refreshed TPWP \[see attachment 4\]. Packages for land and business 13. In our last report to you, we outlined a possible approach for progressing packages for land and businesses. The approach for both packages is summarised on the first page of attachment 3. We are seeking confirmation from you to begin developing these packages. 14. Releasing details of the TPWP 15. We would like to discuss attachments one, two and three with you. Taken together, they represent our proposal of what should be on the Government’s refreshed TPWP. Subject to your views, we consider that these attachments could be released when Ministers announce the refresh of the TPWP. 16. Further, we seek your views on whether there are any other items of work you would like to include on the TPWP, or any items you do not wish to include. For example, is there any particular work you would like on longer-term tax issues? This work may not necessarily end up on a publicly released TPWP given it is unclear what the deliverable or timing would be at this stage. However, it can still be factored into our wider TPWP if Ministers are interested in including it. s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) IR2019/306; T2019/1661: Final details of the refreshed Tax Policy Work Programme for 2019-20 IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE High-level consultation 17. Since our last meeting, we also consulted with the following key stakeholders: • New Zealand Bankers’ Association; • Corporate Taxpayers’ Group (CTG); • Chartered Accountants Australia New Zealand (CA ANZ); and • Small Business Council. 18. We note that CTG provided us with a letter outlining what their members consider should be prioritised by the Government. We were also provided with a copy of a letter to the Minister of Revenue from the Small Business Council, which covered key areas of interest for that group. Finally, CA ANZ noted that the outcome of a survey of its members (on what they consider to be priority issues) will be released later in the year. 19. Our discussions with stakeholders covered the broad direction of the next TPWP, the priority areas for the Government, and the idea of the next TPWP being organised into packages of work. While discussions covered all the proposed packages of work for the next TPWP, the general focus was around the packages you had indicated you would like prioritised – that is, the packages for land and business (including small business). 20. Discussions with stakeholders went well. We outlined that the packages (particularly for business) would have to include a mix of measures which would support a productive economy and encourage growth and innovation, while at the same time recognising the need to protect the integrity of the tax base and the overall fiscal constraints. They were generally comfortable with this approach. 21. Where stakeholders had a specific interest in progressing a particular item of work, they indicated that they would provide us with further information on why that item should prioritised over other items. For example, CA ANZ noted that they will provide us with a list of land measures they consider should be included in the review of the land rules. CTG also indicated that they would think about providing the items they would like progressed on the TPWP within the context of the Government’s wider objectives, particularly around productive investment and innovation. 22. Stakeholders also told us that understanding key deliverables and the possible timing of the different packages of work on the TPWP was important to them. To this end, we would like your permission to provide key stakeholders with further information on the detailed TPWP. Further consultations planned 23. The consultation we have undertaken over the last few weeks is only the first step of a wider strategy for engaging with stakeholders on the packages of work we intend to deliver under the next TPWP. As mentioned above, as we begin the policy development process for each individual item or package of work, we will engage further with stakeholders. This includes, where appropriate, involving stakeholders right from the start of each project. 24. Once the TPWP is finalised, we also expect to start engaging with a wider set of stakeholders and interested parties, including other businesses, social partners, Maori/iwi and across Government. One of the groups you had asked us to talk to at our last meeting was the Prime Minister’s Business Advisory Council, chaired by Mr Christopher Luxon. We have been discussing with the Minister of Finance’s office IR2019/306; T2019/1661: Final details of the refreshed Tax Policy Work Programme for 2019-20 IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE about how best to engage with this group as we advance items relating to business on the TPWP. Next steps Timeline 25. Subject to your agreement, we will prepare a Cabinet paper for noting by DEV, which would include all the documents attached to this report. 26. The following timetable provides you with key dates which will allow you to announce and publish the next TPWP in July: Item Timing TPWP discussion with joint-Ministers Tuesday 11 June 2019 Draft Cabinet paper to Ministers’ offices Thursday 4 July 2019 Cabinet paper lodged in CabNet Thursday 18 July 2019 Paper to DEV for noting Wednesday 24 July 2019 Paper to Cabinet Monday 29 July 2019 Release of TPWP Any time after Cabinet consideration Communications/announcing the TPWP 27. We would like to discuss with you how you would like to announce the refresh of the TPWP. In previous years, the Minister of Revenue has announced the refresh in a keynote address at a suitable tax event or conference. At the same time, we published the details of the TPWP on Inland Revenue’s Tax Policy website. If you are comfortable with this approach, we will liaise with your offices to try and find a suitable opportunity for an announcement.                  !                             !  "#  $   " %     &'()&'   \*%   +          ,+%      -  \*  +    # +     +!"#$ " %  #.% "#$%&'(#%)) \* &   !"#$ " % ,"$"-   + !#  #  /         "$"      +  0     +    ! #      .            +    \*     1#  %+% % \*  %  2 "$" &'()&'  +  % +%           #  %+       %#  +     #        #+3++  "$"  !/  4.    %            \* %    +     +    + # +   %+ ++\*%5\* 6+      "$"  \*                 %      %#  7.  \*)%  !  #     #              +     5\*6+! +   5\*6+ 8 %   + + % #  +    #.              !  #  +       +          + +  \*  9  "$"    +  \*    + +   +$   ++     !  #             #        +#  +               !  #  $      ++     \*           +  !#  +        !#    1+%  !#%     \*+ + 1 :   "$"    &'()&'    +       +  +  #     ! $ % ,$-        #      +"$"      $  +   2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 In Confidence 4. 8.$    % +            "$"    \*    ,     2-  \*   ; /<+ /&= /23    /43 + /7=   /9 + + /:>#,+%   $ ! .+ #   - // ?># /(   /'!! /3  9. \*     !  \*  %    !%  > +\*  %%    +,\*        #  +         +  "$"-  \*  \*  \*   \*    +  %,\*    -+  \*    %+!%  10.\*%+   \*     + "$" # @%3 .5\*  # .%+ + "$"3+ !#\* + $,-%./ 3  &':       +     $    +  \*          +              +         !  #     +        1 & $+ 5\*6+ !#% #++\* %\*   +  ((  +  +     %          +    !#$    # + +!      !      %        ++     \*+  $ + ++\*  %  "$"    23  .         #  +           $ +                +  \*  % + \*%% ; 2\*  + +   \* \*+ # &  2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 2&\*  \* \* +#+ \*# 22 +  ++ +  "$" 24 +  +  + + %   #    "$"  4  ++ + %   #++; 4+  ++%+++%A 4&+    %      %      #)%    A 42   + %A 44+  ! +% % %A 47\* +%+# A+ 49+ #) +# 7.       %    #  +      ++         + "$" ))#.& 9 \*   ++    +"$" + \*        + $%  \*    !%  "$"+ %% :>    ++         +  "$"       %+   + \*       \*                  \*+   +1      /     +    +"$" &'()&'       + !$ % 8:. &'( 2  2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 s 9(2)(f)(iv) 4  2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 s 9(2)(f)(iv)  !" #   &4       +  ++  +        \*    \*   \*    % + !"$"+% #+ +%   +\*   &73+ +%# 1\*  \* % +  !  "$"           %  \* #          \*      %  % +       +     \*  \*        %%  \*  +   + %     #  +                  ++ ++  \*    %          \*   +    + +  +    \*    +    +%! + #+    !/  &9=\* # \*   "$" ,&# )6#$'&'.  ./      +    \*    \*+    #           #  +     +  %  +    +    1  \*+      +  \*#           ++    !%  + +   %  +      +        \*  \*       \*    3+      +  # %      +      3    #     #  %     %      +  +   #\*+    B\*    )        +  +           +    %  + !  +    % )   \*   \*  +  \*   %   +       A    !     " +#      \*% 7  2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 s 9(2)(f)(iv)   %   +#  %  +  \*  +          ++  #!+ %+% \* \* +   % +#+# +%'.# $  ++   +         \*   \*+      +#  +  #  \*  \*; 3 %% # +  # #A <%                 #   A+  %  >  + \*  ,          +%-           "$"       % ++     3  \*           +      \*   + %     # +  +\*    \*     #   % +  \*  #     +)         ,+%               %#-  +        .3 &%$&%# $ ++  +  +   %     %       %  #  %       1     \*    \*  +       ! %  %    .3) &'. $!!#$&'. ./ %#    \*         %     0#  +   0#    3+ + + + \*+ #1 +%'.#  .3) &' .7+8  \*  \* 3+ =  %   !/ 3+\*   4      =   %   ,>+  <  +  C\*> -  + +% 7, +> - $% =#\*  +#%++% #   %+  \*!+ ## #3)  ./ #)#/' ! #   !+ % # + ++  %% %#    1  +          3  ++    3+   +  !#   %    #  \*  !  %   #  # +#  %        ++  0  \*   0  ++           %        +   )     +      ++ +   #         ##+  !# $' !!'$\* \*  +#\* ;        \*      \*    %   ,$.- 9  2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 +%;   $ % A  + )A+ + + A C\*> A+    %#              !      # #                \*          \* %  #  \*  >  +     %    +    \*  % .('.)#.&  4 %& '. 1!# #$.)\*  \*  \*+ ;    \*     !%  %     !  +%+ % \*! %% +   A   +A    \*     %         + A+ +# ! !  #    \*  \*   \*     %           +     !  #  +  +    !  #    \*    \*    \*  + #)  !    % " %\* ) + #           \*  \*   +  + %   %       %    ++       + !+  5 '&'#!          ) )   +  +   %    1       %  +  \*    +     3 #     %#+  % #+    ) +!          +  #  %     \*    \*  \*    #%  " #"#)&'.    \*    \*  +     \*     + %  ! ! + #3\*+ ;  \*  +       \*            #  A  +A A+           !       # :  2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 \*     .&#. &'. ! \*  +  % \*%  \* !+#+%, % % % #+%++-"   +%  %)+%       !   \* A  +      ,+%5\*6+- +  \*  \*   \*  \*+;  % +% !++A   !  .%   %  +  %  \*     +% A  ) \* ,+% \* % -A+ \*)  \*       +  +1     =     + " > %,=">- +#   %% &:$   !/ \*  %%!+        #+    "$" $ \* \* \*   +  %,\*    -+  \*    %+!%   $ % &  #   # #   &/       +     +\*    \*     $  +    +    +"$"      &(   ++    +"$"  +   \*% ; &($      #    .  %   # $ + ++    +"$"A &(&$                   \*+     1 , +-A &(2                  \*   +  \*        +    %+  %   \*         \*     +       %A &(4+  + +A &(7   +          "$"      !              +##% )    %A /  2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 &(9   % 0 +\* 3++   #+   \*  "$"A+ &(:$   \*  + # \*     2'" % "$"  %  #++  !  #     %                      ++      +"$" &'()&'  2 #"&&# 2&    #  +     ++       2   .  %    #      ++ %         !    +  +    \* %  \* +       \*         +       +      &'(  + !# 3          "$"     !+       #    B\*  0#            %    %   +%\*++\*% %      &'&' .%!& &'. 22 3++   # +   %  "$" &'()&' 24.          +         +  "$"    +   % ) +\*  \*% + ;5\*6+=  .      !#      +     +  .  .   5\*  6+    +\* + + \*  + \*               !  "$"  +       \*   +              0 #  \*    #  + +   +                  +   >=\* +     +"$" 27  ++# + "$" %+%;    #=3+#   #+   #>   #      3 .     #  B% + D  <+ 3  5\* 6+.   " CE  . \*       "    +    +      #     %  .   +   +      + +#  \*+  %# %%     ++%%+ #+ %  ++ \*   "$"%%\* 0 ; (  2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) 27%   %   +  \* %       \*+       +   +  +     +%             F ?\*  +   A 27&%   +         %       #  +  A+ 272%   + #  +         #     %           +  #%  + %  GG        ?? # 29    +"$"+\*!  %%   '. .$' !)!'$ &'. 2:$      "$"     +    %      #                      "$" \*  + +        + "$" 2/.     \*       "$"   %   %     # +   + \*% ,#-   $   "$"\* ,#%-     #  ++     %           D#  \*%+ %  !#  ++ =+%  #-'! &'(#)!'$ &'. 2( "$"   + 0 % % B\* #  "$"\* 0  %%    %     %\*% #+ 3!.&'':  !.+ .((4+ ++> !.(/7 ) $&. !\*' 4'.% #3.#,3.- 0 +  "$"3+ +   #\*  3.  1 "$" 0 + %) .'-5& 4   "$"         \*     B  %   .  ((2  +     =   %   .  (('   B  %   +  =    %     \*    + + \*   1 "$"\*  # %++ #./# ./)!'$ &'. 4&     +    %      #  %+     .#    \*   + +\*   1 \*  %  6' 1'!'&\*##$&'(# 42  + #+# '  2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 %1!'$'&\* 44$\*    +"$" # @%3  .5\*  #.%. \* +    \* +3+ !#\*  $&'(##!# # 473        #            +    +  # +  \* 2'\* %+#+ %   #$))#./ &'.          +    +           ; 49&#           !  "#  $   " %   ,"$"-       + &'()&',+  + + - 4:&#    \*  \*         +  "$"     #  .%  &'(  # \* + \* + 3+ !#\* 4/&#    ++#+  \* +3+ !#\* .  + +% B     B> 5     2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:56:09 s 9(2)(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE 2bnpvvfw s 9(2)(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE 2bnpvvfw8u 2019-07-29 13:43:06 s 9(2)(f)(iv) IN CONFIDENCE 2bnpvvfw8u 2019-07-29 13:43:39 s 18(d) IN CONFIDENCE 2bnpvvfw8u 2019-07-29 13:43:39 s 18(d) 2bnpvvf s 18(d) IN CONFIDENCE TABLE ILLUSTRATING HOW TAX WORKING GROUP (TWG) RECOMMENDATIONS ARE REFLECTED ON THE REFRESHED TPWP In its response to the recommendations of the TWG, the Government indicated that it would consider 10 recommendations as high priority items for potential inclusion on the TPWP, and 28 recommendations as items to be considered for inclusion. The following table provides a breakdown of how these recommendations have been reflected on the proposed TPWP. Table key: Consider for inclusion on 2019/2020 TPWP Consider as a high priority for inclusion on 2019/2020 TPWP TWG recommendations How it is reflected on the TPWP Land recommendations (including options around investment property and speculators, land-bankers and vacant land) Recs 96 and 97 – Vacant land and land banking, including Productivity Commission review Rec 98 – repeal 10-year rule Rec 99 – IRD numbers when transferring main home Note also Government indicated that it intended to seek a review of current rules relating to land speculators. Included in the TPWP work on land. TWG recommendations on “concessions” and exemptions Rec 17 – tax deductibility of costs associated with QEII covenant or Ngā Whenua Rāhui Rec 18 – FBT exemption for public transport Rec 19 – removing concessions harmful to natural capital Rec 38 – New Zealand Superannuation Fund exemption Concessions and exemptions included in general work on tax exemptions on the TPWP. Recommendation 19 relating to tax concessions for petroleum mining included in environment/sustainable economy work on TPWP. Environmental recommendations Recs 5, 20 to 24 – recommendations relating to the environment. Included in the environment/ sustainable economy work on TPWP, generally as a watching brief and working closely with Ministry for the Environment. Business recommendations (including Māori authority rates, loss continuity and loss trading rules, blackhole expenditure, depreciation, seismic strengthening, GST contractors, closely-held company issues, and improving collection and compliance). Recs 30 and 31 – Māori authority rates Rec 32 – loss continuity Rec 33 blackhole expenditure Rec 34 – depreciation and seismic strengthening Rec 35 – tax measures that encourage building to higher environmental standards Rec 37 – options to reduce compliance costs Rec 57 – GST and contractors Rec 60 – loss trading and loss continuity review Rec 61 and 66 – closely-held company issues Rec 64 – measures to improve collection and encourage compliance Included in the work on the TPWP for businesses. ATTACHMENT 4 2bnpvvfw8u 2019-07-29 13:44:06 IN CONFIDENCE Rec 67 – ensuring the integrity of the tax system is maintained by exploring options around misalignment of tax rates Rec 74 – tax disputes Infrastructure recommendation Recommendation 36 Included in the work on infrastructure on TPWP. Retirement savings recommendations Rec 43 – KiwiSaver Rec 44 – PIE rates simplification Specific TWG recommendations on retirement savings not prioritised on the TPWP. However, opportunities from Business Transformation (BT) to improve social policy, including ways to simplify PIE rates (rec 44) included in BT work on the TPWP. Tax secrecy and transparency recommendations Rec 68 – research and surveys Rec 69 – measures to increase transparency Rec 70 – Inland Revenue publishing broader range of statistics Rec 71 – Inland Revenue information collection Included in the information collection and use work on TPWP. Charities recommendations Recommendations 84 and 85 Included in the charities work on the TPWP, and is closely connected to work by the Department of Internal Affairs. 2bnpvvfw8u 2019-07-29 13:44:06 I N C O N F I D E N C E DEV-19-MIN-0203 Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Refresh of the Government's Tax Policy Work Programme for 2019/20 Portfolios Finance / Revenue On 31 July 2019, the Cabinet Economic Development Committee: 1 noted t hat the government’s Tax Policy Work Programme (TPWP) prioritises and sequences the development of tax policy proposals, and that the TPWP is refreshed approximately every 18 months; 2 noted t he refreshed TPWP for 2019/20, as outlined in the paper under DEV-19-SUB-0203 and associated attachments; 3 noted that the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Revenue propose to announce the refreshed TPWP in early August 2019, will be published on Inland Revenue’s tax policy website. Janine Harvey Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon Kelvin Davis Office of the Prime Minister Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Officials Committee for DEV Hon Phil Twyford Hon Dr Megan Woods Hon Stuart Nash Hon Jenny Salesa Hon Damien O’Connor Hon Shane Jones Hon James Shaw Hon Eugenie Sage Hard-copy distribution: Minister of Finance Mini ster of Revenue 2bnpvvfw8u 2019-08-02 13:53:49 I N C O N F I D E N C E s 9(2)(f)(iv) 5.