Hon Stuart Nash, Minister of Revenue Information Release Tax Administration (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 Cabinet Paper and Minute March 2019 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s Tax Policy website at http://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2019-ir -cab-leg-19-sub-0011/overview . Documents in this information release 1. LEG-19-SUB-0011 – Cabinet paper: Tax Administration (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 2. LEG-19-MIN-0011 – Minute: Tax Administration (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Cabinet Legislation Committee on 19 February 2019 and confirmed by Cabinet on 25 February 2019. One attachment to the Cabinet paper is not included in this information release as it is publicly available: • Tax Administration (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 Information withheld No information was withheld for this information release. Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee TAX ADMINISTRATION (DIRECT CREDIT OF INCOME TAX AND GAMING MACHINE DUTY REFUNDS) ORDER 2019 Proposal 1. This paper seeks the Cabinet Legislation Committee’s agreement to submit the Tax Administration (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 to the Executive Council. 2. It is proposed that the Order in Council applies to income tax (including ancillary taxes, such as PAYE) and gaming machine duty refunds made from 1 April 2019. Policy 3. On 3 April 2018 the Cabinet agreed to implementing mandatory direct crediting of income tax refunds (CAB-18-MIN-0122.01 refers). 4. This proposal would be implemented through an Order in Council under the existing legislative framework in sections 184A and 184B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). This framework provides for progressive implementation of mandatory direct crediting for tax types administered by Inland Revenue. It was enacted with effect of 1 April 2000 to benefit taxpayers by eliminating time delays associated with the postal system and costs related to the banking of cheques. Inland Revenue would also benefit from reduced administration costs. 5. Section 184A of the TAA allows for exemptions when direct crediting would cause undue hardship or is impracticable. 6. Progressive implementation for the various tax types through Orders in Council was to allow Inland Revenue the necessary flexibility to determine the dates when direct crediting of refunds relating to different tax types could best be implemented in terms of system readiness and to give taxpayers time to provide Inland Revenue with up - to-date bank account details and taxpayers with complex business activities more time to make arrangements and adapt their processes. The intend was that the Commissioner would eventually be required to direct credit all refunds into taxpayers’ bank accounts. 7. Compulsory direct crediting was implemented for goods and services tax (GST) refunds as part of moving the administration of GST to Inland Revenue’s new technology platform in the first stage of its Business Transformation programme, as the new technology platform has modernised and improved information flows, self- service online services and more automated processes. 1 2r4hxlcklw 2019-03-25 15:53:10 IN CONFIDENCE 8. The administration of income tax is to be moved to the new technology platform in the next release planned for April 2019. The administration of ancillary taxes, such as PAYE and fringe benefit tax, was moved to the new platform in April 2018. It is therefore a good opportunity to implement direct crediting for income tax refunds (including ancillary taxes) as part of this transition. 9. In addition, the administration of gaming machine duty has already been moved to the new technology platform in April 2018. However, direct crediting under section 184A of the TAA was not implemented at this time as ancillary taxes are a subset of income tax. 10. I recommend that the Committee agree to including gaming machine duty refunds in the scope of the Order in Council, so that direct crediting under section 184A of the TAA applies to all tax types administered in the new technology platform. 11. I also recommend that the Tax Administration (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 is made implementing direct crediting under section 184A of the TAA for income tax and gaming machine duty refunds made from 1 April 2019. Timing and 28-day rule 12. I propose that direct crediting of income tax and gaming machine duty refunds under section 184A of the TAA applies to refunds made from 1 April 2019. The Order would therefore be in accordance with the rule that regulations must not come into force until at least 28 days after they have been notified in the New Zealand Gazette. Compliance 13. The Order complies with: 13.1 the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; 13.2 the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the Human Rights Act 1993; 13.3 the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 1993; 13.4 relevant international standards and obligations; and 13.5 the Legislation Guidelines, which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. 14. No statutory prerequisite exists for making the Order. Regulations Review Committee 15. There are no anticipated grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Order in Council to the attention of the House under Standing Order 319. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel 16. The Parliamentary Counsel Office has certified that the Order in Council is in order for submission to Cabinet. 2 2r4hxlcklw 2019-03-25 15:53:10 IN CONFIDENCE Impact Analysis 17. The Regulatory Quality Team at the Treasury has determined that the regulatory decisions sought in this paper are exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Assessment as they have no or minor impacts on businesses, individuals or not for profit entities. Publicity 18. I intent to issue a media statement once the Order in Council is made by the Executive Council. 19. The new Order in Council will be published in the New Zealand Gazette and on Inland Revenue’s website. Inland Revenue will also publish an article about these changes in its Tax Information Bulletin. Proactive Release 20. I propose to release this Cabinet paper, and associated Order in Council, in full shortly following the publication of the signed Order in Council in the New Zealand Gazette. Consultation 21. The Treasury, Inland Revenue and the Parliamentary Counsel Office have been consulted in the preparation of this paper. Recommendations The Minister of Revenue recommends that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1. note that on 3 April 2018 the Cabinet agreed that Inland Revenue should issue income tax refunds by direct credit, unless that would result in undue hardship or is not practicable (CAB-18-MIN-0122.01 refers); 2. agree that Inland Revenue should issue gaming machine duty refunds by direct credit, unless that would result in undue hardship or is not practicable; 3. note that the Tax Administration (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 will give effect to the decision referred to in paragraph 1 and 2 above; 4. authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019; 5. note that the (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 will come into force on 1 April 2019. Authorised for lodgement Hon Stuart Nash Minister of Revenue 3 2r4hxlcklw 2019-03-25 15:53:10 IN CONFIDENCE I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-19-MIN-0011 Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Tax Administration (Direct Credit on Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 Portfolio Revenue On 19 February 2019, the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1 noted that on 3 April 2018, the Cabinet agreed that Inland Revenue should issue income tax refunds by direct credit, unless that would result in undue hardship or is not practicable (CAB-18-MIN-0122.01); 2 a reed that Inland Revenue should issue gaming machine duty refunds by direct credit, unless that would result in undue hardship or is not practicable; 3 noted that the Tax Administration (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 will give effect to the decision referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 above; 4 authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Tax Administration (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 \[PCO 21761/2.0\]; 5 noted that the (Direct Credit of Income Tax and Gaming Machine Duty Refunds) Order 2019 will come into force on 1 April 2019. Vivien Meek Committee Secretary Present: Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) Hon Andrew Little Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Stuart Nash Hon Iain Lees-Galloway Hon Tracey Martin Hon Ron Mark Hon Kris Faafoi Hard-copy distribution: Minister of Revenue Officials present from: Officials Committee for LEG 2r4hxlcklw 2019-03-25 15:53:19 I N C O N F I D E N C E 1