Hon Stuart Nash, Minister of Revenue Information Release Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for introduction Policy report, Cabinet paper, and minute July 2019 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s Tax Policy website at http://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2019-ir -c ab -leg-19-sub-0087/overview . Documents in this information release 1.IR2019/186 - Tax policy report: Draft Cabinet paper - Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for introduction (20 May 2019) 2.LEG-19-SUB-0087 - Cabinet paper: Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for introduction (18 June 2019) 3.LEG-19-MIN-0087 - Minute: Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for Introduction (18 June 2019) Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Cabinet Legislation Committee on 18 June 2019 and confirmed by Cabinet on 24 June 2019. Two attachments to the Cabinet paper are not included in this information release as they are publicly available: •Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill •Departmental disclosure statement Information withheld Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act 1982 (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply are identified. Where information is withheld, no public interest was identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Sections of the Act under which information was withheld: 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people 9(2)(f)(iv) to maintain the current constitutional conventions protecting the confidentiality of advice tendered by ministers and officials Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). IN CONFIDENCE POLICY AND STRATEGY Tax policy report: Draft Cabinet paper – Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for introduction Date: 20 May 2019 Priority: Medium Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2019/186 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Revenue Agree to recommendations Authorise the lodgement of the attached Cabinet paper 10a m, Thursday 13 June 2019 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Bill Manager Policy Analyst s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) 1. In Confidence IR2019/186: Draft Cabinet paper – Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for introduction Page 1 of 5 IN CONFIDENCE 20 May 2019 M inister of Revenue Draft Cabinet paper – Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for introduction 1.This report asks you to approve and lodge the attached Cabinet paper and accompanying draft disclosure statement with the Cabinet Office by 10am Thursday 13 June 2019 for consideration at the Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting on Tuesday 18 June 2019. This report also seeks your approval to include a number of additional remedial amendments in the Bill and your approval to seek a minor amendment to a policy change that Cabinet has already approved. 2.The Cabinet paper seeks approval to introduce the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Studen t L oans and Remedial Matters) Bill on or after 26 June 2019 and recommends that a t i ts first reading the Bill is referred to the Finance and Expenditure Select Committee. We have drafted the paper on the basis that you agree to the recommendations to this report. Please advise if there are any changes to the Cabinet paper or Bill that you wish to make. 3.A draft disclosure statement is attached to accompany the Cabinet Paper in accordance with Cabinet guidelines. This document is still subject to some change. The draft disclosure statement is referred to Cabinet along with the Cabinet paper. The draft statement is finalised by Inland Revenue with the Parliamentary Counsel Office three days before the introduction of the Bill, and is made public when the Bill is introduced. 4.The Bill contains the items listed below. Policy items approved by Cabinet •Business Transformation: KiwiSaver Changes (DEV-19-MIN-0038.01 and CAB-19-MIN-0109 refer) •Student Loan Business Transformation Policy Changes ( SWC-19-MIN-0014 a nd CAB-19-MIN-0085 r efer) •Granting overseas donee status to four charities (DEV-19-MIN-0055 and CAB-19-MIN-0142 refer) •Extending the refundability of research and development tax credits, subjec t t o Cabinet approval in late May. Policy/remedial items approved by Minister of Revenue 5.The Bill contains several remedial amendments to Inland Revenue Acts (4 March 2019, IR2019/099, refers). These relate to: •Income attribution rules •Tax treatment of trusts •Disclosure of information about the misconduct of bookkeepers •Tax treatment of non-resident international aircraft operators In Confidence IR2019/186: Draft Cabinet paper – Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for introduction Page 2 of 5 IN CONFIDENCE •Māori authority tax credits •Resident withholding tax for registered charities •Consideration for grant of an easement •Employee Share Schemes. 6.The Bill also contains a number of provisional tax remedial amendments (10 April 2019, IR2019/170 refers). 7.Your approval is also sought in this report for the following changes to previously approved remedial items: •We propose that the application date for the amendment allowing the granting of an income tax exemption to non-resident aircraft carriers be 1 A pril 1984, this being the original application date of the law, rather than the application date of the oldest active agreement under the legislation (1 June 1990). 8.A number of minor maintenance items have also arisen during the Bill’s compilation . Th ese correct minor faults of expression, reader’s aids, and incorrect cross- references. It is proposed that these be included in the Bill. Further remedial items requiring approval by the Minister of Revenue 9.Approval is additionally sought in this report for the following new remedial items. 10.Inland Revenue will be able to issue short-process binding rulings from 1 October 2019. This is a new form of binding ruling service targeted at small-to-medium sized taxpayers. We propose an amendment to allow the Commissioner to withdraw short-process rulings, based on the exiting provision which allows her to withdraw private binding rulings. This will allow the Commissioner to withdraw a ruling where there has been a change in the interpretation of the law (either by the courts or the Commissioner). Withdrawals will apply prospectively, meaning that if taxpayers have entered into an arrangement before the ruling is withdrawn, the Commissioner is still bound by the ruling. We propose that this amendment applies from 1 October 2019 to align with beginning of the short-process rulings process. The Commissioner will not need to apply this provision before the Bill passes into law. 11.Recent changes made to the binding rulings rules also enable the Commissioner to issue binding rulings on matters without the need for an arrangement (for example, on a person’s New Zealand tax residence). We propose an amendment to ensure that where a binding ruling is withdrawn, taxpayers can continue to rely on the ruling for the duration specified in the ruling. We propose this amendment applies from 18 March 2019, which is the date from which the Commissioner can issue binding rulings without the need for an arrangement. 12.The main home exclusion for the bright-line test requires that a person use the land as their main home for most of the time they own the land. The term “own” is defined in the Act. However, the period that a person owns land under this general definition can differ from the period that the bright-line test applies to. This means s 9(2)(f)(iv) In Confidence IR2019 /186: Draft Cabinet paper – Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for introduction Page 3 of 5 IN CONFIDENCE that it is possible that taxpayers may not be eligible for the main home exclusion because, although they have used land as their main home for most of the bright- line period, they have not used it as their main home for most of the time they owned the land. The opposite could also occur. An amendment is recommended to align the period of ownership for the main home exclusion for the bright-line test with the bright-line period. 13. Under the current law a New Zealand taxpayer does not have to make adjustments for being over the thin capitalisation threshold provided they have less than $1 million of group finance costs (and have a reduced adjustment if their group finance cost is less than $2 million). This de minimis was not intended to be available if the New Zealand taxpayer borrowed from a non-resident related party; however, the legislation currently only removes access to the de minimis if the taxpayer has owner-linked debt (which is debt borrowed from an owner who is not a member of the same group). An amendment is recommended to reduce access to the de minimis for non-resident related party borrowing, to apply for income years starting on or after 1 July 2018 to align with the introduction of the de minimis. 14. The PIE tax rules apply to collective investment vehicles, including KiwiSaver funds. Investors in a PIE fund are expected to elect a tax rate, called a Prescribed Investor Rate (PIR). If an investor does not notify the PIE of their PIR the top rate will apply by default. Unless the investor has nominated a lower PIR than they should have the tax is final and the investor will not get a refund for any overpayments. Inland Revenue is able to provide an alternative PIR for an investor where the investor has provided a tax rate to the PIE that is different from what it should be. However, Inland Revenue cannot currently use this power where an investor has not notified the PIE of a PIR to use. Officials recommend that the existing rule that allows Inland Revenue to correct an investors PIR be extended to investors who have been defaulted on to the top rate. This would reduce the overpayment of PIR tax. It is proposed that this would apply from 1 April 2020. 15. The impact of Inland Revenue’s Business Transformation Programme is already accounted for in the Government’s fiscal forecasts. These forecasts take into account the broad direction of policy intent, including the better use of income information and analytics to determine individuals’ tax rates, in addition to the further changes that will be delivered as part of Business Transformation. The recommended amendment to the Commissioner’s power to correct an investor’s PIR does not alter the amount already accounted for in these fiscal forecasts. Items requiring Cabinet approval 16. The attached Cabinet paper seeks cabinet approval for a minor change to a previously agreed policy change. Previously, Cabinet agreed to reduce the period in which a KiwiSaver provider must provide member information and transfer funds to a new provider if a member changes schemes from 35 days to 10 days \[DEV-19- MIN-0038.01 and CAB-19-MIN-0109 refer\]. Approval is sought to specify that the 10-day period would be measured in working days, rather than calendar days. New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 17. Officials believe the provisions in the proposed Bill are consistent with the rights and freedoms affirmed by the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990. The Bill will be sent to the Ministry of Justice today for its BORA vet. While it is not expected that there would be any problems, we will advise if any issues arise. In Confidence IR2019/186: Draft Cabinet paper – Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for introduction Page 4 of 5 IN CONFIDENCE Support party and caucus consultation 18. We recommend that the Bill is introduced on or after 26 June 2019. To achieve this, support party and caucus consultation will need to occur in advance of Cabinet’s final decision. Officials can provide any further briefing material required on the content of the Bill to support your caucus, coalition and support party consultation in relation to the introduction of the Bill. Recommended action We recommend that you: 1. note the contents of this report and attached Cabinet paper; Noted 2. agree that the amendment to allow Inland Revenue to grant an income tax exemption to non-resident international aircraft operators should apply from 1 April 1984; Agreed/Not agreed 4. agree to amendments allowing the Commissioner of Inland Revenue to have the power to withdraw short-process rulings from 1 October 2019; Agreed/Not agreed 5. agree t o changes to allow taxpayers to rely on withdrawn binding rulings on matters not relating to an arrangement for the duration specified in the ruling from 18 March 2019; Agreed/Not agreed 6. agree to an amendment to align the period of ownership for the main home exclusion for the bright-line test with the bright-line period; Agreed/Not agreed 7. agree to the remedial amendment to the thin capitalisation de minimis to ensure that the de minimis is not available if the taxpayer has non-resident related party borrowing with effect from 1 July 2018; Agreed/Not agreed 8. agree to an amendment to allow Inland Revenue to correct the PIR of an investor on the default rate; Agreed/Not agreed 9. agree to seek Cabinet approval that the 10-day period for KiwiSaver providers to transfer information and funds when a member changes scheme be measured in working days; and Agreed/Not agreed s 9(2)(f)(iv) In Confidence IR2019/186: Draft Cabinet paper – Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for introduction Page 5 of 5 IN CONFIDENCE 10. sign and refer the Cabinet paper, to the Cabinet Office by 10 am Thursday 13 June 2019. Signed and referred/Not signed and referred Bill Manager Policy and Strategy Hon Stuart Nash Minister of Revenue / /2019 s 9(2)(a) IN CONFIDENCE In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for Introduction Proposal 1.This paper seeks Cabinet approval to introduce the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill to parliament. This Bill introduces amendments to the following legislation: 1.1. KiwiSaver Act 2006 1.2. Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 1.3. Income Tax Act 2007 1.4. Income Tax Act 2004 1.5. Income Tax Act 1994 1.6. Income Tax Act 1976 1.7. Tax Administration Act 1994 1.8. Taxation (Annual Rates for 2018-19, Modernising Tax Administration, and Remedial Matters) Act 2019 1.9. Taxation (Annual Rates for 2017-18, Employment and Investment Income, and Remedial Matters) Act 2018 1.10. Taxation (Research and Development Tax Credits) Act 2019 1.11. Accident Compensation Act 2001 1.12. Income Tax (Adverse Event Income Equalisation Scheme Rate of Interest) Regulations 1995 Policy 2.The Bill contains a number of legislative changes to the KiwiSaver Act and Student Loan Scheme Act, to give effect to policy changes previously agreed by Cabinet. The Bill also contains a number of remedial changes that do not require Cabinet approval and have been approved in my capacity as the Minister of Revenue. 3.The KiwiSaver and Student Loan policy changes lay the foundations for Release 4 of Inland Revenue’s Business Transformation programme, scheduled for 1 April 2020, 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 2. IN CONFIDENCE and enhance the administration of these schemes. The changes would ensure that New Zealanders receive the correct entitlements and find it easier to meet their obligations, in a timelier manner. Policy items requiring Cabinet approval 4.Cabinet previously agreed to reduce the period within which a KiwiSaver scheme provider must provide member information and transfer funds to a new provider upon a member changing schemes from 35 days to 10 days \[DEV-19-MIN-0038.01 and CAB-19-MIN-0109 refer\]. Approval is now sought to specify that the reduced 10-day period would only apply to working days rather than calendar days. 5.The existing 35-day transfer period relates to calendar not working days and in practice only applies to non-default KiwiSaver scheme providers, as the transfer period that applies to default scheme providers is regulated. Default scheme providers’ Instruments of Appointment specify that they must fulfil transfer requirements within a period of 10 working days. The rationale for reducing the legislatively mandated transfer period for non-default scheme providers was to align transfer timeframes across all KiwiSaver scheme providers. Therefore, to ensure that the timeframe for default and non-default scheme providers is consistent, it is proposed that the legislatively mandated transfer time should be “10 working days” as opposed to the “10 days” that was previously agreed to by Cabinet. Policy items with prior Cabinet approval 6.The Bill contains legislative changes to give effect to a number of policy changes that have prior cabinet approval. 7.There are eight KiwiSaver changes with prior Cabinet approval \[DEV-19-MIN-0038.01 and CAB-19-MIN-0109\]. These changes require amending the KiwiSaver Act 2006, to apply from 1 April 2020, to take effect at the same time as Business Transformation Release 4. These changes are as follows: 7.1. Allowing Inland Revenue to use Crown funds to pass employer contribution amounts to KiwiSaver scheme providers, before the contribution amount is received by Inland Revenue. 7.2. Calculating interest on employer and employee contributions held by Inland Revenue from a member’s pay day as reported by their employer. 7.3. Reducing the KiwiSaver provisional period from three months to two months. 7.4. Reducing the period that Inland Revenue must hold initial KiwiSaver employee and employer contributions from three months to two months. 7.5. Allowing KiwiSaver members to change contribution rates through their scheme provider or Inland Revenue (rather than only through their employer). 7.6. Removing the three-month grace period, for people who were invalidly enrolled in KiwiSaver, to gain New Zealand residence. 7.7. Requiring employers to provide information to Inland Revenue on the: 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 IN CONFIDENCE 7.7.1. income on which contributions are calculated; and 7.7.2. the employees employer superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) rate. 8. The Bill also contains five student loan policy changes with prior approval \[SWC-19- MIN-0014 and CAB-19-MIN-0085 refers\]. These changes require amendments to the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011, to apply from 1 April 2020 to take effect at the same time as Business Transformation Release 4. These changes will: 8.1. limit the changes in a borrower’s repayment obligations prior to 1 April 2013 to changes in residency status, where fraud is involved, or where a tax return has not been filed and it is cost effective to make changes. The Bill also proposes an exception to allow the Commissioner to correct the position of any borrower made worse off as a result of this change; 8.2. rename the student loan repayment holiday to student loan temporary repayment suspension; 8.3. give Inland Revenue the ability to write-off student loans taken out before 2000, in cases where borrowers have been able to prove that they did not take out the loan; 8.4. allow Inland Revenue to notify a borrower’s employer when the borrower’s loan is close to being fully repaid; and 8.5. treat overseas-based borrowers with serious illnesses or disabilities as New Zealand-based. 9. The Bill also contains legislative changes to extend the refundability of Research and Development tax credits, as previously agreed by Cabinet \[DEV-19-MIN-0119 and CAB-19-MIN-0240 refer\]. These changes will make tax credits more broadly refundable from the 2020/21 income year. 10. The Bill grants overseas donee status to four charities as previously agreed by Cabinet \[DEV-19-MIN-0055 and CAB-19-MIN-0142 refer\]. The charities are: 10.1. Little Brother and Sisters International. 10.2. Partners Relief and Development – New Zealand. 10.3. Project Moroto. 10.4. UN Women National Committee Aotearoa New Zealand Incorporated. Items not requiring Cabinet approval (approved by the Minister of Revenue) 11. The Bill includes a range of remedial amendments. The changes described cover a range of issues and typically ensure the relevant tax laws are consistent with their policy intent. The changes are not significant in nature, and do not have any revenue or other fiscal effect. Because of the nature of the changes, Cabinet does not need to confirm these changes – they are approved in my capacity as Minister of Revenue. 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 IN CONFIDENCE Main home exclusion for bright-line test 12. The main home exclusion for the bright-line test requires that a person use the land as their main home for most of the time they own the land. The term “own” is defined in the Act. However, the period that a person owns land under this general definition can differ from the period that the bright-line test applies to. This means that it is possible that taxpayers may not be eligible for the main home exclusion because, although they have used land as their main home for most of the bright-line period, they have not used it as their main home for most of the time they owned the land. The opposite could also occur. The Bill proposes an amendment to align the period of ownership for the main home exclusion for the bright-line test with the bright-line period, to apply from the date of royal assent. Allowing the Commissioner to withdraw short-process rulings 13. Inland Revenue will be able to issue short-process rulings for small-to-medium sized taxpayers from 1 October 2019. An oversight in the drafting of the legislation means that the Commissioner is unable to withdraw short-process rulings. The Bill proposes an amendment to the Tax Administration Act to enable the Commissioner to withdraw short-process rulings, which would mirror the existing rule that allows her to withdraw private binding rulings. The Commissioner relies on this ability in circumstances where there is a change in the interpretation of the law. The proposal would mean that taxpayers cannot rely on binding rulings for arrangements entered into from the date of notification of the withdrawal. The Bill proposes that this applies from 1 October 2019, being the date short process rulings can apply from. The Commissioner will not need to apply this provision before this bill passes into law. Allowing taxpayers to rely on withdrawn binding rulings on matters not involving an arrangement for the duration of the ruling 14. Recent changes to binding rulings allow the Commissioner to issue binding rulings on matters, without the need for an arrangement (eg, on whether a person meets New Zealand tax residence requirements). The Bill proposes an amendment to ensure that where a binging ruling is withdrawn, taxpayers can continue to rely on the ruling for the duration specified in the ruling where there is no arrangement. The application date of this would be 18 March 2019, which is the date from which the Commissioner can issue binding rulings without the need for an arrangement. Research and Development tax credits (approved by the Minister of Research, Science and Innovation and the Minister of Revenue) 15. There are a small number of cases where the legislation supporting the new R&D tax credit does not align with the policy intent. Issues relate to allocating tax credits to members of joint ventures, the timeframe for businesses to complete the disputes process and the certifier regime, clarifying the definition of internal software development, and removing the ability to challenge decisions of the Commissioner in certain circumstances so as to align with the rest of the scheme. The Bill proposes remedial changes for these issues, to apply from the beginning of the regime in the 2019/20 income year. The Bill also makes a remedial change to the refundability policy recently agreed by Cabinet to clarify that where a firm is part of a group, the payroll tax cap would be assessed at the group level rather than the individual firm. 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 IN CONFIDENCE Allowing IR to correct the PIR rate of PIE investors on the default rate 16. Currently, investors in PIE funds are expected to elect a tax rate, called a Prescribed Investor Rate (PIR). If they do not notify the PIE fund of a PIR, the top rate will apply by default. Unless the investor has nominated a lower PIR than they should have the tax is final, and the investor will not be able to get a refund for any overpayment. Inland Revenue can correct the rate for an investor who has provided an incorrect PIR but cannot use this power where an investor has been defaulted onto the top rate. The bill proposes an amendment to allow Inland Revenue to correct an investor’s PIR if they have been defaulted onto the top rate. This would apply from 1 April 2020. Income attribution rules 17. Income attribution rules apply when an individual earns income from providing their own services through an entity that has one main source of such income. The rules disregard the entity and tax the income directly to the person performing the services to prevent lower tax being paid. The Bill addresses two issues relating to these rules: 17.1. If the entity provides services to a foreign party and pays tax overseas, a foreign tax credit may not be available to the working person, contrary to policy intent. The Bill includes an amendment to the Income Tax Act 2007 to clarify that a foreign tax credit is available to the individual, to prevent double taxation. This amendment would have retrospective application from 1 April 2008 to ensure that the law reflects current practice. 17.2. When the income attribution rules are applied, dividends paid to the working person by the entity are exempt from tax, to prevent double taxation of income that has already been taxed to the working person. However, these dividends are exempt even if paid out of income that has not been attributed under these rules, which could result in some income never being taxed. The Bill contains an amendment so that the dividends are only exempt from tax if they have been taxed under the income attribution rules. This would also apply retrospectively to 1 April 2008, this being the original application date of these rules. Trusts 18. Following an administrative review of the income tax treatment of trusts, a number of technical matters for remedial amendment have been identified. These changes will improve the clarity of the law and better reflect the policy intent. These amendments: 18.1. ensure there is consistency within the trust rules on the treatment of distributions when a trustee elects to pay New Zealand tax on world-wide trustee income; 18.2. clarify the relationship of the residence rules to trustees and their obligations under the Income Tax Act 2007; 18.3. clarify rules relating to the value of a settlement; 18.4. ensure there is internal consistency between the treatment of distributions, beneficiary income, taxable distributions and the ordering rules; and 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 IN CONFIDENCE 18.5. address housekeeping matters such as terminology and notice requirements. Disclosure of information about the misconduct of bookkeepers 19. An existing permitted disclosure allows Inland Revenue to disclose information about the misconduct of tax agents to their industry bodies. The Bill contains a change to the Tax Administration Act which introduces an additional permitted disclosure to allow Inland Revenue to disclose information about the misconduct of bookkeepers with their industry bodies. The Bill proposes an amendment to allow Inland Revenue to make these disclosures and requires that the same test must be met for both bookkeepers and tax agents before Inland Revenue can disclose information. This would apply from the date of enactment. Tax treatment of non-resident international aircraft operators 20. The Income Tax Act allows New Zealand to grant a reciprocal income tax exemption to non-resident international aircraft operators, but the wording of the legislation limits the exemption to outbound aircraft. In practice, the exemption has been granted for both outbound and inbound transport. The Bill proposes an amendment to the Income Tax Act to align the legislation with the policy intent and current operational practice, with retrospective application from 1 April 1984, this being the date that the provisions allowing exemption applied from. Māori authority tax credits 21. Under the current legislation, Māori authority tax credits are able to be attached retrospectively to any distribution from a Māori authority. The intention and current practice is that they can only be retrospectively attached to non-cash distributions under the transfer pricing rules. The Bill proposes an amendment to the Income Tax Act to align the law with policy intent and departmental practice, with retrospective application from 1 April 2008 as this will validate Inland Revenue’s operational practice. Consideration for grant of an easement 22. Under the current law, there are some cases where consideration for the grant of a permanent easement could be considered income. The policy intent is that consideration for the grant of a non-permanent easement is income and consideration for the grant of a permanent easement is capital. The Bill contains an amendment to ensure that the law fulfils this intent. This will apply retrospectively from 1 April 2015, this being the application date of the original provision. Availability of GST tax credits 23. Under the current legislation, a GST tax credit becomes available to a taxpayer the day after the GST tax credit arises. This timing is problematic for Inland Revenue’s systems. The Bill proposes amendments to allow GST tax credits to be available on the date that the credit arises. This will align the legislation with current practice and will be slightly favourable to the taxpayer. The application date proposed for this change is 1 April 2018 to align the legislation with the date the system changes applied from. 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 IN CONFIDENCE Inbound Thin Capitalisation de minimis 24. Under the current law a New Zealand taxpayer does not have to make adjustments for being over the thin capitalisation threshold provided they have less than $1 million of group finance costs (and have a reduced adjustment if their group finance cost is less than $2 million). This de minimis was not intended to be available if the New Zealand taxpayer borrowed from a non-resident related party; however, the legislation currently only removes access to the de minimis if the taxpayer has borrowed from an owner who is not a member of the same group. The Bill proposes to align the legislation with the intent for income years starting on or after 1 July 2018, to align with the introduction of the de minimis. Employee Share Schemes 25. The Bill contains three changes to the Employee Share Schemes (ESS) rules. The application date of these changes is 29 March 2018, the original application date of the ESS reforms. Definition of market value 26. Under the current legislation, the ‘market value’ of listed shares is defined as being the ‘middle market quotation’. Obtaining this ‘middle market quotation’ is difficult in practice. From a policy perspective, there are a range of methods that are sensible approximations of market value. The Bill proposes an amendment to allow companies to use a wider range of methods to value shares for the purposes of the ESS rules. Takeovers and similar reorganisations under employee share schemes 27. Currently, the exempt ESS rules require shares to be held by a trustee for a ‘restricted period’ (generally three years) before they can be released to employees. This is to prevent the rules being used to confer a tax-exempt cash benefit to employees. Exempt ESS trust deeds often provide for takeovers and other corporate re- organisations. If a takeover occurs, which can include the shares of minority interests being compulsorily acquired, this could breach the restricted period and mean the scheme fails to meet the statutory criteria, making the shares taxable. 28. Providing an exemption to the restricted period in the case of takeovers or other re- organisations that are outside the control of the employee would not significantly undermine the policy intent behind the restricted period. The Bill proposes that takeovers and similar re-organisations and acquisitions do not disturb the exempt status of benefits provided under ESS even if this occurs within the restricted period, provided it is outside the control of the employee. Flexibility to allow employees to retain their shares if they leave employment 29. Currently, employees who leave employment within the restricted period in the exempt ESS rules must have their shares bought back for the lesser of cost or market value, except in limited cases. These limited cases include employees retiring, being made redundant or if the employee dies. These employees are able to keep their shares or have them bought back for the lesser of cost or market value. 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 IN CONFIDENCE 30. The ESS rules were amended in 2018 to allow trans-Tasman companies to offer Australian exempt schemes to their New Zealand employees. Australian ESS rules requires that all employees leaving employment must be able to keep their shares. Since this conflicts with New Zealand’s rules, it is difficult for trans-Tasman companies to offer the same scheme in both countries. 31. The Bill proposes that companies have the option to choose whether their trust deed allows either: 31.1. That all employees can keep their shares or have them bought back for the lesser of cost or market value; or 31.2. That the trustee must buy the shares back for the lesser of cost or market value. Provisional tax 32. The Bill includes a number of remedial amendments to align tax legislation with Inland Revenue’s systems. This has arisen following the development and design of release 3 of Inland Revenue’s business transformation programme. The changes either have no or a positive impact on taxpayers or are necessary to maintain the integrity of the tax system. Removing the ability of taxpayers to make an estimate on their final instalment and receive the interest concessions for the standard uplift method. 33. This is an integrity measure to ensure that taxpayers cannot take advantage of the design of the system to both reduce their obligations under the provisional tax rules and obtain an interest concession. The Bill proposes that this amendment apply from the 2019-20 income year. Clarify the calculation of interest for standard uplift method taxpayers 34. This amendment aligns the legislation with the policy intent and system design. This change will apply retrospectively from 1 April 2017 to align with the treatment in the system and provide certainty to taxpayers. The amendment is beneficial to taxpayers. Clarify the application of late payment penalties applicable from the final instalment date for standard method taxpayers 35. This corrects an error in the legislation as originally enacted. Inland Revenue’s systems have been applying the rule as it was intended to apply, which is beneficial to taxpayers. The Bill recommends this amendment apply from 1 April 2017 to provide certainty to taxpayers. Remove the ability for taxpayers to choose the provisional tax instalment to which a payment is applied 36. This change will remove the ability for taxpayers to direct a payment to a particular instalment of provisional tax. It will prevent non-compliant taxpayers from reducing their exposure to late payment penalties and gaining an advantage compared to compliant taxpayers. In addition, Inland Revenue’s systems have not been configured to allow for such payment directions. The proposed amendment will apply from 1 April 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 IN CONFIDENCE 2017 to stop taxpayers revisiting prior periods to gain a retrospective advantage. A savings provision will cover the unlikely position where a taxpayer has requested the allocation of a payment. Clarify the way in which provisional tax is truncated to whole dollars 37. The Bill proposes an amendment to confirm the current system approach of truncating cents. The application date proposed for this change is 1 April 2017 to provide certainty to taxpayers and ensure no taxpayer is disadvantaged by this technicality. Clarify the wording in the interest concession rules to more clearly indicate how the interest rules apply to the final instalment of provisional tax 38. Some of the wording in the legislation for the current interest concession rules is unclear. This amendment will not have any practical impact on taxpayers. The proposed application date is 1 April 2017 to provide taxpayers with certainty. Amend section 139B(6) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 to ensure it correctly covers taxpayers who have a non-standard number of instalments 39. The provisions that cover the interest concession rules do not allow for taxpayers with more or less than three instalments of provisional tax. The Bill proposes an amendment to ensure that these taxpayers are able to access the interest concession rules. This amendment should apply from the 2019-20 income year, to ensure that no taxpayers are disadvantaged. Impact analysis 40. Regulatory Impact Assessments were prepared for the policy items in the Bill that required impact assessment. These were submitted at the time that the Cabinet Committee approval for the relevant policy items in the Bill was sought. 41. The regulatory impact assessments prepared cover: 41.1. Business Transformation related KiwiSaver refinements. 41.2. Student Loans: Back-year reassessments prior to 2013. 41.3. Extending the refundability of research and development tax credits. 42. The regulatory impact requirements do not apply to the remaining items in the Bill. A number of items involve technical “revisions” or consolidations that substantially re- enact the current law to improve legislative clarity and understanding (including the fixing of errors, the clarification of the existing legislative intent and the reconciliation of inconsistencies). Other items have no or only minor impacts on businesses, individuals or not-for-profit entities. Compliance 43. The Bill complies with: 43.1. the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 IN CONFIDENCE 43.2. the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the Human Rights Act 1993; 43.3. the disclosure statement requirements (a disclosure statement has been prepared and is attached to this paper); 43.4. the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 1993; 43.5. relevant international standards and obligations; 43.6. the Legislation Guidelines (2018 edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. Consultation 44. The substantive policy initiatives to which this Bill is intended to give effect were subject to public and other consultation in accordance with the Generic Tax Policy Process. Relevant government departments or other public bodies 45. The Treasury was consulted in the development of many of the proposals in the Bill. Other government departments and public bodies consulted on relevant aspects of the proposals include the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Social Development, the Office for Disability Issues, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. The Financial Markets Authority and Office of the Privacy Commissioner have also been consulted on relevant proposals. Relevant private sector organisations and public consultation processes 46. KiwiSaver scheme providers have been consulted on the KiwiSaver proposals and are supportive. 47. A wide range of organisations have been consulted on the development of the research and development tax credits policy. Officials have discussed the proposals with the Corporate Taxpayers’ Group; Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand; representatives from PwC, KPMG, Deloitte and EY; approximately 25 representatives from R&D performing businesses in tax loss or with insufficient taxable income to fully utilise non-refundable R&D tax credits; some large established R&D performers; levy bodies; charities; cooperatives; Federation of Maori Authorities; and Māori business representatives. The refundability proposals have been shaped through these discussions. The government caucus and other parties represented in Parliament 48. Both Government caucus and coalition and support parties will be consulted on this Bill prior to its proposed introduction. Binding on the Crown 49. A number of the Acts being amended by this Bill currently bind the Crown. This Bill does not change this. 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 IN CONFIDENCE Allocation of decision making powers 50. The Bill does not involve the allocation of decision-making powers between the executive, the courts, and tribunals. Associated regulations 51. No regulations are required to bring the proposed Bill into operation. Other instruments 52. The Bill does not include any provision empowering the making of other instruments that are deemed to be legislative instruments or disallowable instruments (or both). Definition of Minister/department 53. The Bill does not contain a definition of Minister, department, or chief executive. Commencement of legislation 54. As an omnibus taxation Bill, each provision of the Bill comes into force on the date specified in the Bill for that particular provision. Parliamentary stages 55. The Bill should be introduced on or after 26 June 2019, referred to the Finance and Expenditure Select Committee, and ideally reported back to the house by the end of 2019. Because the Bill contains changes necessary for Inland Revenue’s Business Transformation release 4, the Bill should be passed no later than February 2020. Proactive Release 56. I propose that this paper, alongside associated policy and Cabinet papers, be proactively released when the Bill is introduced, subject to redactions considered under the provisions of the Official Information Act 1982. Recommendations The Minister of Revenue recommends the Committee: 1. note that on 20 March 2019, the Cabinet Economic Development Committee agreed that the period a scheme provider has to share information and transfer funds to a new provider when a member transfers schemes be reduced from 35 days to 10 days \[DEV-19-MIN-0038.1\]; 2. agree to recommend that Cabinet rescind the decision referred to in recommendation 1; and instead replace it with agreement that the period a scheme provider has to share member information and transfer funds to a new provider when a member transfers schemes be reduced from 35 days to 10 working days; 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 IN CONFIDENCE 3. note that the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill holds a category 3 priority on the 2019 Legislation Programme (to be passed if possible in the year); 4. note that the Bill contains legislative changes that give effect to KiwiSaver and Student loan policy changes agreed by Cabinet to enable Inland Revenue’s Business Transformation Release 4, changes that extend the refundability of Research and Development tax credits and grant overseas donee status to four charities and a number of remedial amendments; 5. approve the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill for introduction, subject to the final approval of the government caucus and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; 6. agree that the Bill be introduced on or after 26 June 2019; 7. agree that the government propose that the Bill be: 7.1. referred to the Finance and Expenditure Committee for consideration; 7.2. passed no later than February 2020. Authorised for lodgement Hon Stuart Nash Minister of Revenue 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-16 18:01:56 I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-19-MIN-0087 Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill: Approval for Introduction Portfolio Revenue On 18 June 2019, the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1 noted that in: 1.1 March 2019, the Cabinet Social Wellbeing Committee agreed to amend the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 to make it easier for borrowers to meet their obligations and enhance the administration of the student loan scheme \[SWC-19-MIN-0014\]; 1.2 March 2019, the Cabinet Economic Development Committee (DEV) agreed to: 1.2.1 the Crown funding the payment of employer contribution amounts passed t o KiwiSaver scheme providers until these amounts are received from the employer; 1.2.2 a number of measures to increase the administrative efficiency of KiwiSaver and enhance members’ experience with the scheme; 1.2.3 reduce the period within which a KiwiSaver scheme provider must provide m ember information and transfer funds to a new provider upon a member changing schemes from 35 days to 10 days; \[DEV-19-MIN-0038.01\] 1.3 April 2019, DEV agreed that four charities be granted overseas done status \[D EV-19-MIN-0058\]; 1.4 May 2019, DEV agreed to extend the refundability of Research and Development tax credits \[DEV-19-MIN-0119\]; 2 a reed to amend the decision in paragraph 1.2.3 above so that that the period a scheme provider has to share member information and transfer funds to a new provider when a member transfers schemes is reduced from 35 days to 10 working days; 3 n oted that the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill (the Bill): 3.1 gives effect to the decisions set out above; 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-18 17:17:04 I N C O N F I D E N C E 1 3. I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-19-MIN-0087 3.2 holds a category 3 priority on the 2019 Legislation Programme (to be passed if possible in the year); 4 noted that the Bill also sets out a number of remedial amendments; 5 approved for introduction the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill \[IRD 21910/1.57\], subject to the final approval of the government caucuses and sufficient support in the House of Representatives; 6 a reed that the Bill be introduced on or after 26 June 2019; 7 a reed that the government proposes that the Bill: 7.1 be referred to the Finance and Expenditure Committee; 7.2 passed no later than February 2020. Vivien Meek Committee Secretary Present: Rt Hon Winston Peters Officials present from: Office of the Prime Minister Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) Officials Committee for LEG Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Stuart Nash Hon Jenny Salesa Hon Tracey Martin Hon Eugenie Sage Hon Ruth Dyson (Senior Government Whip) Hard-copy distribution: Minister of Revenue 2r4hxlcklw 2019-06-18 17:17:04 I N C O N F I D E N C E 2