Hon Stuart Nash, Minister of Revenue Information Release Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulation 2020 July 2020 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s Tax Policy website at https://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2020-ir-cab-leg-20-sub-0028/overview Documents in this information release 1.LEG-20-SUB-0028 – Cabinet paper: Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulation 2020 (3 March 2020) 2.LEG-20-MIN-0028 – Minute: Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulation 2020 (3 March 2020) Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Cabinet Legislation Committee on 3 March 2020 and confirmed by Cabinet on 9 March 2020. One attachment to the Cabinet paper is not included in this information release as it is publicly available: •Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulations 2020 Information withheld No information was withheld for this information release. Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other ag encies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee USE OF MONEY INTEREST RATES SETTING PROCESS AMENDMENT REGULATION Proposal 1.This paper seeks the Cabinet Legislation Committee’s agreement to submit an Order i n Council: Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulations 2020 amending the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Regulation 1997 to the Executive Council. 2.It is proposed that the Order in Council applies from 9 April 2020. Introducing a zero percent floor 3.Use of money interest is a cornerstone of the tax compliance system in New Z ealand. Taxpayers must pay it if they have underpaid their tax and the Commissioner pays it where tax has been overpaid. The legislated twin objectives of the use of money interest provisions are to: 3.1 fairly compensate the party (either the Crown or the taxpayer) that does not have the use of its money; and 3.2 encourage taxpayers to pay the right amount of tax at the right time. 4.The Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Regulation 1997 o utlines the method used for setting the overpayment rate (the Commissioner’s paying rate). This method uses the Reserve Bank of New Zealand 90-day bank bill rate minus 100 basis points (1%). 5.There is currently no floor on the calculation of the rate. This means the 90-day bank b ill rate dropping below 1% will cause the Commissioner’s paying rate to be negative. This is a real possibility and this proposal will add a zero percent floor to the method ensuring it is not set at a negative rate. 6.The Commissioner charging negative interest on overpaid tax would likely be p erceived as being inconsistent with the principles of use of money interest – to fairly compensate taxpayers. This would be especially true if the 90-day bill rate were still positive, but the Commissioner’s paying rate was negative. 7.The proposal would be implemented through an Order in Council under the existing l egislative framework in section 120H of the Tax Administration Act 1994. This section outlines that the Governor-General may, by Order in Council, specify the criteria and other requirements by and against which interest rates will be set. 1 2bnpvvfw8u 2020-03-16 11:21:45 IN CONFIDENCE 1. 8. I recommend that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulations 2020 is made to amend the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Regulation 1997 to prevent the Commissioner’s paying rate becoming negative. Financial implications 9. There is a potential opportunity cost to the Crown from the introduction of a floor as any revenue that might otherwise potentially be received from a negative UOMI rate will not be received. 10. Assuming the Government would use negative interest rates ahead of the market doing so, the size of this opportunity cost is estimated to be approximately $7 million per year, or $28 million less revenue over the forecast period if such an event is triggered in the near future. This estimate is based on a presumption the lowest the 90-day bill rate will drop to 0.7% by April 2020. 1 Therefore, the cost of this policy change is calculated using the difference between switching the UOMI rate from 0.81% to 0.00% (the floor) and changing the UOMI from 0.81% to -0.3% (the lowest it is currently forecast to reach). Timing and 28-day rule 11. I propose that changes to the Commissioner’s use of money interest paying rate be made from 9 April 2020. The Order would therefore be in accordance with the rule that regulations must not come into force until at least 28 days after they have been notified in the New Zealand Gazette. Compliance 12. The Order complies with: 12.1 the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; 12.2 the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the Human Rights Act 1993; 12.3 the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 1993; 12.4 relevant international standards and obligations; and 12.5 the Legislation Guidelines, which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. 13. No statutory prerequisite exists for making this Order. Regulations Review Committee 14. There are no anticipated grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Order in Council to the attention of the House under Standing Order 319. 1 Preliminary forecast from the Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2019. 2 2bnpvvfw8u 2020-03-16 11:21:45 IN CONFIDENCE Certification by Parliamentary Counsel 15.The Parliamentary Counsel Office has certified that the Order in Council is in order f or submission to Cabinet. Impact Analysis 16.The Treasury agrees that no Regulatory Impact Assessment is required for this p roposal, since it is expected to have only minor impacts on businesses, individuals or not-for-profit entities. Publicity 17.I intend to issue a media statement once the Order in Council is made by the Exe cutive Council. 18.The new Order in Council will be published in the New Zealand Gazette and on Inland Revenue’s website. Inland Revenue will also publish an article about these changes in its Tax Information Bulletin. Proactive Release 19.I propose to release this Cabinet paper, and associated Order in Council, in full sh ortly following the publication of the signed Order in Council in the New Zealand Gazette. Consultation 20.The Treasury, Parliamentary Counsel Office, and the Reserve Bank have been co nsulted in the preparation of this paper. Recommendations The Minister of Revenue recommends that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1.agree to setting a zero percent floor the Commissioner’s use of money interest paying rate; 2.note t hat the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulations 2020 will give effect to the decision referred to in paragraph 1 above; 3.authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulations 2020. Authorised for lodgement Hon Stuart Nash Minister of Revenue 3 2bnpvvfw8u 2020-03-16 11:21:45 IN CONFIDENCE I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-20-MIN-0028 Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulations 2020 Portfolio Revenue On 3 March 2020, the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1 noted t hat: 1.1 the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Regulations 1997 provide for the method used for setting the overpayment rate (the Commissioner of Inland Revenue’s paying rate); 1.2 the method uses the Reserve Bank of New Zealand 90-day bank bill rate minus 100 basis points (1 per cent); 1.3 if the 90-day bank bill rate drops below 1 per cent, the Commissioner’s paying rate wi ll be negative; 2 a reed to set a zero per cent floor for the Commissioner’s use of money interest paying rate; 3 noted that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulations 2020 give effect to the decision referred to in paragraph 2; 4 authorised t he submission to the Executive Council of the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Amendment Regulations 2020 \[PCO 22551/2.0\]; 5 noted that the Amendment Regulations come into force on 9 April 2020. Gerrard Carter Committee Secretary Hard-copy distribution (see over) 2bnpvvfw8u 2020-03-16 11:23:28 I N C O N F I D E N C E 1 2. I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-20-MIN-0028 Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters Office of the Prime Minister Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) Officials Committee for LEG Hon Andrew Little Hon Stuart Nash Hon Tracey Martin Hon Julie Anne Genter Hon Eugenie Sage Michael Wood MP (Senior Government Whip) Hard-copy distribution: Minister of Revenue 2bnpvvfw8u 2020-03-16 11:23:28 I N C O N F I D E N C E 2