Child Support Amendment Bill Supplementary commentary on proposed amendments to: – Repeal incremental penalties, and – Simplify write-off provisions Hon Stuart Nash Minister of Revenue First published in July 2020 by Policy and Strategy, Inland Revenue, PO Box 2198, Wellington 6140. Child Support Amendment Bill – Supplementary commentary on proposed amendments to repeal incremental penalties and simplify write-off provisions. ISBN 978-1-98-857319-9 (Online) © Crown Copyright This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence. In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the work, as long as you attribute the work to the Crown and abide by the other licence terms. The Persistent URL for this document is https://purl.org/nzir-tp/2020-010 The document is available at https://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2020-commentary-child-support-bill-supplementary/overview 3 CONTENTS Child support penalties ................................................................................ 5 Repeal of child support incremental penalties ........................................................... 7 Simplification of the child support penalties write-off rules ...................................... 8 5 Child support penalties 7 REPEAL OF CHILD SUPPORT INCREMENTAL PENALTIES (Clause 42) Summary of proposed amendment Late payment penalties are imposed on a liable parent if they do not pay on time. Initial penalties are applied in two stages in the first month, and if the amount is not paid incremental penalties are imposed each month the amount is outstanding. The proposal is to no longer charge incremental penalties. Application date The proposed amendment would apply from 1 April 2021. Key features Incremental penalties would no longer be charged on child support amounts not paid on time. The change would apply to unpaid amounts on or after 1 April 2021. That is, penalties will not be applied to: • new debt arising on or after 1 April 2021; and • existing unpaid amounts due before 1 April 2021. Penalties imposed before 1 April 2021 would remain. Background Currently, late payment penalties are imposed on a liable parent if they do not pay on time. Initial penalties are imposed as well as incremental penalties. Incremental penalties are applied at: • 2% of the outstanding amount including penalties from one month after the due date for the next 11 months; and • 1% of the outstanding amount including penalties each month from 13 months after the due date. The penalties compound and create further debt for customers. The compounding nature of incremental penalties can result in liable parents disengaging with their child support obligations. When a payment is made, it is allocated to the core amount first and then to any penalties. Write-off rules mean that in most cases incremental penalties are written off. Initial penalties are being retained. As child support is due each month, if a person is late paying month-after-month, Inland Revenue is able to take appropriate follow up action with the person when initial penalties are imposed. 8 SIMPLIFICATION OF THE CHILD SUPPORT PENALTIES WRITE-OFF RULES (Clauses 43A, 43B, 43C, 43D, 43E, 43F, 43G, and 44A) Summary of proposed amendment It is proposed that the child support penalty write-off rules be simplified. Application date The proposed amendment would apply from 1 April 2021. Key features The child support penalty write-off rules would be simplified to allow for the write-off of penalties when: • there was a reasonable cause for the late payment; • the late payment was due to the failure of another person to make a deduction; • the late payment was due to an honest mistake by the liable parent; • an error was made by Inland Revenue; • a person is in serous hardship; • it is an inefficient use of Inland Revenue’s resources to collect the penalty; and • the receiving carer has uplifted the debt, or waived the right to the payment, to which the penalty relates and a write-off would be fair and reasonable. To ensure parents who are charged penalties on or before 31 March 2021 are not worse off under the new rules, a “fair and reasonable” penalty write-off provision would be retained that would only be used to write-off penalties charged on or before 31 March 2021. Background The current penalty write-off provisions are complex and difficult for customers to understand and Inland Revenue to administer. Most of the incremental penalties imposed can be written off. Table 1 outlines the current write-off provisions. 9 Table 1: Current write-off provisions Section Mandatory or discretionary Type of penalties Explanation 135A - - The Commissioner may grant relief by writing off in part or in full. If an amount has been paid and the Commissioner writes off a penalty, the amount paid can be refunded. 135B Discretionary Initial and incremental (but does not refer to either) Reasonable cause. 135C Discretionary Initial and incremental Failure of another person to make a deduction. 135D Discretionary Initial and incremental Honest oversight by liable person with no history of default. 135E Discretionary Initial and incremental Error made by Inland Revenue. 135F Discretionary Initial and incremental Debt waived or uplifted. 135FA Discretionary Incremental Unpaid before agreement entered into on or after 1 April 2016. 135G Discretionary Incremental Relief if some or all of the debt has been paid and recovery of incremental penalties would place the liable parent in serious hardship or it would be fair and reasonable to grant relief. 135GA Discretionary Initial and incremental Residual penalty only debt (including when core written off when owed to the Crown). 135GB Mandatory Initial late payment penalty Relief if full or substantial compliance with payment arrangement entered into or made on or after 1 April 2016 and within 3- month period. 135H Mandatory Initial late payment penalty Relief if full compliance with payment arrangement entered into or made before 1 April 2016 and within 3-month period. 135I Mandatory Initial late payment penalty Amount of the penalty is no more than $5 and the amount of the financial support that the penalty relates to is less than the amount of the penalty and no history of default. 135J Mandatory Incremental Relief from incremental penalties unpaid before agreement entered into on or after 26 September 2006 (26 weeks). 135JA Mandatory Incremental Relief from incremental penalties unpaid before deduction plan made on or after 1 April 2016 (26 weeks). 10 Section Mandatory or discretionary Type of penalties Explanation 135K Mandatory Incremental Relief from incremental penalties in relation to arrangements entered into or made before 26 September 2006 (26 weeks). 135L Mandatory Incremental Writing off of incremental penalties if non-compliance with arrangement (if at review date the Commissioner is satisfied that the circumstances relating to the failure would, if related to payment of debt to which penalty relates, entitle the Commissioner to grant relief under any of sections 135B to 135E). 135M Mandatory Incremental Relief if payment agreement in force. 135N Mandatory Incremental Relief if deduction notice in force.