Hon Stuart Nash, Minister of Revenue Information Release Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 August 2020 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s Tax Policy website at https://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2020-ir-cab-leg-20-sub-0087/overview Documents in this information release 1. IR2020/262 – Tax policy report: Cabinet paper: Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 (26 May 2020) 2. LEG-20-SUB-0087 – Cabinet paper: Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 (30 June 2020) 3. LEG-20-MIN-0087 – Minute: Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 (30 June 2020) Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Cabinet Legislation Committee on 30 June 2020 and confirmed by Cabinet on 6 July 2020. One attachment to the Cabinet paper is not included in this information release as it is publicly available: • Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 Information withheld Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act 1982 (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply are identified. Where information is withheld, no public interest was identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Sections of the Act under which information was withheld: 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). POLICY AND STRATEGY Tax policy report: Cabinet paper: Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 Date: 26 May 2020 Priority: Medium Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2020/262 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Revenue Agree to recommendations 25 June 2020 Approve the attached Cabinet paper and advice sheet Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Chris Gillion Policy Lead Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) IN CONFIDENCE 1. In Confidence 26 May 2020 Minister of Revenue Cabinet paper: Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 Purpose 1. This report informs you about the required annual change to the deemed rate of return on attributing interests in foreign investment funds. A Cabinet paper is attached that recommends an Order in Council be made to set the deemed rate of return for the 2019–20 income year. Background 2. The Income Tax Act 2007 (the Act) requires the deemed rate of return under the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules fo r each income year to be set by Order in Council. 3. New Zealand’s FIF rules tax New Zealand residents on attributed income from non- controlling investments in foreign companies, life insurance policies, and certain superannuation schemes. Since 1 April 2014, most interests in foreign superannuation schemes are taxed on transfer, rather than under the FIF rules. 4. The Act provides a number of different methods to calculate FIF income (or loss) for tax purposes, one of which is the deemed rate of return method. An investor must use the deemed rate of return where: 4.1 The interest consists of certain non-ordinary shares that have debt characteristics; and 4.2 The comparative value method cannot be used because the end-of-year market value of the interest cannot be determined. 5. Under the deemed rate of return method, income from a FIF is calculated each year by multiplying the opening book value of the investment by the rate set annually by Order in Council. 6. An Order in Council is now required to set the deemed rate of return for the 2019– 20 income year. Calculation 7. The method for calculating the annual deemed rate of return was established and approved in 1994 (CAB (94) M 35/3 C(vi) refers) and published in Inland Revenue’s October 1994 Tax Information Bulletin. The calculation involves taking an average of the five-year “risk-free” Government bond rates at the end of each quarter of the income year and adding a risk premium margin of four percentage points. If the last day of a quarter falls on a weekend or statutory holiday, the rate on the next business day is used. 8. Officials recommend that the current method for calculating the deemed rate of return be used again for the 2019–20 income year. It is a simple way of approximating the expected return on foreign equities, incorporating a risk premium IR2020/262: Cabinet paper: Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 Page 1 of 3 IN CONFIDENCE In Confidence of four percentage points above the return on “risk-free” debt such as Government bonds. The method has been used for every income year since 1994. 9. The average of the quarterly five-year Government bond interest rates for the 2019–20 income year is 1.05%. This means that the deemed rate of return for the 2019–20 income year will be 5.05% (1.05% plus four percentage points). This is a decrease from last year’s deemed rate of return, which was 5.86%. Regulatory Impact Analysis 10. A Regulatory Impact Analysis is not required for this Cabinet paper because no policy decision is being sought. The deemed rate of return has been calculated in accordance with a formula that was approved by Cabinet in 1994 (CAB (94) M 35/3 C(vi) refers). Timing 11. Because the deemed rate of return is based on five-year Government bond rates from across the year for which the rate applies, it must always be calculated after the end of the income year but apply retrospectively from the beginning of that year. 12. This Order in Council will enable taxpayers using the deemed rate of return method to calculate their FIF income for the 2019–20 income year and therefore needs to apply retrospectively from 1 April 2019. 13. The attached Cabinet paper is drafted so that the Order in Council complies with the 28-day rule for regulations and therefore comes into force on 6 August 2020. 14. However, officials recommend that a waiver of the 28-day rule is sought. Taxpayers that use the deemed rate of return are not able to use the old rate to file a return for the 2019–20 year; they must wait for the new rate to come into force. It is of no benefit to taxpayers or the Government to require some taxpayers to wait an extra 28 days to be able to file a return solely because they are waiting on the rate to come into force. 15. If you agree to recommend a waiver, we will supply you with an updated Cabinet paper. Cabinet paper and associated materials 16. The Cabinet paper and the advice sheet for the Order in Council are attached to this report. These should be signed and referred to the Cabinet Office by 10am, Thursday 25 June 2020, for consideration at the Cabinet Legislation Committee’s meeting on Tuesday 30 June 2020. 17. The Parliamentary Counsel Office will provide copies of the finalised Order in Council directly to the Cabinet Office. 18. A media statement will be issued once the Order in Council has been made. Consultation 19. The Treasury was consulted on the Cabinet paper and agrees with its recommendations. IR2020/262: Cabinet paper: Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 Page 2 of 3 IN CONFIDENCE In Confidence Proactive release 20. This Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers should be proactively released within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions, subject to minor redactions under the Official Information Act 1982. Recommended action We recommend that you: 21. agree for the Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 to have a commencement date of either: 21.1 6 August 2020; Agreed/Not agreed OR 21.2 10 July 2020, requiring a waiver of the 28-day rule to be agreed to by Cabinet (officials’ recommendation); Agreed/Not agreed 22. approve the attached Cabinet paper and advice sheet for consideration at the Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting on Tuesday 30 June 2020; Approved/Not approved 23. agree to the release of the Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Agreed/Not agreed Chris Gillion s 9(2)(a) Policy Lead Policy and Strategy Hon Stuart Nash Minister of Revenue / /2020 IR2020/262: Cabinet paper: Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 Page 3 of 3 IN CONFIDENCE \[IN CONFIDENCE\] In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee INCOME TAX (DEEMED RATE OF RETURN ON ATTRIBUTING INTERESTS IN FOREIGN INVESTMENT FUNDS, 2019–20 INCOME YEAR) ORDER 2020 Proposal 1.This paper proposes that Cabinet Legislation Committee authorise the submission to t he Executive Council of the attached Order in Council, which will set the deemed rate of return on attributing interests in foreign investment funds at 5.05% for the 2019–20 income year. Background 2.New Zealand’s foreign investment fund (FIF) rules tax New Zealand residents on i ncome from certain foreign investments. There are several methods for calculating the taxpayer’s income or loss from these investments, as set out in legislation. One of these methods is the deemed rate of return method. 3.The deemed rate of return method is used to calculate FIF income or loss from non- ordinary shares with debt-like properties, such as shares that guarantee a return. The method can only be used if the market value of the foreign investment cannot be determined at the end of the income year. 4.Under the deemed rate of return method, income from a FIF is calculated each year b y multiplying the opening book value of the investment by a deemed rate set annually by Order in Council. 5.The method for calculating the annual deemed rate of return was established and a pproved in 1994 (CAB Min (94) 35/3 C(vi) refers) and published in Inland Revenue’s October 1994 Tax Information Bulletin. The calculation involves taking an average of the five-year “risk-free” Government bond rates at the end of each quarter of the income year and then adding a risk premium margin of four percentage points. 6.The current method is a suitable way of approximating the expected return on foreign e quities and has been used for every income year since 1994. Comment 7.The average of the quarterly five-year Government bond interest rates for the 2019– 2 0 income year is 1.05%. The attached Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 therefore sets the deemed rate of return for the 2019–20 income year at 5.05% (1.05% plus four percentage points) in accordance with the current method of 1 2bnpvvfw8u 2020-07-13 12:27:11 2. \[IN CONFIDENCE\] calculation. This is a decrease from last year’s deemed rate of return, which was 5.86%. Timing 8. The new deemed rate of return should come into force as soon as practicable to allow taxpayers using this rate to file their tax returns as soon as they can. I therefore recommend that the new rate comes into force on 10 July 2020. 9. To ensure a commencement date of 10 July 2020, I recommend that the 28-day rule be waived for the coming into force of this Order. This will ensure that taxpayers using the deemed rate of return method for calculating their income are able to promptly file their tax return using the correct rate for the 2019–20 income year. 10. If a waiver is not agreed to, then taxpayers that use the deemed rate of return method will not be able to file a return until the 28-day period has been satisfied. Taxpayers in this situation are unable to use last year’s deemed rate of return to file for the 2019–20 income year and must wait for the current year’s rate to come into force. 11. It is of no benefit to taxpayers or the Government to require taxpayers using the deemed rate of return to wait an extra 28 days to be able to file their tax return. This would be a source of frustration for taxpayers who want to file their tax returns quickly but are unable to do so. Therefore, I recommend that the 28-day rule be waived. Consultation 12. The Treasury has been consulted in the preparation of this paper and agrees with its recommendations. Compliance 13. The Order complies with each of the following: 13.1 the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; 13.2 the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the Human Rights Act 1993; 13.3 the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 1993; 13.4 relevant international standards and obligations; and 13.5 the Legislation Guidelines (2018 edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. Legislative Implications 14. The proposal of this Cabinet paper is that the attached Order in Council be submitted to the Executive Council. 2 2bnpvvfw8u 2020-07-13 12:27:11 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Impact Analysis 15. A Regulatory Impact Analysis is not required because no policy decision is being sought. The deemed rate of return has been calculated in accordance with a formula that was approved by Cabinet in 1994 (CAB Min (94) 35/3 C(vi) refers). Regulations Review Committee 16. There are no anticipated grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Order in Council to the attention of the House. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel 17. The Parliamentary Counsel Office has certified that the attached Order in Council is in order for submission to Cabinet. Publicity 18. Once the Order in Council is made, Inland Revenue will publish the new rate on their website. Proactive Release 19. I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions, subject to minor redactions under the Official Information Act 1982. Recommendations The Minister of Revenue recommends that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1. note that the attached Order in Council sets the deemed rate of return on attributing interests in foreign investment funds at 5.05% for the 2019–20 income year; 2. note that a waiver of the 28-day rule is sought: 2.1 so that the Order can come into force on 10 July 2020; 2.2 on the grounds that taxpayers using the deemed rate of return method for calculating their income must wait for the 2019–20 rate to come into force, and that it is of no benefit to taxpayers or the Government to require taxpayers using the rate to wait an extra 28 days to be able to file their tax return; 3. agree to waive the 28-day rule so that the Order comes into force on 10 July 2020; 4. authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020. Authorised for lodgement Hon Stuart Nash Minister of Revenue 3 2bnpvvfw8u 2020-07-13 12:27:11 I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-20-MIN-0087 Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 Portfolio Revenue On 30 June 2020, the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1 n oted that the Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 sets the deemed rate of return on attributing interests in foreign investment funds at 5.05 per cent for the 2019–20 income year; 2 a thorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Income Tax (Deemed Rate of Return on Attributing Interests in Foreign Investment Funds, 2019–20 Income Year) Order 2020 \[PCO 22969/2.0\]; 3 n oted that a waiver of the 28-day rule is sought: 3.1 so that the Order can come into force on 10 July 2020; 3.2 on the grounds that taxpayers using the deemed rate of return method for calculating their income must wait for the 2019–20 rate to come into force, and that it is of no benefit to taxpayers or the Government to require taxpayers using the rate to wait an extra 28 days to be able to file their tax return; 4 agr eed to a waiver of the 28-day rule. Gerrard Carter Com mittee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) O ffice of the Prime Minister HonAndrew Little Officials Committee for LEG Hon David Parker Hon Stuart Nash Hon Iain Lees-Galloway Hon Tracey Martin Hon Eugenie Sage Michael Wood MP (Senior Government Whip) 2bnpvvfw8u 2020-07-13 12:28:35 I N C O N F I D E N C E 1 3.