(2) In collecting the taxes committed to the Commissioner’s charge, and despite anything in the Inland Revenue Acts, it is the duty of the Commissioner to collect over time the highest net revenue that is practicable within the law having regard to— (a) the resources available to the Commissioner; and (b) the importance of promoting compliance, especially voluntary compliance, by all persons with the Inland Revenue Acts; and (c) the compliance costs incurred by persons. 8. In short, the Commissioner is statutorily charged to be, and is in fact, anything but impartial in relation to possibilities that might be construed as causing or having the possibility of causing reductions in net revenue. Put another way, this choice of topic was a brave one on the terms prescribed. ‘F’ because IRD has purported to do its analyses impartially and has soundly failed 9. For over 35 years IRD has promoted and successfully pursued a “broad base low rate” (“BBLR”) paradigm. It has been so successful in this that, capital gains aside, there are probably more examples of systematic over-taxation than there are of systematic under-taxation1. BBLR has become an unchallengeable metaphor for what the IRD considers an effective tax system for a small open economy and one generating the highest net revenue over time. And IRD is rightly proud of this and entitled to be so. 10. However, to define a scope for this LTIB topic impartially, never-mind to carry it out impartially, the Commissioner must first get outside of its BBLR metaphor and she has not. BBLR currently infects the choice of scope, the work that has not yet been done, the amount of investment in the project, the lack of collaboration, the timing of requiring submissions and the structure of the draft report. Dare I say it, the paper appears designed to conclude BBLR whatever evidence it encounters in its way, including no matter how compelling. 11. By way of example, in chapter 3 of the draft LTIB evidence is presented that NZ’s FDI is woeful. That fact is left hanging. Then, buried at paragraph 5.7 is the conclusion: “At the same time, chapter 3 provided evidence that New Zealand does appear to be an outlier in the way it taxes inbound investment. Costs of capital and EMTRs are higher in New Zealand than in most other OECD countries.” 12. Surely the conclusion “does appear to be an outlier” is a key finding and one that merits deep exploration? 13. Given the typically very high quality of IRD policy papers and related processes on matters consistent with its BBLR metaphor these defects cannot be dismissed as accidental. On the other hand, those defects could well be evidence of a ‘Kodak’ moment2 for the Commissioner. Conversation killer 14. I observed earlier that this topic choice was a brave one. I must unfortunately now qualify that it could have been brave. Instead, in its lack of bravery, it comes across as in my view as an unashamed attempt to kill an important conversation. Might yet be saved: 15. First, by dropping BBLR as a unidirectional relic necessitated by a time and tax administration system that is no longer so readily compartmentalised. 15. Second, by developing a more mature metaphor for the role of tax and tax systems in regulating the economy – a metaphor befitting a modern economy and the $1.5b investment in START. As Deirdre McCloskey, author of "The Rhetoric of Economics", says "metaphors are not just a pasted-on ornament ... they're terribly consequential." 16. Third, and mandatory (for impartiality), would be to approach the topic from a wider perspective than tax (i.e. limiting the focus to tax is like analysing liver function whilst ignoring the body of which it is a part – an LTIB put out by the Commissioner must surely deal with the real world not merely first year university tax theory and equivalent level assumptions?)3. Footnotes: 1 Note every occasion where policy papers have identified over-taxation and excused this on the basis of fiscal constraints. 2 An infamous moment when Kodak could have gone on to dominate digital photo technology having invented it but could not follow through to reinvent itself – instead the market did and the rest is history. 3 In line with what at least one submitter on the scoping document recommended.