\[IN CONFIDENCE\] H on David Parker, Minister of Revenue Information Release Tax Administration (Financial Statements—Domestic Trusts) Order 2022 April 2022 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s tax policy website at https://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2022/2022-ir-cab-dev-22-sub-0016 Documents in this information release # Reference Type Title Date 1 IR-2022-002 Tax policy report Order in Council: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts 21 January 2022 2 DEV-22-SUB-0016 Cabinet paper Tax Administration (Financial Statements—Domestic Trusts) Order 2022 2 March 2022 3 DEV-22-MIN-0016 Minute Tax Administration (Financial Statements—Domestic Trusts) Order 2022 2 March 2022 Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Cabinet Economic Development Committee on 2 March 2022 and confirmed by Cabinet on 7 March 2022. Two attachments to the Cabinet paper are not included in this information release as it is publicly available: •Tax Administration (Financial Statements—Domestic Trusts) Order 2022 •Regulatory impact statement – Minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Information withheld Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act 1982 (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply are identified. Where information is withheld, no public interest was identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Sections of the Act under which information was withheld: 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). POLICY AND REGULATORY STEWARDSHIP Tax policy report: Order in Council: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Date: 21 January 2022 Priority: High Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2022/002 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Revenue Agree to recommendations 28 January 2022 Authorise the lodgement of the attached Cabinet paper 10 am Thursday 24 February 2022 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Stewart Donaldson Principal Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) Carl Harris Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) 1 21 January 2022 Minister of Revenue Order in Council: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Executive summary Purpose 1 .In Se ptember 2021 you gave approval for officials to consult on minimum financia l re porting standards for domestic trusts (BN2021/319). Consultation is no w complete. T his report seeks your agreement to set the minimum standards by Order i n Council (OIC) . Bac kground 2.T he Taxation (Income Tax Rate and Other Amendments) Act 2020 introduce d i ncreased disclosure requirements for trusts to support the Commissioner’s abilit y to assess compliance with the new 39% personal income tax rate and assist th e C ommissioner in understanding and monitoring the use of structures and entitie s b y trustees . 3. The new rules require trustees of a trust that derives assessable income, and does n ot fall within a specific exclusion category, to prepare financial statements. This is i n addition to requirements to disclose settlors, settlements, distributions an d appointer details. 4.An OIC will set minimum standards for the financial statements. This will provide c ertainty regarding the level of detail to which the statements must be prepare d a nd will impact on the quality of data collected . C onsultation 5 .P olicy officials undertook targeted and public consultation on the content of the OI C f rom June to December 2021. Officials also consulted on operational guidance to a ddress practical matters for trustees, which is planned to be issued in a n op erational statement in March 2022 . 6.T he main themes arising from the OIC consultation involved a concern about hig h co mpliance costs, a preference for a one-year deferral of all disclosur e re quirements, general support for the OIC, recommendations concerning th e de finition and extent of relief for small trusts, and suggestions concerning variou s t echnical matters including related legislative amendments . An alysis 7 .O fficials acknowledge that the trust disclosure rules will result in increase d c ompliance costs. T his was addressed in the 2020 Regulatory Impact Assessmen t (RI A) “Introducing a new top personal income tax rate”. The RIA included th e r ecommendation to conduct a post-implementation review of the new disclosur e ru les. An appropriate time would be in 2023, after trustees using agents have file d IR2022/002: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Page 1 of 11 their first returns under the new rules (these trustee s have until 31 March 2023 to file their returns for the 2021-22 year). 8.T hroughout the OIC consultation process in 2021, policy officials attempted to strik e a b alance between ensuring the OIC does not generate unnecessary complianc e co sts and ensuring the Commissioner will have sufficient financial information to m eet the objectives of the disclosure rules. We believe the proposed OIC conten t w ill achieve this . 9. T he proposed key features of the OIC are : 9 .1 Date of application: Officials propose that the OIC will apply for the 2021- 22 and future income years. 9.2 OIC requirements: Officials propose that the OIC specifies core requirements for financial statements that must be met by all trusts and additional requirements that must be met for trusts that are not small trusts. 9.3 Limited relief for small trusts: Officials propose limited relief in the OIC for small trusts. This would simplify their reporting obligations and significantly reduce compliance costs. However, all trusts will provide the same financial information in forms prescribed by the Commissioner to ensure the Commissioner has sufficient financial information to meet the objectives of the disclosure rules. Small trusts would be defined as having less than $100,000 assessable income, $100,000 tax deductions, and $5 million total assets in the relevant income year. The income and deduction thresholds would exclude income and expenditure relating to the residential property bright-line rules. Officials estimate that these thresholds will provide limited relief for approximately 75% or 135,000 out of 180,000 trusts subject to the new disclosure rules. 9.4 Asset valuation: Valuations will be market value, cost or tax adjusted value, at the discretion of the trustees. 9.5 Associated person disclosures: Associated person transactions must be disclosed in the financial statements if not disclosed in prescribed forms. Disclosures will not be required for transactions at market value. The definition of associated person will be the general definition to be consistent with prescribed forms, however the Commissioner’s operational statement will accept a best endeavours approach to reporting all associated persons transactions in the first year if information is not available. 10 .O fficials have recommended three legislative amendments to the trust disclosur e ru les in the separate policy report for including amendments to the Taxation (Annua l R ates for 2021-22, GST, and Remedial Matters) Bill at the Finance and Expenditur e C ommittee stage (IR2022/017 refers) . T iming 11 .O fficials recommend that the OIC come into force by 31 March 2022. Subject to C abinet Committee and Cabinet meeting dates, this will require a waiver of the 28- day rule . 12.O fficials have been liaising with the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) regardin g th e drafting of this OIC. Due to the compressed timeframes, there is not sufficien t ti me to obtain Cabinet approval to provide drafting instructions to PCO, and the n s eparately obtain Cabinet Legislation Committee approval to submit the OIC t o E xecutive Council. Officials recommend seeking policy and legislative approval fo r t he OIC in the same Cabinet paper. PCO will begin drafting the OIC following you r a greement to the minimum standards set out in this paper . IR2022/002: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Page 2 of 11 Background 1 4.T he Taxation (Income Tax Rate and Other Amendments) Act 2020 introduce d i ncreased disclosure requirements for trusts to support the Commissioner’s abilit y t o assess compliance with the new 39% personal income tax rate and assist th e C ommissioner in understanding and monitoring the use of structures and entitie s b y trustees. Amendments to reduce compliance costs for some trusts wer e s ubsequently enacted in March 2021 in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21 , Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Act 2021. 15.T he increased disclosure requirements apply to trustees of trusts that deriv e a ssessable income and are not subject to specific exclusions. These new rules appl y f or the 2021–22 and later income years and require trustees to include with thei r a nnual retur n: 1 5.1 A statement of profit or loss and a statement of financial position 15.2 The amount and nature of settlements received 15.3 Settlor details, including details of previous settlors if not previously supplied to the Commissioner 15.4 The amount of distributions made and details of beneficiaries who received the distributions 15.5 Appointer details. 1 6.Of ficials propose setting minimum standards for the financial statements by a n O rder in Council made under section 21C of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) . In the absence of minimum standards, there would be uncertainty regarding the l evel of detail the statements must be prepared to. This would affect the quality o f d ata collected . 17.Two similar Orders have been made under the same section in the past: 17 .1 The Tax Administration (Financial Statements) Order 2014 sets out th e min imum standards for financial statements of companies, and 17.2 The Tax Administration (Financial Statements—Foreign Trusts) Order 2017 sets out the minimum standards for financial statements of foreign trusts. Impact 1 8.The total volume of New Zealand trusts has been estimated to be up to 500,000. I nland Revenue records indicate that approximately 180,000 domestic trusts repor t a ssessable income each year and may be affected to some extent by the ne w dis closure requirements. The financial statement disclosure requirements w ill pr imarily affect approximately 55,000 of these domestic trusts. These are trust s th at report assessable income to Inland Revenue but do not currently repor t b usiness income or file any financial statement s. O bjectives 1 9.O fficials proposed minimum standards that are consistent with the followin g o bjectives : •M inimise compliance costs while supporting policy objectives. Th e min imum standards will strike a balance between minimising unnecessar y c ompliance costs and ensuring the Commissioner will have sufficient financia l i nformation to meet the objectives of the disclosure rules . IR2022/002: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Page 4 of 11 •Improve the quality of data. The minimum standards will positively impact o n the quality of data collected . •E nsure consistency with existing frameworks. Th e minimum standar ds w ill be consistent with previous minimum standards set for companies an d f oreign trusts and they will align with accounting principles where appropriate . •F ollow the proportionality principle. The minimum standards will b e t ailored to the size of the trust. Small trusts will not be required to meet all o f t he minimum standards set for large trusts . C onsultation 2 0.P olicy officials undertook targeted and public consultation on the content of the OI C f rom June to December 2021. Officials also consulted on operational guidance to a ddress practical matters for trustees. The main themes arising from the OI C c onsultation were : 2 0.1 High compliance costs. The new disclosure rules will result in some trust s in curring significant compliance costs. Submitters suggested this could be addressed by legislating a one-year deferral of all of the trust disclosure rules, to allow trustees to structure out of the rules or give them more time to prepare for implementation of the rules. In addition, legislative amendments could provide small trusts an exemption from all of the trust disclosure rules. 20.2 Support for OIC. The proposal to enact an OIC to set minimum financial reporting standards was supported, as it would provide guidance for trustees. 20.3 OIC relief for small trusts. Submitters engaged on how small trusts should be defined for the purposes of the OIC relief and the scope of that relief. 20.4 Technical matters. Submitters engaged on a range of technical matters that should be required in the OIC, the most significant relating to valuation, associated person disclosures, and disclosures relating to beneficiary accounts. Analysis 2 1.T he proposed key features of the OIC content, largely supported by submitters an d o utlined below and in detail in Appendices A and B, are : 2 1.1 Date of application: Officials propose that the OIC will apply for the 2021- 22 and future income years. There are several areas where compliance for the first year (2021-22) could be on a ‘best endeavours’ basis and these will be addressed in the Commissioner’s operational statement. For example, the calculation of opening balances and the reporting of transactions with associated persons. Compliance with the OIC will not impact on the financial information the Commissioner will collect in prescribed forms. 21.2 OIC requirements: Officials propose that the OIC specifies core requirements for financial statements that must be met by all trusts and additional requirements that must be met for trusts that are not small trusts. 21.3 Limited relief for small trusts: Officials propose limited relief in the OIC for small trusts which would be defined using income, expense and asset thresholds. The proposal is to set these thresholds at $100,000 assessable income, $100,000 tax deductions, and $5 million total assets. The income IR2022/002: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Page 5 of 11 and deduction thresholds would exclude income and expenditure relating to the residential property bright-line rules. Officials estimate that these thresholds will result in 75% (135,000 out of 180,000) of trusts will be classified as small trusts for the purpose of OIC relief. This means small trusts will have to meet fewer minimum requirements for their financial statements set out in the OIC, but the information they provide to the Commissioner in prescribed forms will remain the same for all trusts (information to be collected in prescribed forms is summarised in Appendix A). 21.4 Asset valuation: Valuations will be market value, cost or tax adjusted value, at the discretion of the trustees. The valuation method for certain assets must be disclosed. 21.5 Associated person disclosures: Associated person transactions must be disclosed in the financial statements if not disclosed in prescribed forms. Disclosures will not be required for transactions at market value. The general definition of associated persons will be applied, however for practical purposes the Commissioner’s operational statement will accept a best endeavours approach to reporting associated persons transactions in the first year if information is not available to trustees. 21.6 Beneficiary account movements: Beneficiary account movement details will not be set out in the OIC but movements disclosed in prescribed forms would, at a minimum, be part of the materials supporting the financial statements. 22 .O fficials have recommended three legislative amendments to the trust disclosur e r ules in the separate policy report for including amendments in the Taxation (Annua l R ates for 2021-22, GST, and Remedial Matters) Bill at the Finance and Expenditur e C ommittee stage (IR2022/017 refers). These proposed changes will : 22 .1 Exclude non-cash distributions that are minor services incidental to th e op eration of the trust from the disclosure requirements. 22.2 Clarify that the new rules require trusts to disclose the nature of each distribution made by the trustee of the trust. 22.3 Exempt all foreign trusts from the new domestic disclosure rules. Administrative implications 2 3.Implementation and on-going administration costs will be met through baseline f unding . IR2022/002: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Page 6 of 11 Appendix A – Summary of proposed minimum requirements for the preparation of financial statements by domestic trusts subject to section 59BA of the Tax Administration Act 2 5.T he OIC will contain minimum requirements for the preparation of financia l s tatements by trusts subject to section 59BA of the Tax Administration Act 199 4 ( TAA), as summarised below. For the purpose of the OIC, the term “financia l s tatements” includes any notes and other supporting materials forming part of th e fi nancial statement s. T ier 1: Core requirements – for all trusts subject to s 59B A i. P repare a statement of financial position and a profit and loss statemen t. ii. Apply the double-entry method of recording financial transactions. iii. Us e the prescribed valuation principles and disclose the valuation metho d a dopted for shares/ownership interests, land and buildings . i v . Fin ancial statements must contain all relevant amounts that any for ms p rescribed by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue under section 35 of the TA A r equire to be copied from the company’s financial statements (for example, th e I R10 Financial Statements Summary and the financial statement disclosur e s ection in the IR6 income tax return and the IR6B movement in beneficiar y a ccounts) . T ier 2: Additional requirements for trusts that are not “small trusts” v .Apply the principles of accrual accounting. v i . P rovide a statement of accounting policies . vii.D isclose comparable figures for the previous income year to the extent that th e tr ustee has that information . viii.Disclose several specific items: -A reconciliation between the profit or loss in the statement of profit an d l oss to taxable income ; -A n appropriately detailed schedule of the trust’s fixed assets an d depreciable property used for tax purposes; -M atters relating to trusts with forestry and livestock businesse s: i nformation about the cost of timber as at the end of the income year a nd a reconciliation of movements in the cost of timber during the income year ; if the trust is a specified livestock owner, details of livestock valuatio n m ethods, valuations, and calculations for tax purposes . i x . D isclose associated persons transaction details. For the purposes of th e d isclosure rule s: -The disclosure should include details of transactions between the trust and a ny associated person of the trustee, unless the transaction is minor an d i ncidental to the activities of the trustee ; -T ransaction details include names of the associated persons, the nature o f th e association, the nature of the transactions and the amounts involved ; -D isclosures are not required if transactions are at a market rate ; -I f associated person disclosures have been made separately in any form s p rescribed by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue, this information doe s not need to be duplicated in the financial statements. -A ssociated persons are as defined in subpart YB of the Income Tax Ac t 2 00 7. IR2022/002: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Page 7 of 11 2 6.Officials note that from the 2021-22 and later years, the following financial in formation will be collected by the Commissioner in prescribed forms for a ll d omestic trusts subject to section 59BA : I ncome Tax Return for trust s i.Total accounting profit before tax ii. T ax adjustments to reconcile accounting income with assessable income i n t ax retu rn iii. Un taxed realised gain s iv.Total assets v.A ssociated persons financial arrangement s v i .S hares/ownership Interest s vii.L an d viii.B uildin gs i x .T otal liabilitie s x.A ssociated persons financial arrangement s x i .T otal equi ty xii.Drawings xiii.C losing current account balance s T rust beneficiary form Beneficiary account movements i.O pening balanc e + Distributions ii. A ccounting income and other distribution s iii. C orpu s i v .C apita l v.Use of trust property for less than market value v i .D istribution of trust asse ts vii.F orgiveness of deb t - W ithdrawal s viii.A mounts withdrawn from the trust during the income yea r i x .C losing balanc e IR2022/002: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Page 8 of 11 Appendix B – Summary of policy recommendations 2 7.T he policy recommendations following discussions with stakeholders ar e s ummarised below . 28.Minimum standards: Officials propose the OIC will state it contains ‘minimum’ s tandards for trustees of trusts required to comply with the disclosure requirement s s et out in section 59BA of the TAA. Financial statements may be prepared to an y le vel above the minimum specified by the OIC. These minimum standards will no t directly affect other disclosures required under section 59BA(2), which include d etails of settlements, settlors, distributions and appointers . 29.D ate of application: Officials propose the OIC be enacted by 31 March 2022 an d a pply it to the 2021-22 income year for balance dates ending 31 March or later . There are several areas where compliance for the first year (2021-22) could be on a ‘best endeavours’ basis and these will be addressed in the Commissioner’ s op erational statement rather than the OIC. Changes proposed as a result o f c onsultation remove significant compliance costs so there is no advantage i n deferring its application. Making the OIC before 31 March 2022 and applying it for t he 2021-22 year onwards will provide useful guidance for trustees. Setting out i n a n operational statement where the Commissioner will accept a ‘best endeavours ’ a pproach for the first year will reduce transition costs for many trusts. Earl y balance-date trusts will not be required to follow the OIC (approximately 400 out of 18 0,000 trusts with assessable income are early balance date trusts and about hal f w ill be able to access the OIC small trust concessions) . 30.F inancial statement notes and supporting materials: Officials propose th e d omestic trust OIC will clarify that, for the purposes of the OIC, the term ‘financia l s tatements’ includes any notes and other supporting materials. Section 59BA(2)(a ) r equires trusts to provide “a statement of profit or loss and a statement of financia l p osition”. Where the OIC refers to financial statements it will align with th e co mpanies OIC which states that the term financial statements “includes any note s a nd other supporting materials forming part of the financial statements”. This is a n impo rtant compliance cost savings measure – making it clear that items required in the OIC can simply be supporting materials rather than in the actual financial s tatements . 31.N on-standard balance date reporting: Officials propose that financia l s tatements may be prepared to a non-standard balance date (i.e. a balance dat e th at is not 31 March) used for accounting purposes, provided the trust does no t de rive business income which would require Commissioner approval for non- standard balance date reporting. This concession will relieve passive investmen t tr usts from having to re-state their financial statements to the 31 March tax year i f t hey have non-standard balance dates for accounting purposes . 32.S mall trust thresholds: Officials propose that small trust relief thresholds be a s f ollows : i. T o qualify as a small trust, a trustee must report, for the relevant income yea r: • le ss than $100,000 assessable income (before allocation); an d • le ss than $100,000 deductible expenditure; an d • to tal assets (including assets that are not in the tax base) valued at les s t han $5m as at balance date . ii. T he $100,000 assessable income and deductible expenditure figures used f or t he purpose of determining whether a trust is small will not include inco me a ssessed under the bright-line rules or related deductible expenditure . IR2022/002: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Page 9 of 11 iii.Assets will be valued using the valuation principles in the OIC and must be co nsistent with financial statement s. 33.O fficials estimate that raising these thresholds will provide relief for approximate ly 75 % or 135,000 out of 180,000 trusts subject to the new disclosure rules . T hreshold increases remove significant compliance costs but allow IR to continue t o c ollect sufficient information in prescribed forms . 34.O fficials considered suggestions from submitters to minimise trusts ‘flipping’ in an d ou t of the disclosure rules if they have one-off transactions which would put the m a bove the thresholds. Officials recommend the approach suggested by som e s ubmitters that the calculation be limited to assessable income (and deductibl e e xpenditure) in the current year but that assessable income derived from the bright- line residential property sale rules (and related deductible expenditure) be excluded t o avoid anomalies involving residential property sales . 35.S mall trust scope of relief: Officials propose the scope of relief for small trust s will mean only four minimum standards will apply to small trusts: i. P repare a statement of financial position and a profit and loss statemen t. ii. A pply the double-entry method of recording financial transactions . iii.Us e the prescribed valuation principles and disclose the valuation metho d a dopted for shares/ownership interests, land and buildings . i v . Fin ancial statements must contain all relevant amounts that any for ms p rescribed by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue under section 35 of the TA A require to be copied from the company’s financial statements (for example, the I R10 Financial Statements Summary and the financial statement disclosur e s ection in the IR6 income tax return and the IR6B movement in beneficia ry a ccounts). These increases in the scope of the relief for small trusts remov e significant compliance costs but allow the Commissioner to continue to collect s ufficient information in prescribed forms . 36.Va luations: Officials propose the valuation method will be left to the judgement of the trustees. 37.T he OIC will clarify that for the purposes of calculating market value of properties , th e use of rating valuations is an acceptable proxy . 38.I n order to prevent inappropriate use of a ‘tax value’ option, this option will be r estricted to assets and liabilities that are in the tax base . 39.A ssociated person disclosures: Officials propose : i. T rustees must disclose associated persons transaction details, with th e e xception of trustees of small trusts who must only disclose associated perso n t ransactions when required to do so in prescribed forms . ii. T ransaction details include names of the associated persons, the nature of th e a ssociation, the nature of the transactions and the amounts involved . iii. A ssociated persons are defined in subpart YB of the Income Tax Act 200 7. i v . T he disclosure should include details of transactions between the trust and an y a ssociated person of the trustee, unless the transaction is minor and incidenta l to the activities of the trustee . v.D isclosures are not required if transactions are at a market rate . IR2022/002: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Page 10 of 11 vi . I f associated person disclosures have been made separately in any forms p rescribed by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue, this information does no t n eed to be duplicated in the financial statements . 40.T he approach will reduce duplication with disclosures in prescribed forms, provid e m ore clarity as to what disclosure is required, and reduce the extent of disclosure s r equired (for example, by excluding minor and incidental transactions) . 41.B eneficiary account movements: Officials propose there will be no requiremen t i n the OIC to provide a line-by -line reconciliation in beneficiary accounts. Instea d, t he OIC will clarify that financial statements must contain all relevant amounts tha t a ny forms prescribed by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue including the IR6 B m ovement in beneficiary accounts. The beneficiary account movements disclose d in the prescribed form will be sufficient for the purpose of the OIC. This will save co mpliance cost s. 42.G ross-up options: Officials propose the OIC will not prescribe dividend gross-u p f or imputation credits and interest/dividend gross-up for RWT. The gross-up optio n w ill be left to the judgement of the trustees . 43.T rusts Act 2019: Officials propose the OIC will explicitly note that there a re re quirements for trustees to keep records under section 45 of the Trusts Act 2019 . Section 45 of the Trusts Act 2019 requires each trustee of a trust to keep, so far as i s reasonable, records of the trust property that identify the assets, liabilities , i ncome, and expenses of the trust and that are appropriate to the value an d complexity of the trust property. 44.This requirement differs from the OIC as it does not explicitly require trustees to c ompile financial statements and it allows the trustee to exercise judgement as t o w hat is reasonable and appropriate in respect of record keeping. However, it is a le gislative provision that could be usefully referenced in the OIC, while clarifyin g that the minimum reporting standards in the OIC are more prescriptive and in some c ases apply income tax concepts (for example, the use of tax valuations ). 45.F ixed asset schedule: Officials propose the financial statements will include a n appropriately detailed schedule of the trust’s fixed assets and depreciable property u sed for tax purposes. Fixed assets with a tax value are typically tracked through a ta x fixed assets register. For the purpose of the OIC it will only be required to b e in cluded in financial statements as supporting materials . IR2022/002: minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts Page 11 of 11 In Confidence Office of the Minister Revenue Chair, Cabinet Economic Development Committee TAX ADMINISTRATION (FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—DOMESTIC TRUSTS) ORDER 2022 Proposal 1.In 2020, Cabinet agreed to increase the disclosure requirements for trusts, including the requirement to prepare financial statements for the 2021–22 and later income years (CAB-20-MIN-0484 refers). This paper seeks Cabinet’s approval of the minimum level of detail required in those financial statements. Approval is also sought for the Order in Council required to bring the minimum standards into law, and for authority to submit the Order directly to the Executive Council. Relation to Government Priorities 2.The Taxation (Income Tax Rate and Other Amendments) Act 2020 introduced a new to p personal income tax rate of 39% on income exceeding $180,000 for the 2021–22 and later income years. The introduction of a 39% tax rate formed part of the Labour Party’s manifesto for the 2020 General Election. Labour campaigned explicitly that we would not increase the trustee income tax rate but would monitor behaviour around avoidance and the success of enforcement measures. 3.The Act also introduced additional information reporting and disclosure obligations fo r trustees for the 2021–22 and later income years. The objective of these obligations is related to the integrity of the tax system. The disclosure rules will help evaluate the effectiveness of the new 39% rate and gain insight into the use of structures and entities by trustees in New Zealand. Executive Summary 4.The increased trust disclosure requirements include a requirement to prepare a sta tement of profit or loss and a statement of financial position. This requirement does not specify what level of detail the statements must be prepared to. 5.I propose to set, by Order in Council, minimum requirements for financial statements prepared by trusts subject to the new disclosure rules. This will provide increased certainty for trustees regarding their reporting obligations, support compliance with the disclosure rules and will improve the quality of data collected. The proposed Order would apply for the 2021–22 and later income years for most trusts. 6.Inland Revenue officials undertook targeted and public consultation on the proposed con tent of the Order in 2021. Submitters supported setting minimum standards by Order in Council, as it would provide certainty regarding trustees’ reporting obligations and help mitigate the compliance costs imposed by the disclosure rules. 1 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 2 7. The proposed Order has been designed based on feedback received in consultation and is aimed at striking a balance between supporting the Government’s objectives for the disclosure rules and minimising compliance costs for trusts. The proposed minimum standards provide simplified reporting requirements for certain trusts. Background 8. On 23 November 2020, Cabinet decided to defer the decision on whether to increase t he trustee income tax rate to 39% to a later date pending information on whether there is a behavioural response to avoid paying the new 39% top personal income tax rate. Cabinet agreed to collect information from trustees to test compliance and effective operation of the new 39% rate and provide better information to understand and monitor the use of structures and entities by trustees (CAB-21-MIN-0484 refers). 9. The Taxation (Income Tax Rate and Other Amendments) Act 2020 was enacted on 7 D ecember 2020 and introduced increased disclosure requirements for trusts that derive assessable income. The rules apply for the 2021–22 and later income years and require trustees to prepare a statement of profit or loss and a statement of financial position. Trustees must disclose the following information to the Commissioner of Inland Revenue: 9.1 the amount and nature of settlements received (settlements do not need to be d isclosed if they are minor services incidental to the activities of the trust and are provided to the trustee at less than market value); 9.2 settlor details, including details of previous settlors if not previously supplied to t he Commissioner of Inland Revenue; 9.3 the amount of distributions made and details of beneficiaries who received the distributions; and 9.4 appointer details. 10. Certain trusts are excluded from these rules. These exclusions largely relate to trusts t hat already have reporting requirements under other regimes. Examples include non-active trusts, trusts eligible to be Māori authorities, foreign trusts and charitable trusts. 11. The total volume of trusts in New Zealand has been estimated to be over 400,000. I nland Revenue records indicate that approximately 180,000 domestic trusts report assessable income each year and may be affected to some extent by the new disclosure requirements. The financial statement disclosure requirements will primarily affect approximately 55,000 of these domestic trusts. These are trusts that report assessable income to Inland Revenue but do not currently report business income or file any financial statements. 12. There would be uncertainty regarding the level of detail the financial statements must b e prepared to if minimum standards were not set. This would affect the quality of data collected and possibly lead to non-compliance with the rules. 13. Section 21C of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) provides that the Governor- General can prescribe minimum requirements for financial reporting. Before 2 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 recommending the making of an Order under this section, the Minister of Revenue must consult with professional accounting bodies. This requirement has been satisfied by consultation undertaken by officials in 2021, as detailed below. Objectives 14. The minimum standards should be consistent with the following objectives: 14.1 Minimising compliance costs: T he minimum standards should strike a balance between ensuring the Commissioner of Inland Revenue will have sufficient financial information to meet the objectives of the disclosure rules and minimising unnecessary compliance costs. 14.2 Achieving the Government’s objectives: T he minimum standards should positively impact on the quality of data collected to help evaluate the effectiveness of the new 39% rate and gain insight into the use of structures and entities by trustees. 14.3 Ensuring consistency with existing frameworks: T he minimum standards should be consistent where possible with previous minimum standards set for companies and foreign trusts and should align with accounting standards and principles where appropriate. 14.4 Proportionality: T he minimum standards should be tailored to the size of the trust. Smaller trusts should have simplified reporting requirements. Consultation 15. Inland Revenue officials undertook targeted and public consultation on the proposed mi nimum standards in 2021. Officials also consulted on operational guidance for the disclosure rules to address practical matters for trustees. The main themes arising from consultation were: 15.1 High compliance costs: T he new disclosure rules will result in some trusts incurring significant compliance costs. Submitters suggested this could be addressed by legislating a one-year deferral of all the trust disclosure rules, to allow trustees to restructure out of the rules or give them more time to prepare for implementation of the rules. In addition, legislative amendments could provide smaller trusts an exemption from all the disclosure requirements. 15.2 Support for Order in Council: T he proposal to set minimum financial reporting standards by Order in Council was supported, as it would increase certainty for trustees regarding reporting obligations. 15.3 Relief for small trusts: S ubmitters engaged on how small trusts should be defined for the purposes of the Order in Council relief and the scope of that relief. 15.4 Technical matters: S ubmitters engaged on a range of technical matters that should be covered by the Order in Council, the most significant relating to valuation methods, associated person disclosures, and disclosures relating to beneficiary accounts. 3 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 16.In addition to consulting with members of the tax and accounting community, the External Reporting Board, the Department of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, the Ministry of Justice, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Statistics NZ and the Treasury were consulted during the development of the proposed minimum standards. Minimum standards 17.The key features of the proposed Order are set out below. These features have been de veloped based on feedback received in consultation and the objectives set out above. The annex contains further detail on the proposed minimum requirements. Application date 18.A small number of trusts have an early balance date and will have already filed their annual return before the Order is proposed to come into force. Inland Revenue data indicates approximately 0.2% (400 out of 180,000) of trusts subject to these rules are in this situation. 19.To prevent retrospectively imposing requirements on these trusts, I propose that the min imum standards apply for income years that end after the Order comes into force. This will be 2021–22 and future income years for the large majority of trusts that do not have an early balance date. 20.There are several areas where compliance for the first year (2021–22) could be on a ‘best endeavours’ basis and these are expected be addressed in the Commissioner’s Operational Statement on the disclosure rules. For example, this could include the calculation of opening balances in the first year and the reporting of transactions with associated persons. Simplified reporting requirements for certain trusts 21.The proposed Order provides simplified reporting requirements for certain trusts. A trust with less than $100,000 assessable income, less than $100,000 tax deductions and less than $5 million total assets in an income year will have simplified reporting requirements. These thresholds would exclude income and expenditure relating to the residential property brightline rules to reduce the risk of trusts not qualifying for the simplified reporting requirements due to large one-off transactions. 22.Officials estimate that these thresholds will result in 75% (135,000 out of 180,000) of tru sts qualifying for simplified reporting requirements. 23.While these trusts will have to meet fewer requirements for their financial statements, all trusts will provide the same financial information in forms prescribed by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue. This helps reduce compliance costs for a significant number of trusts, while continuing to support the objectives of the disclosure rules of evaluating the effectiveness if the new 39% rate and gaining insight into the use of structures and entities by trustees in New Zealand. 4 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 Asset valuation 24. Assets will be valued at either market value, cost or tax adjusted value, at the discretion of the trustees. For the purposes of calculating the market value of properties, the use of rating valuations will be an acceptable proxy. This helps ensure trustees are not forced to re-value assets, or engage valuers, to comply with the disclosure rules. 25. The valuation method for certain assets must be disclosed. This helps support the q uality of the data collected. Associated person disclosures 26. Trustees must disclose associated persons transaction details, except for trustees of “simplified reporting trusts” who only need to disclose associated person transactions when required to do so in prescribed forms. 27. Disclosures will not be required for transactions at market value. Disclosure of t ransactions with associated persons not at market value is important to assess compliance with the 39% personal income tax rate. Financial Implications 28. This proposal has no financial implications. Timing and 28-Day Rule 29. The proposed Order will come into force on 31 March 2022, the end of the 2021–22 income year for trustees with standard balance dates. The minimum standards set by the Order will apply for income years ending on or after the Order comes into force. That is, the Order will not retrospectively impose requirements on trustees with balance dates prior to the Order coming into force. 30. A waiver of the 28-day rule is sought to allow the Order to come into force by 31 Ma rch 2022 on the grounds that the Order needs to be in force before the end of the 2021–22 income year for trustees with standard balance dates, to provide increased certainty regarding reporting obligations for the 2021–22 and later income years. Compliance 31. The Order in Council complies with: 31.1 the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; 31.2 the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 a nd the Human Rights Act 1993; 31.3 the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 2020; 31.4 relevant international standards and obligations; 31.5 the Legislation Guidelines (2021 edition), which are maintained by the L egislation Design and Advisory Committee. 5 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 Regulations Review Committee Application date 32.The short time between the proposed making of this Order and the application date of the minimum standards may be a basis for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Order to the attention of the House of Representatives under Standing Order 327. Officials consider this risk to be low and that the application date is appropriate for the following reasons: 32.1 The disclosure rules were enacted in December 2020. Trustees have had a rea sonable amount of notice regarding the requirements in the disclosure rules in section 59BA of the TAA. 32.2 Trustees will have until 7 July 2022 to file returns for the 2021–22 income yea r. Trustees with tax agents (the large majority) will be able to file returns as late as 31 March 2023. 32.3 During consultation in 2021, submitters broadly supported applying the mi nimum standards for the 2021–22 income year. Submitters considered that this would provide increased certainty regarding trustees’ reporting obligations. Deferring the application of the Order to a later date would provide no relief from the requirement in section 59BA to prepare financial statements for the 2021–22 income year. 32.4 Inland Revenue has been engaged with tax agents, accountants and software pr oviders regarding the implementation of the disclosure requirements. Sub-delegation issue 33.Clause 1(e) of the Schedule to the Order requires that the financial statements must include all relevant amounts that are required to be copied from financial statements into a form prescribed by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue (for example, the IR10 form – financial statements summary). 34.There is a low risk that this clause may be a basis for the Regulations Review Co mmittee to draw the Order to the attention of the House of Representatives under Standing Order 327. This is because there is a risk that the Order could be seen to sub-delegate to the Commissioner the legislative power to set requirements for financial statements for domestic trusts. 35.Taxpayers that derive business income are required to either file an IR10 form or pro vide a set of financial statements to Inland Revenue. Clause 1(e) of the Schedule is an important integrity measure to ensure that taxpayers cannot avoid the requirements in the IR10 form by filing a set of financial statements prepared to a lower standard. This clause ensures that the financial statements are an appropriate proxy for the IR10 form. This approach follows the precedent set by the minimum standards for financial reporting for companies. 1 36.Clause 1(e) of the Schedule to the Order only relates to forms that the Commissioner is already authorised to prescribe under section 35 of the TAA. To ensure the 1 Clause 1(e) of the Schedule to Tax Administration (Financial Statements) Order 2014. 6 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 financial statement requirements are workable, it is important that they interface with these forms. In these circumstances, officials are satisfied that this approach is within the scope of the regulation making power contemplated by Parliament. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel 37.The Order in Council has been certified by the Parliamentary Counsel Office as be ing in order for submission to Cabinet. Impact Analysis Regulatory Impact Statement 38.A Regulatory Impact Statement has been completed and is attached. 39.The Quality Assurance reviewers at Inland Revenue have reviewed Re gulatory Impact Statement: Minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts and consider that the information and analysis summarised in it meets the quality assurance criteria of the Regulatory Impact Statement framework. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment 40.The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for significance is not met. Population Implications 41.There are no population implications arising from these proposals. Human Rights 42.The proposals do not give rise to any human rights implications. Communications 43.I will publish a press statement regarding the minimum standards for financial sta tements prepared by domestic trusts before the end of the 2021–22 income year. 44.The Order will be published in the Ga zette and Inland Revenue will include details of the new minimum standards in a Tax Information Bulletin after the Order is made. 45.To date a number of submitters and media articles have focused on the increased compliance costs for trustees as a result of the new domestic trust disclosure rules. They have noted these rules go further than reporting requirements under the Trusts Act 2019 and suggested that because the disclosure rules were enacted in December 2020 with no consultation it would be preferrable to defer their application for a year. While the proposed Order goes some way to reducing compliance costs based on submitter feedback, it is likely that concerns about the timing and the amount of information being collected will continue to be raised. 7 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 Proactive Release 46.I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key ad vice papers with appropriate redactions within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Recommendations The Minister of Revenue recommends that the Committee: 1.note that the Taxation (Income Tax Rate and Other Amendments) Act 2020 i ntroduced increased disclosure requirements for certain trusts, including the requirement to prepare financial statements for the 2021–22 and later income years. 2.note that section 21C of the Tax Administration Act 1994 allows the Governor- G eneral to prescribe, by Order in Council, minimum requirements for preparing financial statements for certain classes of taxpayers. 3.note that before recommending the making of an Order in Council under section 21C o f the Tax Administration Act 1994, the Minister of Revenue must consult with professional accounting bodies. Targeted and public consultation undertaken by officials in 2021 satisfies this requirement. 4.agree to the minimum financial reporting requirements as set out in the attached Order, Tax Administration (Financial Statements—Domestic Trusts) Order 2022. 5.agree that the proposed Order should apply to all trusts subject to the disclosure ru les introduced by the Taxation (Income Tax Rate and Other Amendments) Act 2020. 6.agree that the proposed Order should apply for income years that end on or after 31 March 2022. 7.authorise th e submission to the Executive Council of the Tax Administration (Financial Statements—Domestic Trusts) Order 2022. 8.note that the Tax Administration (Financial Statements—Domestic Trusts) Order 2022 will come into force on 31 March 2022, the end of the 2021–22 income year for trusts with standard balance dates. 9.note that a waiver of the 28-day rule is sought so that the Order in Council can come i nto force by 31 March 2022 on the ground it needs to be in force before the end of the 2021–22 income year. 8 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 10. agree to waive the 28-day rule so that the Order in Council can come into force by 31 March 2022. Authorised for lodgement Hon David Parker M inister of Revenue 9 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 Annex – minimum standards for financial statements prepared by domestic trusts For the purposes of the Order in Council, the term “financial statements” includes any notes an d other supporting materials forming part of the financial statements. The standards set out below are “minimum” standards. Financial statements may be pr epared to any level above these minimum requirements. Financial statements may be prepared to a non-standard balance date (i.e. a balance date that is not 31 March) used for accounting purposes, provided the trust does not derive business income (which would require approval from the Commissioner of Inland Revenue for non-standard balance date reporting – section 38 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA)). Valuation Valuation of assets and liabilities can be either at market value, cost or tax adjusted value, at the discretion of the trustee. The use of ‘tax value’ will be limited to assets and liabilities that are in the tax base (i.e., assets and liabilities that are used in the production of assessable income). Simplified reporting trusts A trust is a “simplified reporting trust” for a relevant income year if the trustee reports: less than $100,000 assessable income, AND less than $100,000 deductible expenditure, AND total assets reported in the statement of financial position (including both private and in come producing assets) valued at less than $5 million as at balance date. The $100,000 assessable income and deductible expenditure thresholds used in this test do not include income assessed under the brightline rules or related deductible expenditure. Assets will be valued using the valuation principles set out above and must be consistent with the prepared financial statements. Core requirements for all trusts The following minimum standards apply to all trusts subject to the disclosure rules. The financial statements must consist of: A statement of financial position setting out the assets, liabilities, and net assets of th e trust as at the end of the return year; and A statement of profit or loss statement showing income derived, and expenditure in curred, by the trust during the return year. Financial statements must be prepared using the double-entry method of recording financial tra nsactions. Financial statements must use the prescribed valuation principles (set out above) and di sclose the valuation method adopted for land, buildings, and shares/ownership interests. 10 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 A trustee can choose to adopt a different valuation method for each of these categories. If there are multiple assets within one category (e.g., multiple buildings), each asset may be valued using a different method. Financial statements must contain all relevant amounts that any forms prescribed by the Co mmissioner under section 35 of the TAA require to be copied from the company’s financial statements. Additional requirements for trusts that are not “simplified reporting trusts” For trusts that do not qualify for simplified reporting for an income year, the financial st a tements must: Be prepared applying the principles of accrual accounting. Include a statement of accounting policies Disclose comparable figures for the previous income year to the extent that the tru stee has that information. Disclose several specific items: oa reconciliation between the profit or loss in the statement of profit or loss to ta xable income; oan appropriately detailed schedule of the trust’s fixed assets and depreciable pr operty used for tax purposes; omatters relating to trusts with forestry and livestock businesses: information about the cost of timber as at the end of the income year and a reconciliation of movements in the cost of timber during the income year; if the trust is a specified livestock owner, details of livestock valuation me thods, valuations, and calculations for tax purposes. oDisclose details of transactions between the trust and any associated person of the trustee, unless the transaction is minor and incidental to the activities of the trust. Transaction details include the names of the associated persons, the n ature of the association, the nature of the transactions and the amounts involved. Disclosure is not required if the transaction is at a market rate. If associated person disclosures have been made separately in any f orms prescribed by the Commissioner, this information does not need to be duplicated in the financial statements. 11 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:05:11 I N C O N F I D E N C E DEV-22-MIN-0016 Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Tax Administration (Financial Statements — Domestic Trusts) Order 2022 Portfolio Revenue On 2 March 2022, the Cabinet Economic Development Committee: 1 noted t hat the Taxation (Income Tax Rate and Other Amendments) Act 2020 introduced increased disclosure requirements for certain trusts, including the requirement to prepare financial statements for the 2021–22 and later income years; 2 noted t hat section 21C of the Tax Administration Act 1994 allows the Governor-General to prescribe, by Order in Council, minimum requirements for preparing financial statements for certain classes of taxpayers; 3 noted t hat: 3.1 before recommending the making of an Order in Council under section 21C of the Tax Administration Act 1994, the Minister of Revenue must consult with professional accounting bodies; 3.2 targeted and public consultation undertaken by officials in 2021 satisfies this requirement; 4 a reed to the minimum financial reporting requirements as set out in the Tax Administration (Financial Statements – Domestic Trusts) Order 2022 (the Order); 5 a reed that the Order should apply to all trusts subject to the disclosure rules introduced by the Taxation (Income Tax Rate and Other Amendments) Act 2020; 6 a reed that the Order should apply for income years that end on or after 31 March 2022; 7 noted that the Order will come into force on 31 March 2022, which is the end of the 2021–22 income year for trusts with standard balance dates; 8 note d that a waiver of the 28-day rule is sought: 8.1 on the grounds that the Order needs to be in force before the end of the 2021–22 inc ome year; 8.2 so that the Order can come into force by 31 March 2022; 9 a re ed to waive the 28-day rule so that the Order can come into force by 31 March 2022; 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:04:42 I N C O N F I D E N C E 1 3 I N C O N F I D E N C E DEV-22-MIN-0016 10 authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Tax Administration (Financial Statements—Domestic Trusts) Order 2022 \[PCO 24469/4.0\]. Janine Harvey Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Office of the Prime Minister Hon Carmel Sepuloni Officials Committee for DEV Hon David Parker Hon Poto Williams Hon Stuart Nash Hon Kris Faafoi Hon Willie Jackson Hon Michael Wood Hon Dr David Clark Hon DrAyesha Verrall Hon Meka Whaitiri Hon Phil Twyford Dr Deborah Russell MP 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-10 11:04:42 I N C O N F I D E N C E 2