\[IN CONFIDENCE\] POLICY AND REGULATORY STEWARDSHIP Tax policy report: Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2021 Date: 20 October 2021 Priority: High Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2021/486 Action sought Action sought Deadline Parliamentary Under- Secretary to the Minister Agree to recommendations 4 November 2021 of Revenue Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Maraina Hak Policy Lead s 9(2)(a) Richard McLaughlan Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 20 October 2021 Parliamentary Under-Secretary to the Minister of Revenue Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2021 Executive summary 1. This report outlines the process for increasing the student loan repayment threshold for New Zealand-based borrowers from 1 April 2022 and recommends you take a paper to Cabinet on this matter. 2. The current policy is to adjust the loan repayment threshold for movement in the Consumer Price Index – all groups excluding cigarettes and other tobacco products (CPI-ex tobacco) every year. 3. The current repayment threshold is $20,280. Under the current policy the new threshold would be $21,268 and would apply from 1 April 2022. This would allow New Zealand-based student loan borrowers to earn an additional $988 of income per year (or $19 per week) before they must begin to make loan repayments. 4. The impacts of adjusting the repayment threshold are already accounted for in the forecast. However, the Parliamentary Counsel Office will need to be instructed to draft the necessary regulations to increase the threshold and Cabinet authorisation is needed for the regulations to go to the Executive Council. 5. Any new repayment threshold needs to be included into payroll software in time for the 2022/23 income year. To provide payroll providers time to make and test changes to payroll software, Inland Revenue starts issuing payroll specifications about 4 months before the start of the next income year. We therefore recommend aiming to have this matter considered by Cabinet Legislative Committee on 11 November. Recommended action We recommend that you: 6. Note that under the current policy, the student loan repayment threshold is adjusted for inflation annually. Noted 7. Agree that the Parliamentary Counsel Office be instructed to draft the necessary regulations to increase the student loan repayment threshold to $21,268 and that the threshold apply from 1 April 2022. Agreed/Not Agreed 8. Agree to take the attached paper to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on 11 November, which asks for authority to submit the Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2020 to the Executive Council, following consultation with the Minister of Revenue. Agreed/Not Agreed IR2021/486: Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2021 Page 1 of 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 9. Agree to proactively release the Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers in full, in line with the provisions of the Official information Act 1982, within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Agreed/Not Agreed 10. Refer this report to the Minister of Revenue for his information. Referred/Not referred 11. Refer this report to the Minister of Education for his information. Referred/Not referred s 9(2)(a) Maraina Hak Policy Lead Policy and Regulatory Stewardship Dr Deborah Russell Parliamentary Under-Secretary to the Minister of Revenue / /2021 IR2021/486: Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2021 Page 2 of 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Background 12. The student loan repayment threshold sets the amount of annual income at which a New Zealand-based borrower is required to begin making loan repayments. The threshold is a mechanism to reduce the likelihood that a low-income borrower would be placed into financial hardship as a consequence of their student loan repayment obligations. 13. The student loan repayment threshold is prescribed by regulation through an Order in Council. 14. The Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2020 set the annual repayment threshold for the 2021/22 tax year at $20,280. This was an increase from $20,020 for the 2020/21 tax year. Process for calculating the threshold adjustment 15. Since 2016, Government policy has been that the student loan repayment threshold is adjusted annually in line with the CPI-ex tobacco (September quarter) \[CAB-16- MIN-0655 refers\]. Adjusting the repayment threshold for inflation maintains the real value of the amount of income someone can earn before they are required to begin repaying their student loan. The threshold for the 2022/23 tax year 16. The CPI-ex tobacco for the quarter ending 30 September 2021 was up 4.7% on the September 2020 quarter. Applying the CPI-ex tobacco value to the formula set out in the Appendix to this report produced a new annual threshold of $21,268. This would mean that New Zealand-based student loan borrowers could earn an additional $988 per year (or $19 per week) before being required to make loan repayments. Regulations to be made by Order in Council 17. To increase the student loan repayment threshold to $21,268 per year from 1 April 2022, the Parliamentary Counsel Office needs to be instructed to draft regulations under s 215(a) of the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011. 18. Ideally, the Order in Council should be made before the end of 2021. This provides sufficient certainty and time for payroll providers to build and test any new repayment threshold amount into payroll software in time for the 1 April 2022 application date. Financial implications 19. The impacts of adjusting the threshold from 1 April 2022 using the current methodology are already accounted for in the forecast \[CAB-16-MIN-0655 refers\]. Administrative and system implications 20. Threshold adjustments need to be built into payroll specifications for the relevant tax year and tested. Inland Revenue issues a number of draft specifications to allow payroll users to gauge the impacts of payroll changes well in advance of their application. These specifications are normally published in December to apply for the following tax year. IR2021/486: Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2021 Page 3 of 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Proactive release considerations 21. If the student loan repayment threshold is adjusted, officials recommend that the Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers be proactively released within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Next steps 22. We recommend the attached Cabinet paper be lodged with the Cabinet Office by 4 November for consideration at the Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting on 11 November. IR2021/486: Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2021 Page 4 of 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Appendix Method Application from 1 April 2022 The formula to calculate the student loan repayment threshold for the 2022/23 tax year is: Tnew = RU (19084 x CPIexcl2 / 986.6778) Where: Tnew is the new threshold to be effective from 1 April 2022 to 31 March 2022 Ru() is a function which rounds its argument up to the next multiple of 52 CPIexcl2 is the value of the Consumer Price Index excluding cigarettes and tobacco products for 30 September Y-1 19084 is the repayment threshold for the year ending 31 March 2017 And 986.6778 is the All groups less cigarettes and tobacco subgroup (series SE9NS14800) for September 2015 CPIexcl2 = 1099 (index for September 2021) Tnew = Ru (19084 x CPIexcl2 / 986.6778) Ru (19084 x 1099/986.6778) Ru (19084 x 1.11384) Ru ($21,256.50) The next multiple of 52 above 21256.50 is 21268 (52 x 409). 21256.50 is therefore rounded up to 21268. Tnew = $21,268 Proposed threshold from 1 April 2022 is $21,268. IR2021/486: Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2021 Page 5 of 5