Hon David Parker, Minister of Revenue Information Release Child Support Amendment Act 2021 and Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021: Amendment to application dates May 2022 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s tax policy website at https://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2022/2022-ir-cab-leg-21-sub-0156 Documents in this information release # Reference Type Title Date 1 IR2021/321 Tax policy report Amendments to commencement dates in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 28 July 2021 2 IR2021/397 Tax policy report Cabinet paper – Orders in Council setting child support amendment’s commencement dates 21 September 2021 3 LEG-21-SUB-0156 Cabinet paper Amendment to application dates in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021 30 September 2021 4 LEG-21-MIN-0156 Minute Amendment to application dates in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021 30 September 2021 Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Cabinet Legislation Committee on 30 September 2021 and confirmed by Cabinet on 4 October 2021. Two attachments to the Cabinet paper are not included in this information release as they are publicly available: •Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Commencement Order 2021 1 •T axation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act Commencement Order 2021 2 1 Available at https://legislation.govt.nz/regulation/public/2021/0301/latest/whole.html 2 Available at https://legislation.govt.nz/regulation/public/2021/0302/latest/whole.html Information withheld Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act 1982 (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply are identified. Where information is withheld, no public interest was identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Sections of the Act under which information was withheld: 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people Accessibility Inland Revenue can provide an alternate HTML version of this material if requested. Please cite this document’s title, website address, or PDF file name when you email a request to policy.webmaster@ird.govt.nz Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). POLICY AND REGULATORY STEWARDSHIP Tax policy report: Amendments to commencement dates in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Date: 28 July 2021 Priority: Medium Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2021/321 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Revenue Agree to recommendations 4 August 2021 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Carolyn Elliott Policy Lead Jacqueline d’Ath Senior Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) 1. IR2021/321: Amendments to commencement dates in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Page 1 of 4 28 July 2021 Minister of Revenue Amendments to commencement dates in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Summary Purpose 1. This report seeks your agreement to amend by Order in Council the commencement dates for recent child support amendments to align with the move of child support to Inland Revenue’s new technology platform START. Background 2. The Child Support Amendment Act 2021 (CSAA) was enacted on 24 March 2021. Its purpose was to make amendments to further improve the administration of the child support scheme. This took advantage of the opportunity offered by the modernisation of Inland Revenue’s system. 3. When the Child Support Amendment Bill was introduced, it was intended that the child support scheme would move to Inland Revenue’s new system (START) in April 2021. However, due to COVID-19, this move was delayed until the second half of 2021. Because of this delay, the commencement dates of many the proposals in the CSAA were changed to 1 April 2022 or an earlier date as set by Order in Council. Proposal 4. Moving child support to START is now set for Labour Weekend 2021. As such, commencement dates for provisions relating to the administration of the scheme will need to be amended. Officials recommend that generally the dates be amended to 26 October 2021 to align with the move. However, for provisions relating to penalty changes, such as the introduction of the grace period, it is preferable that they apply from the beginning of a month. Officials therefore propose such provisions apply from 1 November 2021. The affected sections and the commencement date for each are listed in Appendix A to this report. 5. Provisions relating to the annual assessment of child support, such as the changes to what is included as income, will apply from 1 April 2022 being the start of the next child support year. Consultation 6. The Treasury was consulted in the preparation of this report. Next steps 7. If you agree to the date changes, officials will draft a Cabinet Legislative Committee paper for your consideration and submission to the Cabinet Office. IR2021/321: Amendments to commencement dates in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Page 2 of 4 Recommended action We recommend that you: 8. agree to bring forward the commencement dates for the specified sections of the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 from 1 April 2022 to 26 October 2021 or 1 November 2021 as set out in Appendix A, Agreed/Not agreed 9. note t hat officials will draft a Cabinet Legislative Committee paper. Noted Carolyn Elliott Policy Lead Policy and Regulatory Stewardship Hon David Parker Minister of Revenue / /2021 s 9(2)(a) IR2021/321: Amendments to commencement dates in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Page 3 of 4 Appendix A: Sections of the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021 that require an Order in Council to amend the date of commencement Section being amended in the Child Support Act 1991 Section in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Proposed new commencement date Section 5 (Children who qualify for child support) 5 26 October 2021 Sections 19(3) to (7) (When liability to pay child support starts) 6 26 October 2021 Section 81A (Amendments of assessments arising from living circumstances existing at time initial assessment made) 18 26 October 2021 Section 87(7) (Amendment of assessments) 19 26 October 2021 Section 87A (Four-year time bar for amendment of certain assessments) 20 26 October 2021 Section 88(3A) (Notice of assessment of formula assessment of child support) 21 26 October 2021 Section 89A(1)(aa) (Outline) 22 26 October 2021 Section 89B (Definitions for this Part) 23(2) to (4) 26 October 2021 Subpart 2 heading in Part 5A – “persons suffering from long-term periods of illness” 24 26 October 2021 Cross-heading above section 89C - “persons suffering from long-term periods of illness” 25 26 October 2021 Section 89C(1)(a)(ii) (Exemption for long-term hospital patients) 26 26 October 2021 Section 89CA (Exemption for persons suffering from long-term periods of illness) 27 26 October 2021 Section 89D(1)(a)(ii) (Exemption for long-term prisoners) 28 26 October 2021 Sections 89F(1)(a)(i), (1)(a)(ia), (1)(a)(ii), (2A), (3) relevant period (Exemption does not apply at any time during child support year if income criteria not met at any time during relevant period) 29 26 October 2021 Sections 89G(1)(aa), (3)(aa) (Other restrictions on application of exemptions) 30 26 October 2021 Sections 89H(1)(b)(ia), (1)(ca), (2)(aa) (Applications for exemptions under this subpart) 31 26 October 2021 Subpart 3 heading in Part 5A “persons suffering from long-term periods of illness” 32 26 October 2021 Section 96BA (Four-month time limit for certain applications that are time-barred under section 87A) 34 26 October 2021 Section 96D(1)(bb) (Determinations that may be made) 35 26 October 2021 Section 105(2)(e) and heading (Matters as to which court must be satisfied before making order) 36 26 October 2021 IR2021/321: Amendments to commencement dates in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Page 4 of 4 Section being amended in the Child Support Act 1991 Section in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Proposed new commencement date Section 106B (Further provision on orders for offsetting of liabilities situations) 37 26 October 2021 Section 129(1) (Right to choose voluntary automatic deductions or other payment method) 40 26 October 2021 Section 129A (Newly liable persons to pay financial support by automatic deduction) 41 26 October 2021 Section 134AAA (Sixty-day grace period before penalties apply) 43 1 November 2021 Sections 152B(1), (1A), (2) to (4) (Offsetting child support payments) 55 26 October 2021 Section being amended in the Child Support Act 1991 Section in the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021 Proposed new commencement date Sections 134(2) and (3) (Penalties for late payment of financial support debts) 8(2) and (4) 1 November 2021 Part 5 - Schedule 1 - Clause 23 (Amendments to section 134 (Penalties for late payment of financial support debts) 9 1 November 2021 POLICY AND REGULATORY STEWARDSHIP Tax policy report: Cabinet paper – Orders in Council setting child support amendment’s commencement dates Date: 21 September 2021 Priority: High Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2021/397 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Revenue Agree to recommendations Approve the attached Cabinet paper for lodgement 10 a m, Thursday 23 September 2021 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Nam e Position Telephone Carolyn Elliott Policy Lead Jacqueline d’Ath Senior Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) 2. IR2021/397: Cabinet paper – Orders in Council setting child support amendent’s commencement dates Page 1 of 2 21 September 2021 Minister of Revenue Cabinet paper – Orders in Council setting child support amendment’s commencement dates Purpose 1. This report asks you to approve the attached draft Cabinet paper and accompanying Orders in Council for lodgement with the Cabinet Office by 10am on Thursday, 23 September 2021, for consideration at the Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting on Thursday, 30 September 2021. Background 2. The Child Support Amendment Act 2021 was enacted on 24 March 2021. Its purpose was to make amendments to improve the administration of the child support scheme. This took advantage of the opportunity offered by the modernisation of Inland Revenue’s system. 3. When the Child Support Amendment Bill was introduced, it was intended that the child support scheme would move to Inland Revenue’s START system in April 2021. However, due to COVID-19, this move was delayed until the second half of 2021. Because of this delay, the commencement dates of many the proposals in the Child Support Amendment Act were changed to 1 April 2022 or an earlier date as set by Order in Council (as were the child support amendments in the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021). 4. Moving child support to START is now set for Labour Weekend 2021. As such, commencement dates for provisions relating to the administration of the scheme need to be amended. 5. To achieve these commencement dates, officials recommend that you seek a waiver of the 28-day rule, which requires regulations to be notified in the New Zealand Gazette 28 days prior to their coming into effect. 6. You have previously agreed to amend the commencement dates by Order in Council \[report IR2021/321 refers\]. 7. The Parliamentary Counsel Office have drafted two Orders in Council. One sets the commencement dates for amendments in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 and the other sets the commencement dates for amendments in the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021. Consultation 8. The Treasury was consulted in the preparation of this report. Next steps 9. A draft Cabinet paper and associated Orders in Council are attached for you to take to the Cabinet Legislation Committee on Thursday, 30 September 2021. IR2021/397: Cabinet paper – Orders in Council setting child support amendent’s commencement dates Page 2 of 2 10. Inland Revenue officials will provide speaking notes for taking the paper through the Cabinet Legislation Committee. Specifically, these will identify what the proposed changes are, the purpose for these changes, and address key concerns which may arise. 11. Officials recommend you sign the attached Order in Council “goatskin” cover sheets, for submission to Cabinet office with the Cabinet paper. 12. Officials consider that the attached Cabinet paper should be proactively released within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions, subject to minor redactions under the Official Information Act 1992. Recommended action We recommend that you: 13. note you have agreed to amend by Order in Council the commencement dates of specific amendments to the Child Support Act 1991; Noted 14. agree to seek a waiver of the 28-day rule so that the commencement of specific provisions is aligned with the move of child support to Inland Revenue’s new technology platform START; Agreed /Not agreed 15. approve for lodgement the attached Cabinet paper and the Orders in Council to the Cabinet Legislation Committee by 10am Thursday 23 September 2021 for consideration at the Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting on Thursday 30 September 2021; Approved/Not approved 16. sign and refer the attached Orders in Council “goatskin” cover sheets, for submission to Cabinet Office with the Cabinet paper; and Signed and referred/Not signed and referred 17. agree to the release of the attached Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers, within 30 days of Cabinet making final decisions, subject to minor redactions under the Official Information Act 1992. Agreed/Not agreed C arolyn Elliott Policy Lead Policy and Regulatory Stewardship Hon David Parker Minister of Revenue / /2021 s 9(2)(a) In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee AMENDMENT TO APPLICATION DATES IN THE CHILD SUPPORT AMENDMENT ACT 2021 AND THE TAXATION (BUDGET 2021 AND REMEDIAL MEASURES) ACT 2021 Proposal 1.This paper seeks the Cabinet Legislation Committee’s to agree to the submission of th e two accompanying Orders in Council to the Executive Council: the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Commencement Order 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act Commencement Order 2021. The Orders will amend the commencement dates of specific amendments in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021. Relation to government priorities 2.The amendments will align the commencement dates for recent child support ame ndments with the move of child support to Inland Revenue’s new technology platform, START. This is an operational amendment that requires Cabinet approval. Background 3.The Child Support Amendment Act 2021 was enacted on 24 March 2021. Its pu rpose was to make amendments to the principal Act in order to improve the administration of the child support scheme. This took advantage of the opportunity offered by the modernisation of Inland Revenue’s system as part of Business Transformation. 4.When the Child Support Amendment Bill was introduced, it was intended that the chi ld support scheme would move to Inland Revenue’s START system in April 2021. However, due to COVID-19, this move was delayed until the second half of 2021. Because of this delay, the commencement dates of many of the proposals in the Child Support Amendment Act were changed to 1 April 2022 or an earlier date set by Order in Council (as were the child support amendments in the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021). Policy 5.Moving child support to START is now set for Labour Weekend 2021. As such, comme ncement dates for provisions relating to the administration of the scheme will need to be amended. I recommend the following: 5.1 for provisions relating to the administration of the scheme their comm encement dates be amended to 26 October 2021 to align with the move; and 1 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-09 02:17:08 3. 5.2 for provisions relating to penalty changes, such as the introduction of the grace period, it is preferable that they apply from the beginning of a month. Therefore, I propose these provisions apply from 1 November 2021. 6. The affected sections and the commencement date for each are listed in Appendix A t o this report. 7. Amending the commencement dates will be done by way of two Orders in Council – t he Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Commencement Order 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act Commencement Order 2021. 8. Provisions relating to the annual assessment of child support, such as the changes t o what is included as income, will continue to apply from 1 April 2022, being the start of the next child support year. Financial implications 9. There are three provisions where amending the commencement date will have fiscal i mplications. These are:  the introduction of the grace period,  the repeal of the rule which requires that the penalty be at least $5, and  the imposition of the second stage of the penalty (formerly known as the initial p enalty) from the 7th day after the due date to the 27th day after the due date. The costs of these changes are immaterial, -$25,000. The fiscal impact of the new co mmencement dates falls within rounding of annual forecasts. Timing and 28-day rule 10. If Cabinet agrees to the recommendations in this paper at the Cabinet meeting on 3 0 September 2021, the amendments will come into force on 26 October 2021 and 1 November 2021. 11. To achieve commencement dates for provisions relating to the administration of the child support scheme to coincide with the move of child support to START, I recommend that the 28-day rule, which requires regulations be notified in the New Zealand Gazette28 days prior to their coming into effect, be waived. Impact analysis Regulatory Impact Assessment 12. The Regulatory Impact Analysis Team at the Treasury has determined that the re gulatory proposal to amend the application dates in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the basis that it has no or minor impacts on businesses, individuals or not-for- profit entities. 2 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-09 02:17:08 Climate Implications of Policy Assessment 13. The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and co nfirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for significance is not met. Communications 14. I propose to issue a media statement once the Order in Council is made by the Exe cutive Council. Inland Revenue will publish an article about these changes in its Tax Information Bulletin. Proactive release 15. I propose to proactively release the policy report, this Cabinet paper and associated O rders in Council in full shortly following the publication of the signed Orders in Council in the New Zealand Gazette, subject to redactions under the Official Information Act 1982. Consultation 16. The Treasury has been consulted on the amendments to the commencement dates. 17. The Treasury and the Parliamentary Counsel Office have been informed of the co ntents of this paper. Recommendations I recommend that the Cabinet Legislative Committee: 1. agree t o bring forward the commencement dates for the specified sections of the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021 from 1 April 2022 to 26 October 2021 or 1 November 2021 as set out in Appendix A; 2. note t hat the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Commencement Order 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act Commencement Order 2021will give effect to the decision referred to in paragraph 1 above; 3. note that a waiver of the 28-day rule is sought so that the regulations can come into force to coincide with the move of child support to Inland Revenue’s new technology platform START 4. agree t o waive the 28-day rule so that the regulations can come into force on 26 October 2021 and 1 November 2021 to coincide with the move of child support to START; 5. authorise t he submission to the Executive Council of the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Commencement Order 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act Commencement Order 2021; 3 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-09 02:17:08 Authorised for lodgement Hon David Parker Minister of Revenue 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-09 02:17:08 4 Appendix A: Sections of the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021 that require an Order in Council to amend the date of commencement Section being amended in the Child Su pport Act 1991 Section in the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Proposed new c ommencement date Section 5 (Children who qualify for child su pport) 5 26 October 2021 Sections 19(3) to (7) (When liability to pay ch ild support starts) 6 26 October 2021 Section 81A (Amendments of assessments a rising from living circumstances existing at time initial assessment made) 18 26 October 2021 Section 87(7) (Amendment of a ssessments) 19 26 October 2021 Section 87A (Four-year time bar for a mendment of certain assessments) 20 26 October 2021 Section 88(3A) (Notice of assessment of f ormula assessment of child support) 21 26 October 2021 Section 89A(1)(aa) (Outline) 22 26 October 2021 Section 89B (Definitions for this Part) 23(2) to (4) 26 October 2021 Subpart 2 heading in Part 5A – “persons su ffering from long-term periods of illness” 24 26 October 2021 Cross-heading above section 89C - “p ersons suffering from long-term periods of illness” 25 26 October 2021 Section 89C(1)(a)(ii) (Exemption for long- term hospital patients) 26 26 October 2021 Section 89CA (Exemption for persons su ffering from long-term periods of illness) 27 26 October 2021 Section 89D(1)(a)(ii) (Exemption for long- term prisoners) 28 26 October 2021 Sections 89F(1)(a)(i), (1)(a)(ia), (1)(a)(ii), (2 A), (3)(aa) relevant period (Exemption does not apply at any time during child support year if income criteria not met at any time during relevant period) 29 26 October 2021 Sections 89G(1)(aa), (3)(aa) (Other re strictions on application of exemptions) 30 26 October 2021 Sections 89H(1)(b)(ia), (1)(ca), (2)(aa) (Ap plications for exemptions under this 31 26 October 2021 5 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-09 02:17:08 subpart) Subpart 3 heading in Part 5A “persons su ffering from long-term periods of illness” 32 26 October 2021 Section 96BA (Four-month time limit for ce rtain applications that are time-barred under section 87A) 34 26 October 2021 Section 96D(1)(bb) (Determinations that ma y be made) 35 26 October 2021 Section 105(2)(e) and heading (Matters as t o which court must be satisfied before making order) 36 26 October 2021 Section 106B (Further provision on orders f or offsetting of liabilities situations) 37 26 October 2021 Section 129(1) (Right to choose voluntary a utomatic deductions or other payment method) 40 26 October 2021 Section 129A (Newly liable persons to pay f inancial support by automatic deduction) 41 26 October 2021 Section 134AAA (Sixty-day grace period b efore penalties apply) 43 1 November 2021 Sections 152B(1), (1A), (2) to (4) (O ffsetting child support payments) 55 26 October 2021 Section being amended in the Child Su pport Act 1991 Section in the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021 Proposed new c ommencement date Sections 134(2) and (3) (Penalties for late p ayment of financial support debts) 8(2) and (4) 1 November 2021 Part 5 - Schedule 1 - Clause 23 (Ame ndments to section 134 (Penalties for late payment of financial support debts) 9(2) 1 November 2021 6 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-09 02:17:08 I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-21-MIN-0156 Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Child Support Amendment Act 2021 and Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021: Amendment to Application Dates Portfolio Revenue On 30 September 2021, the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1 agreed to bring forward the commencement dates for the specified sections of the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act 2021 from 1 April 2022 to 26 October 2021 or 1 November 2021 as set out in Appendix A of the paper under LEG-21-SUB-0156; 2 n ted t hat the Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Commencement Order 2021 and the Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act Commencement Order 2021 will give effect to the decision referred to in paragraph 1 above; 3 n ted t hat a waiver of the 28-day rule is sought so that the regulations can come into force to coincide with the move of child support to Inland Revenue’s new technology platform START; 4 agreed to waive the 28-day rule so that the regulations can come into force on 26 October 2021 and 1 November 2021 to coincide with the move of child support to START; 5 auth rised t he submission to the Executive Council of the: 5.1 Child Support Amendment Act 2021 Commencement Order 2021 \[PCO 24001/2.0\]; 5.2 Taxation (Budget 2021 and Remedial Measures) Act Commencement Order 2021 \[PCO 24046/4.0\]. Rebecca Davies Comm ittee Secretary 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-09 02:17:20 I N C O N F I D E N C E 1 4. I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-21-MIN-0156 Present: Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Poto Williams Hon Kris Faafoi Hon Michael Wood Hon Kiri Allan Hon Dr David Clark Hon Phil Twyford Officials present from: Office of the Prime Minister O fficials Committee for LEG 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-09 02:17:20 I N C O N F I D E N C E 2