www.ird.govt.nz Ref: 23 OIA1362 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 18 October 2022 Dear Th ank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 20 September 2022. You requested the following (numbered for ease of answering): 1. A copy of any leave provisions for gender reassignment/affirmation 2. If you don't have a specific leave provision for this, how this can be recognised in your current leave provisions 3. What steps you went through to get it in place 4. What engagement you undertook with staff and LGBTQI+ to develop the leave provisions, and any copy and feedback you received (understanding that personal information will be redacted). 5. Any other information that is in scope of developing and implementing gender reassignment and affirmation leave. Questions 1 & 2 While Inland Revenue does not have an explicit leave policy or provision for gender reassignment/affirmation, we are committed to supporting people who are transitioning at work and promoting an inclusive culture through our existing leave, special leave, and medical appointment provisions. These policies support the expectation that we will work with individuals on a case-by -case basis. Inland Revenue recognises gender reassignment/affirmation through the IR Gender Transitioning at Work Guide, which is produced by He Toa Takitini – Inland Revenue’s internal Rainbow Network. The guide is intended to improve outcomes for Inland Revenue people who plan to transition at work and to help encourage conversations between them on how best leaders can provide support. The expectation would be that a transitioning person and their leader look at developing a plan together and agree on how to manage the transition through an appropriate consideration of leave (i.e., annual, sick leave), flexible working arrangements and/or special leave. As Inland Revenue’s policies and guidelines are principle-based, our leave provisions are intended to broadly and inclusively cover a range of circumstances. The IR Gender Transitioning at Work Guide, along with copies of our general leave, special leave, and healthcare appointment guidelines and policies are attached. The enclosed documents contain contact information that is outside the scope of your request. This information has not been considered for release and has been withheld as “not in scope”. Questions 3 and 4 As mentioned previously, there is no explicit policy in place and therefore no specific steps or engagement were undertaken around developing such a policy. T he IR Gender Transitioning at Work Guide, however, is designed to be reviewed and updated as practices evolve and develop. Inland Revenue’s Rainbow Tick accreditation supports our goals to develop an inclusive culture by ensuring we are a safe LGBTTQIA+ organisation. Each year, organisations are Ref: 23 OIA1362 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] revaluated to ensure they still meet requirements and are making necessary improvements. Through this Rainbow Tick reaccreditation process, we have recognised that we can strengthen our inclusion practices to more explicitly support our non-binary and transgender people. We will continue to work with He Toa Takitini and the Rainbow Tick organisation to review our policies and provide training to our people in order to achieve Inland Revenue’s goal of creating an inclusive work environment where people from all walks of life can achieve their full potential. Question 5 At this stage, work with Inland Revenue’s He Toa Takitini has not extended to the development or implementation of a specific gender reassignment and affirmation leave policy. As mentioned, our existing policies and procedures, such as the IR Gender Transitioning at Work Guide, will continue to support achieving the best outcomes for our Inland Revenue people while we continue conversations with our Rainbow Tick organisation. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response to be of public interest, and will publish it in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you again for your request. Yours sincerely Eri na Clayton Enterprise Leader – People & Workplace Services 2 Who this policy applies to This policy and the guidelines which support its application apply to all Inland Revenue employees. Many of the leave provisions are contained in employment agreements. Additionally, employees may have individually negotiated provisions/terms with Inland Revenue or have speci fic protected terms (some documents refer to these as “grandparented”). To ensure correct identification of entitlements and obligations, people leaders need to check the employee’s personnel file and their employee's agreement (including any variations). Specific practice around leave NOTIFICATION AND RECORDING Employees should notify their people leader that they intend to take leave as early as possible and specify the type of leave. Employees are required to organise leave arrangements with their people leader. The leave is entered and approved through our sel f service tools to maintain an accurate record of leave taken and current entitlements. In the case of domestic violence leave, the leave can be also be applied for via a union support person or HR Advice. Specific types of leave For further information check the specific guidelines which expand on many of the leave types below (Topic 2 – ‘Leave’ in our People Policies & Guidelines. The homepage also includes links to employment agreements, protected entitlements etc.) ANNUAL LEAVE Annual leave may be taken as it accrues. It must be taken in either full or half days. While generally it is the employee’s choice as to how and when they request leave, the usual expectation is that they will take annual leave within 12 months of becoming entitled to it. Employees are encouraged to take at least one long break of at least two weeks each year for rest and recreation. Inland Revenue can require an employee to take annual leave (including specifying when) but must provide a minimum of 14 days’ notice. (Situations when this may occur are covered in the annual leave guidelines). Anticipating annual leave Where applicable, the employees’ employment agreement set s out how much leave may be anticipated. An employee may anticipate some of the next year’s annual leave entitlement if their people leader approves. If the employee stops working for Inland Revenue before accruing enough leave to cover the anticipated annual leave taken, Inland Revenue will recover the difference from the final pay if possible.