Page 1 of 11 Ref: 23OIA1580 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 16 December 2022 Dear Thank you for your further request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 19 November 2022. You requested the following: With reference to the response to my OIA request of 21 October 2022 provided by Inland Revenue on 18 November 2022 (2nd OIA request), I am seeking some further detail on the data provided. 1. With regard to the tables provided in response to question 1 of the 2nd OIA request, please provide a breakdown by tax agent status for the total debt where no return has been filed. This is for the years ended 30 June 2021 and 30 June 2022. 2. With regard to the tables provided in response to question 1 of the 2nd OIA request, please categorise each subset shown in the tables (individual return filed, individual no return filed etc) by the number of years spanned by the tax debt balances in increments of 1 year from 1-5 and then 5+. 3. With regard to the tables provided in response to question 1 of the second OIA request, please a breakdown for individuals, companies and others in the "return filed" column balances by total tax debt balances (which may relate to more than one year), categorised by income levels shown in the most recent filed return or automatic assessment for the years ended 30 June 2021 and 2022 in $10,000 increments up to $50,000, and $50,000+. 4. With regard to the tables provided in response to question 2 (iii) of the 2nd OIA request, please provide a breakdown of each of the last 4 rows in each table (before the total) - debt balances of $10,000 and above categorised by (a) agent status; (b) type of customer (individual, company or other); (c) return filed or no return filed (as defined in the footnote in the response of 18 November 2022); (d) for those with a filed return or assessment in place, income levels shown in the most recent filed return or automatic assessment for the years ended 30 June 2021 and 2022 in $10,000 increments up to $50,000, and $50,000+. For the avoidance of doubt, I am requesting that the analysis show an initial categorisation of the debt bracket rows ($10k-$15k, $15k-$20k, $20k-$25k and $25k+) by agent status, each of those subsets then categorised by customer type and each of the resulting smaller subsets categorised by return filed. The final categorisation by income level will only be relevant to the return filed subsets. Information being released The in formation you have requested is provided in the Appendix. Please note, since my last OIA response to you, some customers have been reclassified from the “other” category, and therefore the data has slightly shifted/improved. “Other entities” includes all entities that are not individuals or companies e.g., clubs and trusts. www.ird.govt.nz Page 2 of 11 Ref: 23OIA1580 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Income tax debt balances includes all debt across all historical periods where a debt still exists. The “return filed” category includes all debt (including assessment, penalties, interest, overpayments) where a return has been received and an assessment is in place. The “no return filed” category includes debt that relates to income tax where a return has not been filed, and mainly includes default assessments and late filing penalties, though other elements may exist e.g., late payment penalties on a default assessment. Dollar value figures in questions one, two and three are rounded to the nearest 100,000, which aligns with the reporting used for Inland Revenue’s Annual Report. Figures provided in question four are rounded to the nearest 10,000. The "unavailable" row includes customers that have debt in a previous year but have not filed an income tax return or received an automated income tax assessment in the last two years, therefore their latest income band is unavailable. For categories where the total is fewer than 10 customers, these customers have been included in the “unavailable” column under section 18(3) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Right of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz . If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Yours sincerely Richard Philp Customer Segment Leader Micro Business Customer Segment