Ref: 23 OIA1459 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 9 November 2022 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 17 October 2022. You requested: 1) Who decides on the appointment for new members of the executive IRD team? Is it the Inland Revenue Minister, is it the Executive team itself, or is it an entirely different process? 2) Is it also different for members such as the Chief Executive position or the Commissioner? 3) Please outline the exact procedure for appointments. Question 1: Appointing new members of Inland Revenue’s executive team Te Tari Taake Inland Revenue mostly follows the same process for appointing members of the executive leadership team (ELT) as we do for appointing other staff members. This can include using an external recruitment company to assist our search for candidates. An overview of our recruitment process is outlined in our response to question 3. In addition to that process, a potential ELT candidate may meet some ELT members before an appointment is made. The final decision-maker is the Commissioner and Chief Executive of Inland Revenue ( this is a single role, currently held by Peter Mersi). Question 2: Appointing a new Commissioner and Chief Executive Te Kawa Mataaho the Public Service Commission (PSC) recruits and appoints the Commissioner and Chief Executive of Inland Revenue. This process is run entirely by the PSC, as one of its main roles is to recruit and employ the chief executives of public service departments. You can read how public service chief executives are appointed on the PSC’s website (publicservice.govt.nz) or at Appointing Public Service chief executives - Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission. Question 3: An outline of the exact procedure for appointments As stated in our response to question 1, our recruitment process for ELT members is mostly the same as for any other appointment. The additional steps are stated in our response to question 1. Recruitment involves: 1) Sourcing candidates, potentially combining job advertisements with the use of an executive search agency, depending on market conditions. 2) Selecting candidates, following a transparent and objective process that includes reviewing CVs, shortlisting on the basis of capabilities and other agreed Ref: 23 OIA1459 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] criteria (as advertised), and a panel interview, which may include a presentation from candidates and reference checking. 3) Rigorous pre-employment checking, particularly for criminal history, and tax checks. A more detailed overview of our recruitment process for all staff members (other than the Commissioner and Chief Executive), including ELT members, is s et out in the attached document Kimi Kaimahi at IR: The 7 Stages of our Inland Revenue Recruitment Process. The document is released to you in full. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider that this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details, or any information that would identify you, will be removed before it is published. Thank you for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Yours sincerely Erina Clayton Enterprise Leader, People and Workplace Services THE 7 STAGES OF OUR INLAND REVENUE RECRUITMENT PROCESS KIMI KAIMAHI AT IR 5) SELECT AND VERIFY Choose your preferred candidate, in line with your key selection criteria. Work with your TA Specialist to complete appropriate verification checks. 4) INTERVIEW AND ASSESS Make a great first impression! Make evidence- based assessments of candidate suitability for your role vacancy. Ensure candidates have a good understanding of the role and your requirements. 3) REVIEW AND SHORTLIST Work with your TA Specialist and your panel to review all applications and assess them against your key selection criteria. 2) ATTRACT AND SEARCH Agree on appropriate candidate sourcing strategies with your TA Specialist, work with them to create a great advert and set aside dedicated time to shortlist and interview. 1) PLAN AND PARTNER Partner with your Talent Acquisition Specialist, outline your key requirements for your vacancy and work together to design a tailored recruitment process, that meets your needs. 6) OFFER Gain the necessary approval to make an offer to your preferred candidate. The offer will be in line with our remuneration framework. 7) ONBOARD AND INDUCT Ensure your new hire has all of the information they need for their first day and knows what to expect. Order their technology and plan their induction programme. WORK CLOSELY WITH YOUR TA SPECIALIST No two recruitment processes are the same, so take advantage of the subject matter expertise your Talent Acquisition Specialist can offer you. Your Talent Acquisition Specialist will work with you to develop a tailored recruitment process that delivers the best outcomes for you, your candidates and your team. Released under the OIA