Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. • • 6 September 202 I Deputy Commissioner Policy and Regulatory Stewardship Inland Revenue Department PO Box 2198 \\Vcllington By email: poliq·.webrnaster@i rd.govt. m, Dear Sir/ Madam CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS~ AUSTRALIA• NEW Z EALAND Tax, investment and productivity: Consultation on the scope of Inland Revenue's long-term insights briefing Thank you for the opportunity to provide feedback on the proposed scope of Inland Revenue's long-term insights briefing (LTIB). Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand (CA ANZ) is supportive of this project and related workstreams. In summary our comments are as follm-vs: We agree that the impact of tax on investment and productivity is a worthwhile subject to investigate further. Several of the suggested options for consideration have been considered previously and it ,.vould be preferable to take a broader approach. G/\\/\\ --- 005 Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. • • o o o o • !'age 2 'vVe recommend that the work also consider whether an increase in Foreign Direci:. Investment (FDI) ,vould increase New Zealand's productivity. The work should consider the role of the tax system in: Reducing the cost of capital into Ne,v Zealand; Addressing New Zealand's infrastnicture deficit; Adapting to the changing nature of ,vork; and Attracting "frontier firms" to Ne,v Zealand. 'vVe suggest that the outcomes be used as a frame,vork for future policy ,vork. General comments J\\s the consultation document notes, New Zealand's productivity is lmver than comparable economies and this remains a concern to the business sector as well as Government. 'vVe are supportive of work undertaken to assist Ne,v Zealand's international competitiveness and productivity. We agree that it ,vill be useful to consider ·whether the tax settings are a contributing faltor. Productivity in New Zealand Ne,v Zealand's productivity has been the subjelt of rnuch investigation. In 20 17, the Tax Vvorking Group considered New Zealand's produltivity as part of its work. The group investigated a number of options for tax reform that could advance produci:ivity and boost investment. In particular, it considered 1: 1 https//taxv,orhnggroup.govt.nz/resources/future-tax-final-report-vol-i-html .html#child-4 7, Chapter G and Summary at Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. • • • • • • • • • Changes to the loss continuity rules; An expansion of black-hole deductions; Reinstatement of building depreciation deductions; Removal of residential rental loss ring-fencing rules; and Tax concessions for national! y significant projects. !'age 3 The first three of these have been addressed to some extent although further ,vork is needed to extend the scope of deductible feasibility expenditure. \\11/e hope that the introduction of the residential property interest denial rules may bring ,vith it a repeal of the residential rental loss ring-fencing rules. To our knmvlcdge, the last measure is the only one that has not been progressed in any form. It may be too early to tell whether the changes have affected New Zealand's productivity. Hm-vever, to date, there have not been any headline changes. It is likely that something bolder is needed. Proposed topics for consideration The proposed scope suggests the following as possibilities: Reductions in the company tax rate; Measures ·which increase the present value of capital ·write off's for capital expenditure; lv'feasures to take account of inflation to reduce overstatements or understatements of capital income; Changes to thin-capitalisation rules which might allow multinational firms to claim greater deductions for interest expense; Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. • • • Changes to allmv multinational firms or other flrms with foreign shareholders a notional interest deduction on their equity; !'age 4 Specific incentives for particular types of investment or specific types of business, and 1vfore fundamental changes in the tax base such as the dual income tax structure adopted in Nordic countries with a relatively low flat marginal tax rate on capital income with higher progressive tax rates on la hour income. i\\11 of these would be useful to consider. Hmvever, many have been considered already as part of the Tax 'vVorki ng Groups in 2009 and 20 I 7. Again, it is likely that something bolder is needed. Foreign Direct Investment A key question is whether an increase in FDI would increase New Zealand's productivity. According to the scope document, New Zealand's FDI is low compared to other countries. Ultimately a non-resident investor will vie,v the New 7:ealand tax cost as another cost that will impa(t return on investment or increase the cost of goods and services it d1arges to New Zealand customers. The lo-wer the taxes the lower the charges to Ne\\v Zealand customers and the increased likelihood the investment ,.viii occur. The key issues will be the level of tax, the certainty that these taxes will remain constant and a hove all the predictability of the direction of tax changes. Recent peiiods have suggested that non-residents have faced increased NZ tax obligations. Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. • • • • • • • • • Cost of capital \\Ve believe the cost of capital will he key to increasing New Zealand's produci:ivity over the medium to long term. Ne,v Zealand is going to need an enormous amount of capital to: address the infrastructure deficit; invest in Ne,v Zealand businesses to grow and/or become "frontier firms"; and encourage frontier firms to locate themselves here. It is unlikely that all infrastruci:urc needed can be funded exclusively from the Government balance sheet. The LITB should be considering where the additional capital ,viii come from; and how the tax system should be designed to allow the desired capital flows. If the work concludes that the capital ,viii come from overseas, we recommend the !Tm consider how best to attraLi:. investment into Nevv Zealand. This will include broader considerations such as: cost of capital; cost of engagement; ease of engagement; and ability to link up with the rest of the world; and the tax system has a role in them all. The LTIB work should look at what more can be done in the tax system to ad1ievc each of these, including any changes to tax administration through further leveraging the START system. At the time of introduction, the START system was seen as "billion dollar investment" and should be an asset to be leveraged for medium and long term benefit. The return on investment should not be limited to additional tax collected and reducing head count at Inland Revenue. The I.Tm shou Id consider how the START system can contribute to case of doing business in New Zealand. Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. • • • • }>age 6 Another important component \\Vill be hmv non-residents are taxed compared to Ne,v Zealand residents under our current system, whether the differences remain appropriate and what changes could be made to the tax settings to attract foreign capital into New Zealand. At that point, it would be appropriate to consider measures such as thin capitalisation or notional interest deduc"tions, but we recommend that a broader enquiry is undertaken first. i\\ foreign investor will have a choice of entities and structures to use as it looks to put capital into Ne\\v Zealand. The tax system includes specific regimes for many different tax entities and it is often difficult to see the reasons for the differences. It would be easier for a foreign investor to invest into New Zealand if the structures could be chosen for commercial reasons, with tax being neutral across all equivalent structures. A key part of the work should be to articulate the reasons for the differences or establish tax neutrality across all structures. New Zealand infrastructure Concerns have been raised regarding New Zealand's infr<lstructure and the difficulty faced by Government in delivering large scale infrastmcture projec"ts; for example, Transmission Gully and Kiwi build. There is a growing need for additional infrastmcture in Nevv Zealand including: housing; roading (including bridges and tunnels); public transport; \\Yater infrastructure (the Three vVaters project). Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. The work should also consider whether an increase in FDI or a change in tax settings could assist to address Ne,v Zealand's infrastructure deficit. }>age 7 Many foreign investors and investment consortiums incur large up-front costs, including due diligence, scoping and tendering for significant infrastructure projects. These costs arc not recovera blc nor arc they tax deductible in the event that the bid is unsuccessful. It is important that foreign investors have certainty of tax outcome from investigation of viability, financing and constrnction if successful and potentially operation. Costs can be reduced if tax outcomes are neutral asbet,veen similar investment stru(tures. At present there is a heavy reliance on private rulings to provide tax certainty. Changes in factual position or key assumptions add to these costs as often a new ruling is required. The future of work As you arc av,-arc, the nature of ,vork is changing. Covid-19 has demonstrated that business can be conducted from home and individual employees can work from home. Many now have more than one income source. Technology continues to improve. This has implications for where people are likely to locate in future and therefore our infrastmcturc need. This should be considered in prioritising infrastmcture projects and developing the tax settings needed to ad1ieve them. The changing nature of work also has implications h)f the way people stmci:ure their business affairs. It would be useful to look at the way businesses are taxed and whether the settings are approp1iate. A person in New Zealand may choose to go into business as a sole trader, or through a partnership, a company or an LTC. Should tax settings be neutral across all structures? If not, why should the treatments be different? Articulating the reasons for the differences ,vill be key in deciding which polky settings to retain or change going forward. Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. The study should also consider pen;onal tax rates. Businesses operating as a sole trader or through a partnership or LTC ,-vill equally be affected by personal tax rates. This includes those in the "gig economy". For SME companies that arc predominantly New· Zealand owned, the personal tax rate may influence investment decisions. The interaction bet,veen the tax and social policy systems is important. The Welfare Expert Advisory Group (vVFAG) made a range of recommendations in 2019, many of which have not been adopted. vVork undertaken on how to increase New Zealand's prodm.tivity should additionally take into account care required for the most vulnerable member:; of society and how they can transition to generating income/further income if and when appropriate. The WEJ\\G's report highlighted that the rules for benefit abatement could lead to extremely high effective marginal tax rates for people moving into work. It recommended increases to the level at which vVorking for Families credits were abated, and a reduction in the rate at ,vhich they were removed. There arc currently well-publicised labour shortages, which is having a signiflcant effect on New Zealand's productivity. The LTIB should consider ,vhether the interaction between tax and social policy systems has a role to play. Frontier firms The consultation document states that the L TIB work ,vill be done in conjunction with the Treasury and other Government agencies. vVe note the importance placed on "frontier firms" 2 in the Productivity 2 https//www.prnductivity.govt.nz/assets/Document s/f inal-report-f mntier-finns.pd f Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. • • !'age 9 Commission's report. If frontier firms arc the best pathway to grmvth, then it would be worthwhile to explore ·which tax settings would attract frontier firms to Ne,v Zealand, including any changes as appropriate to our R&D regime. Outcome of the L TI B The scope document is silent on how the outputs from the study ,viii be used. In the event that the tax system is shown to impact producthity, we believe that as a minimum the output should be used as a foundation for a polic-y framework or terms of reference against ·which to evaluate all future policy work. Ideally more detailed policy ·work should then be undertaken to develop a suite of tax changes that may be adopted by Government to increase productivity. The work should be done in conjunction with other areas of Government to play a part in a whole-of-Government response to leverage produci:ivity in New Zealand. Page 36 of the consultation document notes that possible measures which might lower costs of capital arc likely to include: changes to allow multinational firms or other firms ,vith foreign shareholders a notional interest deduction on their equity; specific incentives for particular types of investment or specific types of business ... Recent policy projects in the short term have moved to restrict multinationals interest deductions, rather than ensure they are alknved (for example restricted transfer pricing/changes to thin capitalisation and Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. the work on hybrids). \\i\\Thilc we arc not against New Zealand being broadly in step \\Vith other comparable countries to do business, the cost of belonging needs to be evaluated against the long term good of Ne,v Zealand's economy and it may be that a more muted response is appropriate. Other projects have added to the tax cost of inbound investment such as the work on thin capitalisation and changes to AIL and NRWT. If tax cost of FDI is a barrier to productivity, Government should take that into consideration in deciding whether to progress future policy projects. vVe ,vould be happy to discuss our submission further ,vith you. Please contact Jolayne Trim. Yours faithfully John Cuthbertson FCA .Jola ync Trim CA CA ANZ NZ Tax and Financial Services Leader CA ANZ Senior Tax Advocate Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand Carlaw Park, 12-16 Nicholls Lane, Parnell, Auckland 1010 PO Box 3334, Shortland Street, Auckland 1140 P +64 9 917 5915 © Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand ABN 50 084 642 571 (CA ANZ). Formed in Australia. Members of CA ANZ are not liable f or the debts and liabilities of CA ANZ. • • • • o o o o Reponses to specific questions Is tax and its impact on investment and productivity a worthwhile subject to investigate further through an LTIB? Yes Are there other global tax trends that are critical to this study which should be considered? Yes-the tax settings they have used to attract frontier firms and foreign capital Are these sensible policy options to consider? Yes Arc there other reforms which should also he considered? \\Ve recommend that the work also consider whether an increase in FDI would increase Ne,v Zealand's productivity. The ,vork should also consider the role of the tax system in: Reducing the cost of capital into New Zealand; Addressing New Zealand's infrastructure deficit; Adapting to the changing nature of work; and Attrading "frontier firms" to New Zealand.