\[IN CONFIDENCE\] In confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet TAX ADMINISTRATION (CANTERBURY FLOOD EVENT) ORDER 2021 Proposal 1. I seek Cabinet’s agreement to allow Inland Revenue to remit interest charges on late payments of tax caused by taxpayers being physically prevented from paying tax due to the recent flooding in Canterbury. Allowing Inland Revenue to remit this interest requires an Order in Council. Policy 2. A medium-scale adverse event has been declared in response to the recent h eavy rains and subsequent flooding in Canterbury. The level of flooding and disruption in Canterbury is physically preventing some taxpayers from meeting their tax obligations, including filing, and paying tax on time. 3. Relief from late payment and late filing penalties is already available for t axpayers affected by the flooding. However, this relief does not extend to the remission of interest charged by Inland Revenue to compensate the Crown for the loss of the use of revenue (use-of-money interest). This reflects that the remission of interest requires a higher threshold, such as a natural disaster, before the relief can be provided and requires Cabinet approval. The current rate of interest on underpayments of tax is 7%. 4. The Tax Administration Act 1994 provides for an Order in Council to allow I nland Revenue to remit interest where: a. an emergency event physically prevents a taxpayer from paying tax on time; b. the non-payment of tax results in the imposition of interest; and c. the taxpayer is a member of class of persons eligible for remission of i nterest if the Order in Council declaring the emergency event describes such a class of person. 5. The major flooding in Canterbury meets the criteria for interest remission. The Order authorises Inland Revenue to remit use-of-money interest incurred by taxpayers who were physically prevented from paying their tax on time due to the floods. For the purposes of the Order, the emergency event is defined as the floods in Canterbury resulting from the heavy rain that fell between 29 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-07 15:26:17 1 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] May and 1 June 2021. The Order will commence on its notification in the Gazette and will expire 31 August 2021. Timing and 28-day rule 6. A waiver of the 28-day rule is sought, to enable the regulations to take effect f rom the day after their notification in the Gazette. Exercise of this power is taxpayer-friendly, and not expected to affect anyone negatively. Further, the sooner the relief is effective the more certain taxpayers’ positions will be, and Inland Revenue’s processing of relief applications will be more efficient. Once in force, the Order will enable Inland Revenue to remit interest charged prior to the making of the Order. Compliance 7. Section 183ABA of the Tax Administration Act 1994 provides the statutory a uthority for the Governor-General to declare an event to be an emergency event and qualify for the making of an Order in Council. This event meets the Tax Administration Act’s qualifying criteria. 8. The Order in Council complies with the following: The principles of the Treaty of Waitangi N ot applicable The rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Not applicable Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the Human Rights Act 1993 The principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act Not applicable 1 993 Relevant international standards and obligations Not applicable The Legislation Guidelines (2018 edition), which are Compliant ma intained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee Regulations Review Committee 9. Officials believe there are no grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Order in Council to the attention of the House under Standing Order 319. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel 10. The regulations have been certified by the Parliamentary Counsel Office as b eing in order for submission to Cabinet, except that they will come into force earlier than the 28 th day after the date of their notification in the Gazette. 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-07 15:26:17 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Impact Analysis Regulatory Impact Assessment 11. The Regulatory Impact Analysis Team at the Treasury has determined that the regulatory proposals in this paper are exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the basis that they are only modifying the effect of primary legislation, under powers only able to be exercised by the government during a declared emergency or emergency transition period. Climate Implications of Policy Assessment 12. The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been co nsulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for significance is not met. Publicity 13. I will announce Inland Revenue’s ability to remit use-of-money interest once t he Order is in effect and notified in the Gazette. Proactive Release 14. I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers in whole within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Consultation 15. Inland Revenue officials have consulted with the Treasury who agree with the p roposal in this paper. My officials have also informed the Chartered Accountants of Australia and New Zealand about Inland Revenue proposed response to the flooding event. Recommendations The Minister of Revenue recommends that Cabinet: 1. Note that the Tax Administration Act 1994 authorises the Commissioner of I nland Revenue to remit interest charged to taxpayers for late payment of tax, where the late payment was due to the effects of an emergency event declared by Order in Council. 2. Note that the event described as the Canterbury Flood Event meet the criteria sp ecified in the Tax Administration Act 1994 for the declaration of an emergency event. 3. Authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Tax Administration (C anterbury Flood Event) Order 2021. 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-07 15:26:17 3 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 4. Note that this remission of interest is not expected to have a fiscal cost. 5. Note that a waiver of the 28-day rule is sought on the grounds that the e xercise of the power will only positively affect taxpayers, and the power it confers will apply to events before the making of the Order. 6. Agree to the waiver of the 28-day rule so that the regulations can come into f orce after their notification in the Gazette. Authorised for lodgement Hon David Parker Minister of Revenue 2r4hxlcklw 2022-03-07 15:26:17 4