www.ird.govt.nz Page 1 of 2 Ref: 22 OIA2020 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 14 July 2022 Than k you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 15 June 2022. You requested the following: 1. The details of any sessions of “The Wall Walk” that your organisation has paid for since 2016. Please provide the date, time, and job titles of those who attended along with the cost each of these sessions to your organisation. 2. Please provide any records of any feedback your organisation has given to Simone Bull or any other organiser of The Wall Walk. 3. Please provide a list of any documented changes your organisation has made as a result of participating in The Wall Walk. Questions 1 and 2 I have located two sessions of The Wall Walk that Inland Revenue has participated in since 2016. These are detailed below. • Senior Leaders’ Forum – 3 December 2019, 9:00am - 1:15pm Inland Revenue staff attended a session of The Wall Walk as part of the Senior Leaders’ Forum in December 2019. A final list of invitees to the Senior Leaders’ Forum is attached. Although the invitee list is known, Inland Revenue does not hold a record of the staff that physically attended the Wall Walk session, therefore this part of your request is refused under section 18(e) of the OIA, as the information does not exist. There was no cost to Inland Revenue for The Wall Walk portion of this Forum. Inland Revenue provided a koha to the facilitator of the session to the value of $41.00. A copy of the feedback provided to the event organisers is attached. The enclosed documents contain information that is outside the scope of your request. The information has not been considered for release and has been withheld as “outside scope”. • The Wall Walk – Tax Counsel Office – 3 May 2021, 10:30am - 3:00pm Approximately 60 people attended a Wall Walk session on 3 May 2021, which included a range of staff across the Tax Counsel Office and Legal Services business units. Attendees included leaders (including Chief Tax Counsel), tax counsel, solicitors and business support. Inland Revenue does not hold a record of definite attendees to this session; therefore, your request for this information is refused under section 18(e) of the OIA as the information does not exist. The cost of the Wall Walk portion of this session was $4,600.00. Feedback on this session was given to the event organiser on the day. Inland Revenue does not hold a record of this information; therefore, your request for this information is refused under section 18(g) of the OIA as the information is not held by Inland Revenue, and we do not believe it is held by another agency. Page 2 of 2 Ref: 22 OIA2020 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The Tax Counsel Office used the Wall Walk as the starting point to launch its Māhutonga strategy. Māhutonga is Inland Revenue’s strategic approach to meeting its obligations under te Tiriti o Waitangi. As the Tax Counsel Office is a unit that is responsible for interpreting complex tax law, the Wall Walk experience provided staff with the courage to question how the law they are reviewing impacts Māori customers and to better understand Māori perspectives, processes and practices. Question 3 The aim of these sessions was to build a greater understanding of the Crown-Māori relationship. The Wall Walk gave Inland Revenue staff the opportunity to view the world through a Māori lens which better prepares our people to understand what they can do to improve outcomes and relationships with Māori. Inland Revenue has not documented any formal changes to the organisation as a direct result of participating in The Wall Walk, therefore this part of your request is refused under section 18(e) of the OIA as the information does not exist. Right of Review If you disagree with my decisions on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decisions. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Yours sincerely Ju liet Glass Service Leader – Commercial Services and Strategic Property \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Group Manager OCTC Group Manager SDI Head of Commercial and Procurement Intel Leader - Data Science & Analytics Intelligence Lead - OI&K Intelligence Leader - I&I International Revenue Strategy Manager Legal Services Leader Management Support Management Support Management Support Manager Business Performance Manager Governance and Integrity Manager Performance & Culture Manager Services & Optimisation Network lead - Tech Specialist Network Network Lead-Customer Experience Design Organisation Design Lead PMO Lead Principle Transformation Director Privacy Officer Programme Director Programme Manager Programme Manager Programme Manager - Org Design Programme Manager - Tech Arch Delivery Programme Manager He Kotuitui Project Programme Director Senior Advisor Senior Advisor to DC Service Leader Service Leader Service Leader Service Leader Start Release 4 Manager Start Release 4 Manager Strategy and Intelligence Manager Team Manager - Advisory Transition Support Lead Workforce Information & Intelligence Manager