www.ird.govt.nz Page 1 of 2 Ref: 23OIA1034 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 5 August 2022 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 9 July 2022. You requested the following: 1. How much did your organisation spend on advertising, public relations campaigns, and publications in total between 1 July 2021 and 30 June 2022? 2. How many FTE staff in total were employed by your organisation as at 30 June 2022? 3. What was the total staff headcount for your organisation as at 30 June 2022? 4. What percentage of FTE staff in your organisation were earning a salary of $100,000 or more as at 30 June 2022? 5. How many FTE staff were employed by your organisation for the COVID-19 Response as at 30 June 2022, if any, and how many of these roles are permanent? 6. How many square meters of owned and leased office space did your organisation have as at 30 June 2022, and how did this compare to the previous five years? 7. What was the attrition rate/unplanned turnover rate for your organisation for the 12 months ending 30 June 2022? Information on advertising Inland Revenue spent a total of $1,229,285 on advertising, public relations campaigns and publications between 1 July 2021 and 30 June 2022. Information on staff levels, as at 30 June 2022 The total number of people employed at Inland Revenue is 4,009 (headcount). Due to some people working part-time, this equates to 3, 923 FTE staff. This figure does not include those on long-term leave (e.g., parental leave). The percentage of FTE staff earning $100,000 or more is 26.8%. For clarity, this is the percentage of our current permanent and fixed-term employees, excluding those who are not at work e.g., on extended leave. The annualised unplanned turnover rate of staff is 13.4%. Inland Revenue had a number of people supporting customers with both COVID-19 response work, and general tax and social policy. The number of FTE staff specifically supporting the COVID-19 response is unable to be quantified, as COVID-19 affected the lives of many taxpayers in contact with Inland Revenue. Your request for this information is therefore refused under section 18(g) of the OIA, as the information is not held by Inland Revenue and we do not believe it is held by another agency. Information on leased office space Inland Revenue, like other employers in the private and public sectors, supports flexible working and follows the flexible-by -default approach promoted across the public service. While Inland Revenue has experienced increased numbers of staff working from home, this has not led directly to a reduction in the amount of space the department leases. Page 2 of 2 Ref: 23OIA1034 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] In line with the changing shape of the organisation driven by Inland Revenue’s transformation, and as leases allow, Inland Revenue is taking opportunities to exit buildings or surrender floors. As at 30 June 2022, Inland Revenue leased 82,790 square meters of office space. Your request for information on Inland Revenue’s leased office space for the previous five financial years is refused under section 18(d) of the OIA, as the information is publicly available. You can find this information here (Question 19): Inland Revenue’s Written Responses to Annual Review Questions 2020/21. Right of review If you disagree with my decisions on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decisions. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Yours sincerely Er ina Clayton Enterprise Leader – People and Workplace Services