\[IN CONFIDENCE\] In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet Business Committee STUDENT LOAN SCHEME (REPAYMENT THRESHOLD) REGULATIONS 2020 Proposal 1. I propose that the Cabinet Business Committee authorise the submission to the Exe cutive Council of the attached Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2020 (the Regulations). The Regulations increase the income threshold at which New Zealand-based student loan borrowers must begin to repay their student loan, from $20,020 to $20,280, for the tax year beginning 1 April 2021. Policy 2. The policy is to adjust the student loan repayment threshold for inflation yearly. The i nflation adjustment is based upon the September quarter Consumer Price Index – all groups excluding cigarettes and other tobacco products (CPI-ex tobacco). This approach was agreed to in 2016 \[CAB-16-MIN-0655 refers\]. 3. In line with the policy the student loan repayment threshold increases from $20,020 a year to $20,280 for the tax year beginning 1 April 2021. 4. The repayment threshold limits the likelihood that a low-income borrower would be p laced in financial hardship as a consequence of having to meet student loan repayment obligations. This year’s adjustment would mean New Zealand-based borrowers could earn an additional $5 per week ($260 per year) before being required to make repayments on their outstanding student loan balance. Financial implications 5. The impacts of adjusting the student loan repayment threshold, using the current me thodology, are already accounted for in the forecast \[CAB-16-MIN-0655 refers\]. Administrative implications 6. Threshold adjustments need to be built into payroll specifications for the relevant tax ye ar. Inland Revenue issues specifications to allow payroll users to gauge the impacts of payroll changes on their software well in advance of their application. These specifications are normally published in December to apply for the next tax year. 1 2r4hxlcklw 2020-12-14 10:24:11 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Impact analysis 7. The Regulatory Quality Team at the Treasury has determined that the regulatory proposals in this paper are exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the basis that they have no or minor impacts on businesses, individuals or not for profit entities. Consultation 8. Inland Revenue has consulted with the Ministry of Education on the proposal to i ncrease the repayment threshold for the 2021/22 tax year. Timing and 28-day rule 9. A waiver of the 28-day rule is not required as the Regulations are not proposed to co me into force until 1 April 2021 and will apply for the 2021/22 tax year. Publicity 10. Inland Revenue will publish information about the new threshold and its impact in the st udent loan section of its website. 11. Inland Revenue will publish an article about this change in its T ax Information Bulletin. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel 12. The Regulations have been certified by the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) as being in order for submission to Cabinet. Regulations Review Committee 13. Officials consider that as the adjustment is of a minor and routine nature, it is u nnecessary to refer the Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2020 to the House of Representatives under Standing Order 319. Compliance 14. The regulations comply with: 14.1 The principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; 14.2 The rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 o r the Human Rights Act 1993; 14.3 The principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 1993; and 14.4 Relevant international standards and obligations. 2 2r4hxlcklw 2020-12-14 10:24:11 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Proactive release 15. I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers in line with the provisions of the Official Information Act 1982, within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Recommendations I recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1. note t hat the policy is for the student loan repayment threshold to be adjusted for inflation every year. 2. note t hat an Order in Council is required under section 215(a) of the Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 to adjust the repayment threshold. 3. note that the Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2020 increase the student loan repayment threshold to $20,280 for the 2021/22 tax year and come into force on 1 April 2021. 4. authorise t he submission to the Executive Council of the Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2020. Authorised for lodgement Hon David Parker Minister of Revenue 3 2r4hxlcklw 2020-12-14 10:24:11