www.ird.govt.nz Page 1 of 3 Ref: 23OIA1549 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 23November 2 022 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received 8 November 2022. You requested the following (number for ease of response): 1.How many days’ of annual leave or paid time off (such as departmental holidays or supplementary leave), in excess of the statutory four weeks leave, do your staff receive? 2.When was the amount of annual leave or paid time off (in excess of four weeks) allocated to each employee last increased? 3.If any additional leave or paid time off entitlements have been given in the past two years, please provide a reason as to why. 4.Please indicate whether they above additional entitlements are temporary or will continue next year and/or for the foreseeable future. 5.If different employees receive different entitlements to additional leave, please indicate the number of staff receiving each entitlement. E.g., 5 Days - XX employees, 6 days - XX employees, 7 Days XX employees. 6.What is the total annual cost of providing leave entitlements beyond the four weeks required by law? 7.‘If there has been additional entitlements in the past two years (e.g., an extra paid day off over the Christmas break), what is the estimated cost of providing this? Question 1 Inland Revenue h as 2 leave types that are greater than the statutory 4 weeks of annual leave. These are detailed below: Annual Leave Inland Revenue employees in roles under collective coverage accrue annual leave at a rate of 4 weeks per year for the first 5 years of service, then from the start of their 6 th year of service, accrue annual leave at the rate of 5 weeks per anniversary year. Employees in roles not under collective coverage, on our Standard Terms Employment Agreement, accrue annual leave at the rate of 5 weeks per anniversary year from the date of commencement of the agreement. Long Service Leave After 5 years of recognised continuous service, employees are entitled to 1 week’s long service leave. Thereafter, employees will be entitled to 1 week’s long service leave at the end of each additional 5 years of continuous employment. This is the same for employees on both coverage and non-coverage employment agreements. Page 2 of 3 Ref: 23OIA1549 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Question 2 The Holidays Act 2003 included an increase in annual leave to a minimum of 4 weeks per anniversary year with effect from 1 April 2007. Inland Revenue, prior to the change in legislation, had employees under coverage employment agreements accruing 3 weeks annual leave for the first 5 years of service, 4 weeks from the start of the 6 th year of service and 3 days paid departmental leave to be taken between Christmas and New Year each year. For those outside of coverage on the Standard Terms Employment Agreement, they accrued 4 weeks of annual leave, with 3 days paid departmental leave to be taken between Christmas and New Year each year. With the change in the legislation Inland Revenue, working with our union partners, made changes to the entitlement to annual leave for all employees with effect from 1 July 2004 (these new entitlements are detailed in Question 1). The entitlement to departmental days was removed from all agreements. Questions 3 and 4 Over the last 2 years 8 employees have received additional paid time off to recognise their high performance. T he additional entitlements were temporary and were one-off individual instances with no future entitlements. Question 5 This question has been split into the two leave types covered in Question 1. All data is as at 31 October 2022. Annual Leave The total number of employees with a 5- week a nnual leave entitlement as at 31 October 2022 is 3,066. Long Service Leave The total number of employees with long service leave eligibility as part of their employment agreement is 4,007. The number of employees with more than 5 years’ service who will have received at least 1 entitlement to a period of long service leave is 2,944. The number of employees who became entitled to a period of long service leave between 1 November 2020 and 31 October 2022 is 1,293. Question 6 This question has been split into the two leave types covered in Question 1. All data is as at 31 October 2022. Annual Leave Cost of the additional annual leave of 1 week for the 3, 066 eligible employees is approximately $5,432,565.50. This is based on calculating 1 week of their gross annual base salary (pro-rated for part time employees). Long Service Leave It is more difficult to calculate long service leave as this is once every 5 years and the date of entitlement is specific to the individual employee. Page 3 of 3 Ref: 23OIA1549 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] There are currently 923 employees with an entitlement to l ong service leave available to use, which has an approximate cost of $1,602,143.39. This is based on calculating 1 week of their gross annual base salary (pro-rated for part time employees). Long service leave is not paid out on resignation and is forfeited if not taken within 5 years of entitlement. Question 7 The total 2-year cost for additional paid time off (in addition to what is already detailed in Question 6) was $57,603.77. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes response to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Yours sincerely Erina Clayton Enterprise Leader, People and Workplace Services