Hon David Parker, Minister of Revenue Information Release Income Tax (Employment Income - Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 May 2022 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s tax policy website at https:// taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2022/2022-ir-cab-leg-21-sub-0042/overview Documents in this information release # Reference Type Title Date 1 IR2021/129 Tax policy report Tax policy report: Income Tax (Employment Income - Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 23 March 2021 2 LEG-21-SUB-0042 Paper Tax policy report: Income Tax (Employment Income - Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 15 April 2021 3 LEG-21-MIN-0042 Minute Tax policy report: Income Tax (Employment Income - Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 15 April 2021 Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Cabinet Legislation Committee on 15 April 2021 and confirmed by Cabinet on 19 April 2021. One attachment to the Cabinet paper is not included in this information release as it is publicly available: •Tax policy report: Income Tax (Employment Income - Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 - Order in Council (6 April 2021) 1 Inf ormation withheld Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act 1982 (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply are identified. Where information is withheld, no public interest was identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. 1 https://legislation.govt.nz/regulation/public/2021/0078/latest/whole.html Sections of the Act under which information was withheld: 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). \[IN CONFIDENCE\] POLICY AND REGULATORY STEWARDSHIP Tax policy report: Draft Cabinet Paper – Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 Date: 23 March 2021 Priority: Medium Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2021/129 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Revenue Agree to recommendations 10am Thursday Authorise the lodgement of the attached 8 April 2021 Cabinet paper Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Chris Gillion Policy Lead s 9(2)(a) Haydn Clark Principal Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) 1. \[IN CONFIDENCE\] In Confidence 23 March 2021 Minister of Revenue Draft Cabinet Paper – Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 Purpose 1 .T his report asks you to approve and lodge the attached draft Cabinet paper wi th t he Cabinet Office by 10am Thursday 8 April 2021 for consideration at the Cabine t L egislation Committee meeting on 15 April 2021 . 2. T he Cabinet paper seeks the Cabinet Legislation Committee’s agreement to submi t the Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2 021 to the Executive Council . 3. T his Order excludes from the definition of accommodation in the employmen t i ncome rules, accommodation that is provided for the purpose of enabling a n employee to isolate due to the risk of the outbreak or spread of COVID-19 . Ac commodation that is provided for this purpose will, as a result, not be treated a s e mployment income and be exempt from tax . 4.Y ou agreed to the recommendation in our report Order in Council: Tempora ry a ccommodation provided to employees to manage the risk of COVID-1 9 t ransmission dated 23 February 2021 (IR2021/072 refers) that this new exclusio n b e added to the definition of accommodation . N ext steps 5.E nclosed is a draft Order. The Parliamentary Counsel Office will provide the fina l I ncome Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 202 1 f or the Cabinet Legislation Committee meeting on 15 April 2021 . 6.W e will provide you with speaking notes for the Cabinet Legislation Committe e m eeting . IR2021/129: Draft Cabinet Paper – Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 Page 1 of 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] In Confidence Recommended action We recommend that you: 7 .n ote the contents of this report and the attached Cabinet paper ; N ote d 8.s ign and refer the Cabinet paper to the Cabinet Office by 10am Thursday 8 Apr il 2021. S igned and referred/Not signed or referre d H aydn Clark Principal Policy Advisor Policy and Regulatory Stewardship Hon David Parker Minister of Revenue / /2021 IR2021/129: Draft Cabinet Paper – Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 Page 2 of 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 Proposal 1.This paper seeks the Cabinet Legislation Committee’s agreement to submit the Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 to the Executive Council. Policy 2.The employment income rules define accommodation in broad terms, with some t argeted exclusions to exempt accommodation provided in certain circumstances from tax. 3.The starting position under the employment income rules is that the value of accommodation provided to a person in relation to their employment is treated as employment income and subject to tax. This is because it is effectively an alternative to receiving more salary or wages, which would normally be taxed. 4.Accommodation is inherently private in nature since it provides a private benefit. In so me cases, however, the private benefit is either incidental to a business objective or is minimal or hard to measure. For these reasons, certain types of accommodation are excluded from the accommodation definition and exempt from tax. 5.I recommend that the Committee agrees that a new exclusion is added to the d efinition of accommodation, to exempt accommodation that is provided to allow an employee to isolate due to the risk of the outbreak or spread of COVID-19. Accommodation provided for this purpose has a primary business objective of protecting employees, as well as the wider community, from COVID-19 infection. The private benefit is incidental to this business objective. 6.Examples of types of accommodation that would be exempt from tax under this e xclusion are accommodation provided to isolate: 6.1 airline crew on their return to New Zealand; 6.2 harvest worker teams in separate bubbles during a lockdown, to manage the r isk of COVID-19 transmission through a workforce during a harvest window; and 6.3 front-line workers from vulnerable family members. 1 2bnpvvfw8u 2021-07-27 08:46:06 . \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 7. The criteria for the new exclusion are that where the accommodation is provided, it is: 7.1 to enable an employee to isolate due to the risk of the outbreak or spread of COVID-19; 7.2 not normally provided as part of the employee’s remuneration package for their role or for a similar role; 7.3 not provided in substitution for a greater amount of employment income; 7.4 provided for a period of 3 months or less; and 7.5 provided between 22 April 2021 and 30 June 2022. 8. An existing power provides for additional types of accommodation to be excluded from the accommodation definition by Order in Council. Timing and 28-Day Rule 9. I propose that the change should apply from the date the New Zealand Gazette is published giving notice of the Order in Council, and that the 28-day rule is waived in this case, as the new exclusion will confer only benefits to the public. Compliance 10. The Order in Council complies with: 10.1 the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; 10.2 the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the Human Rights Act 1993; 10.3 the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 1993; 10.4 relevant international standards and obligations; 10.5 the Legislation Guidelines (2018 edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. 11. No statutory prerequisite exists for making the Order in Council. Regulations Review Committee 12. There are no anticipated grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Order in Council to the attention of the House of Representatives under Standing Order 319. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel 13. The Parliamentary Counsel Office has certified that the Order in Council is in order for submission to Cabinet. 2 2bnpvvfw8u 2021-07-27 08:46:06 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Impact Analysis 14. The Regulatory Impact Analysis Team at the Treasury has determined that the regulatory proposal in this paper is exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the basis that it has no or minor impacts on businesses, individuals or not-for-profit entities. 15. The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply to this proposal as the threshold for significance is not met. Revenue Implications 16. This change will have no fiscal impact. Communications 17. Inland Revenue will publish an article about the change in its Tax Information Bulletin. Proactive Release 18. I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper and associated minutes in whole within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Consultation 19. The proposal has been developed in response to queries raised by employers and various stakeholders have been consulted informally during the design process. 20. The Treasury has been consulted in the preparation of this paper and supports the change. Recommendations The Minister of Revenue recommends that the Committee: 1. agree to a new exclusion from the definition of accommodation in the employment income rules, by Order in Council, for accommodation that is provided for the purpose of enabling an employee to isolate due to the risk of the outbreak or spread of COVID-19; 2. note that the Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 will give effect to the decision referred to in paragraph 1 above; 3. authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021; 4. note that a waiver of the 28-day rule is sought: 4.1 so that the regulations can come into force as soon as possible; 4.2 on the grounds that they will confer only benefits to the public; 3 2bnpvvfw8u 2021-07-27 08:46:06 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 5. agree to waive the 28-day rule so that the regulations can come into force when the next New Zealand Gazette is published on 22 April 2021. Authorised for lodgement Hon David Parker Minister of Revenue 4 2bnpvvfw8u 2021-07-27 08:46:06 I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-21-MIN-0042 Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Income Tax (Employment Income - Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 PortfolioRevenue On 15 April 2021, the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1agreed to a new exclusion from the definition of accommodation in the employment income rules, by Order in Council, for accommodation that is provided for the purpose of enabling an employee to isolate due to the risk of the outbreak or spread of COVID-19; 2noted that the Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 will give effect to the decision referred to in paragraph 1 above; 3authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Income Tax (Employment Income—Meaning of Accommodation) Regulations 2021 \[PCO 23645/3.0\]; 4noted that a waiver of the 28-day rule is sought: 4.1so that the regulations can come into force as soon as possible; 4.2on the grounds that they will confer only benefits to the public; 5agreed to a waiver of the 28-day rule so that the Regulations can come into force on 22 April 2021. Gerrard Carter Committee Secretary Present:Officials present from: Hon Chris Hipkins (Chair) Hon David Parker Hon Poto Williams Hon Aupito William Sio Hon Meka Whaitiri Keiran McAnulty, MP (Senior Government Whip) Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG 1 I N C O N F I D E N C E 2bnpvvfw8u 2021-07-27 08:47:45 3.