Page 1 of 11 Ref: 23OIA1333 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Customer and Compliance Services Ratonga Kiritaki me te Tautukunga AIA Building 5- 7 Byron Avenue PO Box 33150 Takapuna Auckland 0622 18 October 2022 Dear T hank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 12 September 2022. You requested the following: a) the total amount of tax debt; b) the amount of tax debt relating to taxpayers returning total taxable income of $40,000 or less; c) the average amount of tax debt per taxpayer in (b); d) the amount of tax debt relating to taxpayers returning taxable income of $10,000 or less and the same information for each succeeding $10,000 of taxable income i.e. total taxable income of $10,001-20,000, $20,001-30,000 and upwards; e) the amount of tax debt broken down by region; f) the amount of tax debt relating to taxpayers without an agent; g) the amount of tax debt which is the subject of arrangements; h) For the purposes of this request, tax debt is overdue tax debt as defined in Inland Revenue’s Annual Reports. This information is requested for the 2017-18, 2018- 19, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 tax years. Clarification of your request On 19 September, you were advised that we have interpreted your use of the term “tax debt” to include all tax types excluding debt related to child support, student loans and COVID-19 products. We considered your request to seek information relating to tax debt for individuals only. You were also advised that we are unable to provide the information you have requested for income years ending prior to 31 March 2020 as the information does not exist in the format that you have requested. You clarified your request to the following: For individuals and limited companies with income up to $40,000: 1. Tax debt balances and averages categorised by income level for the 2020 and 2021 tax years in $10,000 increments up to $40,000, and $40,000+. 2. Tax debt balances broken down by region 3. Current tax agent status of those with tax debt 4. Whether there is a current debt arrangement in place for those with tax debt. Inland Revenue’s approach to compliance The Commissioner of Inland Revenue is tasked with protecting the integrity of the tax system and collecting the highest net revenue over time. Page 2 of 11 Ref: 23OIA1333 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Our approach to compliance is multi-layered and based on our commitment to making it as easy as possible for customers to get it right from the start, and hard for them to get it wrong. We know most individuals and businesses want to do the right thing, and we want them to understand that if they get in touch with us when they are struggling, they will get the help they need. We also want the vast majority of New Zealanders who are making the effort to meet their tax obligations to know that we will identify the few who aren’t and take action. Inland Revenue works with customers who anticipate they will not be able to make their payments by the due date to understand their financial situation and to help them resolve their debt. This could be by setting up instalment arrangements or determining if they qualify for financial relief. Relief options include extra time to pay through an instalment arrangement, extra time to file returns, and where appropriate, writing off tax, penalties or interest. Specific web pages to help customers understand what is available to them if they are impacted by COVID-19 events or have a debt, are available on our website (ird.govt.nz). Information being released The information you have requested is detailed in the tables in the Appendix. We have provided income tax debt information only, as we believe this is a fair and comparable way to provide the information based on your request for information by income band. Information regarding data being provided Individual customers have filed either an IR3 or received an Automatic Income Tax Assessment for each respective tax year, and companies have filed an IR4. The data does not include customers with default assessments or late filing penalties if the return is not present. Debt and arrangement metrics are as at six months after the last major due date for the corresponding tax year (i.e., for the 2020 tax year, the debt, arrangement and agent information was taken as at 30 September 2021, and 2021 tax year was at 30 September 2022). Data for regions with single digit numbers is considered sensitive revenue information. These regions are merged into the “Unknown/other” group. As such, this information is withheld under section 18(c)(i) of the OIA, as making the requested information available would be contrary to the provisions of a specified enactment, namely Inland Revenue’s confidentiality obligation in section 18 of the TAA. Disclosure of this information does not fall within any of the exceptions to the confidentiality obligation listed in sections 18D to 18J of the TAA. Total tax debt If you are interested in information on total tax debt, this can be found in Inland Revenue's Annual Report, here: https://www.ird.govt.nz/about-us / publications/annual-corporate- reports/annual-report. The 2022 Annual Report is due to be published in November 2022. Right of review If you disagree with my decisions on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decisions. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review.