www.ird.govt.nz Ref:23OIA1074 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 16 August 2022 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 21 July 2022. You requested: With respect, can IRD please provide the last five years (financial or calendar) of tax paid on profits by the following businesses: • All businesses • Primary sector • Dairy farms • Petroleum/gas/minerals sector • Hospitality and accommodation sector • Tourism sector • Construction sector • Manufacturing sector • Financial services sector • Any other categories IRD wishes to provide I’m happy to mould these categories to however IRD collects its information. If possible, please provide a tally of companies in each sector. Inland Revenue does not hold data that specifies which sector a taxpayer operates in. The information most closely related to this is an industry classification, which is provided by the taxpayer. Some sectors may fall in several industries (for example, a business in the tourism sector may also be in the accommodation industry, retail trade, or many others). Therefore, the information provided in my response to your request is based on industry classifications rather than sectors. Industry classification Classification of a taxpayer into industries has been done using the Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification (ANZSIC) data held by Inland Revenue. Please note, this data is incomplete and may not reflect the current industry for taxpayers that have not updated their information with Inland Revenue. For example, an individual may have a “dairy farmer” industry classification but could be retired or no longer work in that field. I have provided a breakdown of tax paid and number of taxpayers by broad industry classification in Table 1 and Table 2. For the Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing industry I have isolated Dairy farming and other agriculture to address your specific request for “dairy farming”. Please note, there may be taxpayers for whom no industry code information is held, therefore figures for the identified industries should be considered as lower bounds. Ref:23OIA1074 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Income tax information Information on income tax by industry is provided in Table 1. These figures are calculated using annual income tax returns. For companies and Māori authorities this figure is residual income tax as declared on an IR4 or IR8 tax return. For trusts, the figure is calculated as trading profits (ignoring trading losses) allocated to beneficiaries or trustees, multiplied by average beneficiary or trustee rates. For partnerships and look-through companies, the tax figure is calculated as the income after expenses multiplied by average tax rates for individuals who received partnership or look-through company income. This approach is also taken for shareholder salaries paid by companies. Average tax rates for these streams of personal income are calculated as if they were the last dollar earned. For individuals, self-employment income is also taxed as if it was the last dollar earned. This information was extracted from Inland Revenue systems on 27 July 2022. Please note, tax returns for the tax year ending 31 March 2021 were not due until 31 May 2022 for taxpayers with an extension of time. As some returns for this income year may not have been received or processed, the figures provided are a progress total. Figures in Table 1 are rounded to the nearest $0.1m and may not sum to the total due to this rounding. Number of taxpayers with business income You have also asked for the total number of companies in each sector. I have interpreted this to mean the number of taxpayers actively filing returns with business income in each industry including other entities such as trusts, partnerships or the self-employed. This information is provided in Table 2. Counts are rounded to the nearest 10 and may not sum to the total due to this rounding. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Yours sincerely Sandra Watson Policy Lead, Forecasting & Analysis