PUB-06 Corporate Taxpayers Group 29 April 2022 LTIB topics c/o David Carrigan Inland Revenue Department PO Box 2198 WELLINGTON 6140 Dear David Tax, Foreign Investment and Productivity: Draft Long-Term Insights Briefing Introduction In its submissio n on 6 September 2021, t he Corporate Taxpayers Group ("the Group") supported Inland Revenue scoping its curre nt Long-Term Insights Briefing ("LTIB"). The Group cons iders the LTIB process to be a valuable one a nd supports continu ing t his process. We have been a sked for feedback o n the draft LTIB. Our overall feedback is that the Group struggle s to understand the focus ofthe d raft LTIB. Paragraph 1 of t he Execut ive Summary states that t he draft LTIB: "Examines how New Zealand tax settings are likely to affect incentives for firms to invest into New Zealand and benchmarks New Zealand tax settings against those in othercountries." This seems to be a focus on the taxation of inbound investment and w hether t his is increasing the cost of capital, reducing investment, and thus lowering potential productivity and wages. However, paragraph 9 of t he Executive Summary states that the a im of t he draft LTIB is to initiate a process of discussion on whether to change our tax settings more generally a nd "how best to change it if change is deemed desirable". It then lists possib le changes for cons ideration with detailed quest io ns of views on each of these: • Acut in the company tax rate • Accelerated depreciation provisio ns • Inflati on indexation of t he tax base • A higher thin capitalisation rule safe harbour • An allowance for corporate equity • Specia l industry-specific or firm-specific incentives • A dual i ncome tax system. Contact the CTG: We note the views in this document are a reflection of the views c/o Robyn Walke r, Deloitte ofthe Corporate Taxpayers Group and do not necessarily reflect PO Box 1990 the views of individual members. Wellington 6140, New Zealand DDI: 04 470 3615 Emai l: robwalker@deloitte.co.nz CTG - Submission on LTIB 29 April 2022 Page 2 of 10 This seems a much wider focus t ha n the p reviously stated focus o n i nbound investment. We term the above broader tax policy settings in contrast to the narrower tax policy settings on how New Zealand taxes inbound investment. The rationa le for this focus o n broader tax policy settings seems to be based on the argument advanced in t he draft LTIB that a lthough New Zealand has high effective margina l tax rates (EMTRs) o n i nbound investment as measured by OECD and s imilar studies, actual EMTRs on particular investments are highly variable a nd in some cases a re much lower than the data for EMTRs on inbound investment suggests and may even be negative. A general lowering of EMTRs on inbound investment may therefore not be welfa re enha ncing. Reform may be better focused o n t he broader tax policy settings by trying for more uniform (and positive) EMTRs across the board. If this is the argument being advanced, it would assist ongoing dia logue if that were clearer. The Group would support reforms to the broader tax policy settings t hat would increase investment in a way that improves productivity and is welfare enhancing to the extent these are cons istent with the Group's (4 C's) principl es of: High certainty a nd low business risk Low compliance costs Positive contribution of tax to society Internatio na l competitiveness with our major trading partners and competitors, especially Australia. Some of t he measures suggested for consideration (such as a cut in t he corporate tax rate) seem justified on this basis. However, the measures have potent ia l ramifications for the tax system and more detailed analysis seems necessary before the Group could come to a definitive view on them. For example, as the d raft LTIB recognises, comprehensive indexation of t he tax base ra ises numerous issues. The Group supports developing a p rocess where reform of these broader tax settings can be discussed with a vi ew to improving productivity. The Group does not, however, consider t hat this should be at t he cost of not giving consideration to the evidence o n how current policy discourages inbound investment. While there are caveats and gaps in our knowledge and data, t he Group submits that the economic theory a nd the evidence in the draft LTIB strongly support a policy direction of lowering tax o n i nbound investment, so as to lower t he cost of capital, increase investment and thus enhance productivity and wages. However, the Group believes that recent policy changes have been consistently increasing tax o n i nbound investment. Consideration of measures to reduce the variability of EMTRs in the broader policy setting can be advanced in tandem with measures that reflect a change of d irection so that tax policy a ims to attract inbound investment instead of penalising it fo r fiscal gain at every opportunity. What t he Group is suggesting is that t he LTIB be used to develop a process whereby the strategic directio n of tax policy is established in a way that accords with national welfare a nd is clear, pragmatic, reasonably simple and consistently forms the basis of advice Officials provide to government. We consider this is very achievable and something New Zeala nd had in the past but has now been lost. The number of incoherent ad hoc policy announcements we now see is testimony to that. Adopting a clear and pragmatic approach to t he taxation of inbound investment would be a good place to start. This seems like ly to mean rolling back some of t he international tax measur es adopted over the past few years . We do agree, however, that consideration should also be g iven to t he broader tax policy settings. CTG - Submission on LTIB 29 April 2022 Page 3 of 10 The Group's reading of t he draft LTIB is that it sets out three categories of issues: 1. The impact on investment a nd productivity ofthe hig h EMTRs New Zeala nd has o n capital in general and inbound investment in particular. 2. Issues with t he a lig nment of the company tax rate and personal tax rates and the ro le of capital gains tax in buttressing misalignment. 3. The tax treatment of particula r types of investment - depreciation, indexation, a nd specific tax concessions. The Group recogni ses that these can be viewed as related issues. Hig h tax rates on capital can be reduced by a r eductio n in the company tax rate but that gives rise to misalig nment of t he company and personal rates. Alternatively high tax rates can be reduced by more generous tax rules o n over-taxed types of investment (depreciation, indexation, and concessio ns) but that can lead to more variable rates depending on types of investment unless the more favourable tax treatment is limited to those types of investment facing highest rates. While recogn ising these relationships, a more constructive d ia logue on future tax policy settings seems more likely to be obtained by a more structured discussion. In ourview this involves: • Establishing that our EMTRs on capital i n general a nd inbound investment are too hig h. Pragmatic policies to reduce those rates should be advanced to the extent feasible . This could involve rolling back some recent measures to increase EMTRs. • The above would include considering more generous depreciation rates and measures successfully adopted by other countries to reduce tax on investment. • A policy goal of al ig nment of company and personal rates is a barrier to initiatives that might otherwise be pursued and t he need for a lignment and the extent t he tax system can efficiently and fairly operate with a lower company tax rate should be explored. As a final general comment, if the final LTIB is to canvass broader tax policy settings, then i t would seem useful to d iscuss this in the context of Treasury's paper "Looking to t he Future - New Zealand's Long-Term Fiscal Challenges". Th at paper envisaged a n i ncreasing levelof taxatio n being required to fund increasing gove rnment expend iture. In t he Group's submissio n on the Treasury paper we noted note t hat a ny materia l increase in the overall tax burden is likely to put pressure on the robust and sound tax system based o n income tax and GST we currently have. The Group concluded: "In any such reconfiguration of tax policy settings t he Group's view is t hat priorit ies s hould be consistent with the policy objective of a tax system that is conducive to increased domestic and i nternational investment in New Zealand business with increased productivity from that investment. In particular: • The company tax r ate should be at a n internationally competitive level. • The tax rules need to be designed so as to attract inbound fore ign investment • We need to avoid high personal tax rates that d iscourage or impose high costs on the employment of internationally mobile skills." The Group considers these points relevant to t he broader tax setting issues raised by the draft LTIB. CTG - Submission on LTIB 29 April 2022 Page 4 of 10 The Group has no comment on the methodology used to calculate EMTRs, leaving t hat to those with expertise in that area. The Evidence as to the EMTRs New Zealand Levies on Inbound Investment The d raft LTIB clearly present s t he evidence that New Zealand has gone from having internatio nally a relatively l ow corporate tax rate to a hig h corporate tax rate (page 10). It a lso shows that relative to other countries our EMTRs on inbound investment are now h ig h (page 28). This p resents a clear message t hat New Zealand is a highly taxed country that in tax terms is not attra ctive to fore ign investors . The d raft LTIB suggests we should compare ourselves with other small, advanced economies when considering our internatio na l competitiveness. The Group agrees noting New Zeala nd is geogra p hically distanced from foreign in vestors and t ra d ing partners . Tax barriers seem more important to small economies trying to attract the sort of investment that advanced economies need to lift productivity. In generalan MNE will want to invest in USA and China. Those countries also offer economies of scale making detailed investment analysis on potential investments cost-effective. New Zealand has to stand out. A message t hat we choose not to be internationally competitive in our tax settings sends a very clear adverse message. The draft LTIB demonstrates that by comparison with other small, advanced economies New Zealand stands out -but for t he wrong r easons. We a re the highest taxing of s uch economies by a significant margin (page 31). Finally, the d raft LTIB usefully extends t he no rmal OECD EMTR analysis to consider some recent quite micro changes to tax policy settings - such as changes to t hin capitalisation, AIL and NRWT ru les (Chapter 4). It co ncludes that these have further increased the EMTRs New Zeala nd levies, making us an even less desirable place to invest in. Despite t he above, the draft LTIB does not seem to conclude that our policy settings in this area a re wrong. This seems to be because it points to investments w here in t heory EMTRs on foreign investment can be much l ower than the OECD type models capture . An example given i s an appreciating asset w here costs are expensed a nd that is financed by interest bearing debt in times of moderate or more inflation. The combination of no tax on the gain in the appreciating asset (no capital gains tax), expensing and t he allowance of deductions for nominal interest means, naturally enough, that rather t han t he EMTR being positive, it is n egative -the investment produces a positive rate of return but income tax losses. Obvi ously, this combination of circumstances should produce the tax loss g iven by the theory. However, t here are in our view important caveats to suggest ing that such theoretical models negate t he more obvious conclusio ns that New Zealand under current policy is v iewed as a country t hat from a tax perspective is un welcoming to fore ign investment: • This is a combinatio n of circumstances that is not reflected in much of the investment we require such a s infrastructure. Such i nvestments are highly taxed a s per the international comparisons of EMTRs . • The theoretical modelassumes the losses over the investment p hase resulting from expens ing, the deduction for nominal interest and the non-taxation of the growth in value flowing from the increased present value of future taxable profits can be immediately used. Taking the example of a n IT firm; such a firm often incurs h ig h deductible personne l costs in its development phase, that produces tax losses. It then expects to make s ubstantial profits as it rolls out product(s). The draft LTIB would seem to see the early losses as g iving rise to a tax subsidy because the firm is building up t he present value of future income w hile making overall tax losses, thus in economic terms expensing t he costs of an asset. However, in pra ctice more often t ha n not the losses are only able to be carried CTG - Submission on LTIB 29 April 2022 Page 5 of 10 forward against future taxable income. As a result, t he "immediate expensing" is theoretical but not real. This applies most specifically with foreign investment in such firms. • An economic consideration of the impact of not taxing appreciating assets should take into account the risk assumed in acquiring them. Consideration can be given to the wider tax settings g iving rise to such negative EMTRs, but this does not justify ignoring t he high EMTRs curre nt policy levies on inbound investment in general. Do high EMTRs on Inbound Investment Matter? Surprisingly, in the Group's view, whether the h igh EMTRs New Zealand levies on inbound investment n egatively impacts on New Zealand's cost of capital a nd the level of investment available to us does not seem to get much focus in the draft LTIB. The LTIB would benefit from more consideration of this. The Group considers that t he analysis should begin with the economic theory and literature. As the d raft LTIB discusses, the economic theory is t hat taxing foreign investors increases the costs of capital, reduces investment, p roductivity and wages. The economic incidence of t he tax o n foreigners is not borne by the foreigners but by domestic labour because fo reign investment is very sensitive to local tax. Our understand ing is that economic literature over recent years has increasingly seen t his t heory as reflective of the real world suggesting that our h ig h EMTRs o n foreign investment s ig nificantly damage investment and productivity here. This seems especially likely given we are a small open economy. New Zealand does not figure on t he radar screens of most large international investors. If our tax settings seem unattractive, investment options here are unlikely to be even considered. As the draft LTIB notes, there are caveats to a nd assumptions u nderlying the theory-the presence of: • Overseas tax credits to offset New Zealand tax, • Location specific economic re n ts in New Zealand, • Sunk investments. However, all theories have caveats and assumptions. Fundamental to most economic analysis is the assumption of pure markets. Even t hough i t is clear that many markets are far from pure, the theory is useful in modelling the real world modified by the knowledge t hat economic theory will d iverge from reality in some respects. Officials' starting position should be that there needs to be very strong evidence that the economic theory and literature suggesting h ig h welfare costs from high EMTRs on foreign investment does not apply in the case of New Zealand. The Group is unaware of a ny such strong evidence. The Group concedes t hat t here is a little amount of empirical evidence supporting a high correlatio n between foreign investment a nd EMTRs. That may s imply reflect the number of such studies. There are, however, a n umber of reasons w hy an empirical correlation between EMTRs and the level of foreign investment may not reflect the extent of the welfare costs of our high EMTRs: • The most valuable foreign investments are of a long-term nature and thus consider t he lo ng term i mpact of tax policy settings. While empirical studies measure the immediate impact of current settings, long term investors are concerned with the overall strategic di rectio n of t hose settings. This CTG - Submission on LTIB 29 April 2022 Page 6 of 10 means a reduction in t he company tax rate may not have its full impact on investment decisio ns for some t ime. It a lso means that the strategic direction of reform and messaging are as important as the current ru les. Countries attractive to foreign investors (such as Singapore and Ireland) have a clearly s ig nalled tax welcoming mat. Our perspective is that New Zealand used to signal it welcomed fo re ig n i nvestment with a lo ng-term d irection of lowering EMTRs but in more recent times a diffe rent strategic direction and messaging has been adopted with a number of measures increasing tax on foreign investment being announced and justified on t he basis of combating "tax avoidance" (particul arly by mult inatio na ls) or closing " loopholes." This is a very clear negative message to long term investors while wrongly focusing on the legal, as opposed to the more relevant economic incidence, of the tax measures proposed. • In t he tax a rea complex technical tax rules meet t he complexity of t he realworld. It is thus d ifficult to model the likely impact of quite detailed tax ru les. For example, various measures to increase the tax New Zealand applies to hybrid instruments would be ha rd to model empirically. However, the impact has been to impose much h ig her tax wedges o n t he internatio na l funding of our banking sector and that flows through to h ig her cost of borrowing throughout the economy. • How tax laws are admin istered can be as important as the detail of t he rules. It seems reasonable to hypothesise that our generally honest and competent tax administration is a natio na l benefit in t his regard (and i nvestment to maintain those standards s hould be made). However, in recent times IR seems to have taken a relatively aggressive approach c halleng ing tax benefits t hat fore ig n investors rel i ed upon. Again, such a factor is not likely to be able to be incorporated into empirical studies on the impact of EMTRs on investment . On t he basis of t he above the Group considers t hat t he LTIB should be clearer on the likely negative impact of our internatio nally high EMTRs o n inbound investment. Implications for the LTIB In t he Group's view the LTIB should form the basis for a dialogue that can establish a clear strategic direction for New Zealand tax policy settings. This should be based o n an analys is of the relevant economic theory and literature fleshing this out with feedback as to what is impacting on investment decis io ns in t he real world. While anecdotal feedback may be seen as lacking modelling rigour, it usefully supplements modelling to give con text to how taxes work in reality. The policy that emerges from that will be incremental but s hould be consistent with the strategic direction. Of necessity cons iderable pragmatism will be required in turning strategy into actual policy. Based on the theory and literature, the focus should be o n reducing to the extent possible t he EMTRs o n i nvestment and especially inbound investment. We do not consider that the d rah LTIB makes a convincing case fo r focusing instead on reducing the variability of EMTRs on d ifferent forms of investment under domestic tax ru les. Reducing the variability of EMTRs s hould instead be pursued to the extent possib le and justified in tandem wit h t he overall need to reduce tax barriers to investment. In other words, we do not see a strategic approach of lowering EMTRs for investment generally as inconsistent with a lso making EMTRs o n types of investment less variable. The (McLeod) Tax Review 2001 raised the inherent tension between a policy objective of a lignment of personaland top personaltax rates and reducing EMTRs on capital and in particular inbound investment . It n oted however t hat the apparent high EMTRs on inbound investment were lowered to t he extent the investment was fina nced by debt (at least fo r Fore ign Direct Investment -FDI). The implication at least is that low tax o n debt investment is a useful feature of our tax system by ameliorating the otherwise h ig h EMTRs. CTG - Submission on LTIB 29 April 2022 Page 7 of 10 The draft LTIB is useful in expanding the OECD type EMTR ana lysis to incorporate t his aspect. However, in r ecent years in the name of closing "loopho les" t he scope of the transfer pricing rules, thin capita lisation ru les, NRWT and AIL has been expanded so as to increase the tax we impose o n debt financed investment. It would be useful i f the LTIB clarified Officials thinking on t he extent to which New Zealand should be taxing i nbound debt investment so as to provide a basis for ongoing dialogue on the issue. There are obvious limitations in t he McLeod Review approach and these are alluded to in the draft LTIB: • It may ameliorate high EMTRs o n FDI but has limited impact o n the EMTRs on Foreig n Portfolio In vestment (FPI). • The interest deductio ns that lower EMTRs can be offset by the tax on interest imposed by the investor's home jurisdiction. Responses to t hese points have been considered in the past a nd in novative t hinking should be encouraged. For example , cons ideration could be given to cashing out a proportion of imputation credits received by foreign investors. One r esponse to the tax t hat investor home jurisdictions imposed on interest was that New Zealand allowed deductio ns on an accrual basis whereas NRWT (and often home jurisdictio n tax) was imposed only on paymen ts. However, t his was identified by Officia ls as a "loophole" and NRWT has been extended to cover accrued i nterest costs. It is always necessary to bear in mind t hat we have to desig n tax ru les pragmatically and perfect solutio ns are seldom available. The d r aft LTIB seems to imply a view t hat t he longer-term alignment of the company and top persona l rate may not be a stable policy setting for New Zealand. This seems to be the basis for the d raft LTIB raising alternative tax policy settings not based o n such a lig nment -an allowance for corporate equity a nd a dual i ncome tax system. These raise complexities and issues of t hei r own. There is a naturaltendency to see faults in the settings we have close experience with but underestimate t he issues alternatives give rise to. It would be useful to assist dialogue on this to develop a clearer view as to limits where lack of a lig nment of tax rates is likely to create unmanageable integrity issues without radical change. For example, governments could be re laxed about income not readily substitutable fo r employment income not being taxed at personal r ates. Governments could be re laxed about any income re-invested and not used in persona l consumption being taxed at less than personal tax rates. The less concerned governments are about taxing all income at personaltax rates the more a reduction in the company tax rate (which the Group would support) can be seen as viable. I mplicit in the draft LTIB seems to be the view that any reduction in t he company tax rate (or a more general move to a dua l income tax system) would need to be buttressed by the taxation of capital gains -at least o n the sale of shares. The Group is not convinced by t he comments in the draft LTIB o n this point. Any consideration of the role oftaxing capital gains needs to take into account notjust a ny buttressing benefits such a tax would involve but also its d isadvantages. The problems with taxing capital gains are many and varied as set out in the report of the Tax Working Group, even by the majority w ho supported such a tax. This included complexity ofthe ru les, complia nce costs, lock-in effects, and the impact of taxing gains only on realisation so that the tax becomes t ransactiona l in nature. The taxing of share gains seems especially problematic, particularly how taxing s hare gains can work efficiently under an imputation system. One problem identified was that t he capita l gains tax designed by the TWG would have increased t he tax levied o n CTG - Submission on LTIB 29 April 2022 Page 8 of 10 New Zealanders investing in New Zealand companies but not increase t he tax levied o n New Zealanders investing in offsho re companies (or fore igners investing in New Zealand companies). The potent ia l result was seen as the hallowing out ofthe New Zealand equity market to the detriment ofthe economy generally. Indexation, Depreciation and Concessions The d raft LTIB ra ises the option of comprehensive indexation of the tax base. The rationale is that even at moderate levels of inflation a nomina l tax system creates considerable variability in t he EMTRs applying to diverse types of investment a nd the draft LTIB seems to suggest these can be more economically costly than high EMTRs o n inbound investment. Examples are: • High EMTRs on inventory • High EMTRs on depreciable assets especially short-lived assets. • L ow or negative EMTRs on debt financed investment. Comprehens ive indexatio n of t he tax base has been explored in t he past and found to be impractical. Indexatio n of fina ncia l assets (debt) seems especially problematic. That is not only on grounds of complexity and compliance costs but conceptually. For example, a business that has issued debt at low interest rates would find t hat if inflation increases materially in realterms its interest rate would become negative. It would then be deemed to have derived taxable income even though it has to continue to pay interest as a cash outflow. This would be a materia l risk fo r firms increasing uncertainty ofthe impact of our tax laws. The Group does not consider this to be a viable optio n. The Group does however cons ider partia l i ndexation measures could usefully be considered. That would include indexing depreciation deductio ns (so the book value of assets is increased each year for inflation) and moving inventory to say a LIFO from FIFO system. Such measures would seem consistent with a lo ng-term strategy of decreasing EMTRs on investment and inbound investment in particula r. The Group also considers t h at overseas examples of successful tax concessions should be considered. We provided examples in t he Group's 6 September 2021 submission on the Long Term Insig hts Consultative Document. Specific tax concessio ns are most likely to be justified in attracting internationally mobile activities that other countries court with attractive offers. The main economic argument against tax concessions is that they need to be funded by higher taxes on other firms (assuming a set revenue need) a nd they d ivert resources to activities generating a lower overall return. However, such objections do not hold to the extent tax concessions attract activities here that contribute tax revenue but would not locate he re without concessions and that engage resources (including personnel) that would otherwise not be here . With r espect to depreciation rates, t hese have been set based o n models of the economic life of assets. It would be appropriate to questio n this approach a nd explore further the basis on which actual investment decis io ns are made. As technology makes investment t imeframes shorter it seems like ly t hat investment timeframes are much less than modelled economic life of assets. This suggests higher depreciation rates t ha n curr ently available. We attach as a n Appendix t he Group's comments in relatio n to the questions for response in Chapters 7 to 12 of t he briefing. Pl ease let us know if you have any queries in relatio n to the matters set out in this letter, we would be happy to d iscuss these further. CTG - Submission on LTIB 29 April 2022 Page 9 of 10 For your information, the members of the Corporate Taxpayers Group are: 1 AIA New Zealand Limited 24 Methanex New Zealand Lim ited 2 Air New Zealand Limited 25 New Zealand Superannuation Fund 3 Airways Cor poration of New Zealand 26 Oji Fibre Solutions (NZ) Limited 4 ANZ Bank New Zealand Limited 27 OMV New Zealand Limited 5 ASB Bank Limited 28 Pacific Aluminium (New Zealand) Limited 6 Auckland I nternational Ai rport Limited 29 Powerco Limited 7 Bank of New Zealand 30 Resolution Life Australasia Limited 8 Chorus Limited 31 SkyCity Entertainment Group Limited 9 Contact Energy Limited 32 Sky Network Television Lim ited 10 Downer New Zealand Limited 33 Spark New Zealand Limited 11 First Gas Limited 34 Summerset Group Holdings Limited 12 Fisher & Paykel Appliances Limited 35 Suncorp New Zealand 13 Fisher & Paykel Healthcare Limited 36 T & G Global Limited 14 Fletcher Building Limi ted 37 TAB New Zealand 15 F onterra Cooperative Group Limited 38 The Todd Corporat ion Limited 16 Genesis Energy Limited 39 Vodafone New Zealand Limited 17 Heartland Bank 40 Watercare Services Limited 18 IAG New Zealand Limited 41 Westpac New Zealand Limited 19 lnfratil Limited 42 WSP 20 Kiwibank Limited 43 Xero Limited 21 Lion Pty Limited 44 Z Energy Limited 22 Mercury NZ Limited 45 ZESPRI International Limited 23 Meridian Energy Limited We note t he views in this document are a reflection of the views of the Corporate Taxpayers Group and do not necessarily reflect the views of individual members. Yours sincerely John Payne For the Corporate Taxpayers Group CTG - Submission on LTIB 29 April 2022 Page 10 of 10 APPENDIX ONE Comments on Specific Questions Asked. Question 6 -page 53. The Group s upports a reductio n i n the company tax rate but the extent to which that would require buttressing measures s hould be d iscussed. Question 7 -page 60. The Group s upports reconsidering depreciatio n rules a nd higher depreciatio n rates. Details should be developed in discussio ns . Question 8 -page 67. The Group s upports cons ideration being g iven to indexing depreciatio n and inventory but not financial assets. Question 9 -page 74. Our thin capitalisation ru les should be reviewed with a focus o n New Zealand becoming more attractive for inbound investment rather t ha n just a revenue focus. With respect to FDI and FPI, both a re of benefit to the country but pragmatically the main option fo r reducing EMTRs o n FPI is to reduce the company tax rate whereas other options are available with respect to FDI. Question 10 - page 80 a nd Q12 - page 93. As part of a broader d iscussion of t he need fo r a lignment of company and personal tax rates both a dual income and allowance for equity systems should be explored. Question 11- page 85. In general, t he Group considers tax ru les s hould not be industry specific unless there are pragmatic reasons for that (such as fo restry, petro leum mining etc.). However, consideration s hould be given to adopting tax concessions that other countries have successfully implemented a s discussed above.