1 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Topic 4 – Healthy, Safe & Equitable Workplace Kaupapa Whakatīwheta, Whakaweti me te Whakatoihara Harassment, Discrimination & Bullying Policy This policy explains Inland Revenue’s commitment and approach to preventing and managing unacceptable workplace behaviour. We are committed to maintaining a positive working environment and culture, where diversity is appreciated, and all people are respected and valued. Inland Revenue regards discrimination, bullying or harassment of any kind as unacceptable. This applies whether this behaviour comes from, or is directed at, an employee, contractor, consultant, customer or a visitor to Inland Revenue. We put prevention at the centre of our approach and expect all our people to model appropriate standards of conduct and report any breaches. If possible, behaviour can be adjusted and the working relationship can be repaired. This policy is underpinned by robust processes and procedures to ensure our people are supported. Why we have this policy We want a safe work env ronment, free from harassment, bullying and discrimination and want all our people to feel safe and supported to raise any issues and speak up. It makes good sense for Inland Revenue to address undesirable behaviours, as they can be detrimental to both the health of the affected employee/s and business productivity. In addition, undesirable behaviours in the workplace can constitute a work-related hazard, which Inland Revenue has a legislative duty to manage. Our Code of Conduct makes clear that ‘we must all contribute to an inclusive, respectful, safe and healthy workplace’ and that ‘discrimination, bullying, harassment and violence of any kind are unacceptable’. Who this policy applies to This policy and the guidelines which support its application apply to all Inland Revenue employees and contracted individuals (referred to as “all staff” or “a staff member”). Released under the OIA 3 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] (2015) sets out serious consequences if electronic communications are used with the intent to cause harm, and includes 10 communication principles, many of which relate specifically to harassing, discriminatory or bullying behaviour. PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT This policy, and the guidelines which support its application, look to ensure all staff: • Understand our commitment to a positive workplace and that unacceptable behaviour will not be tolerated under any circumstances; and • Have access to the information and resources they need to better understand harassment, bullying and discrimination; and • Know how to raise a concern or complaint, and the options available to them MANAGING COMPLAINTS Inland Revenue has procedures in place for making and managing complaints to ensure any genuine complaint or query is treated confidentially, taken seriously and acted on promptly. There is a preference for appropriately tailored solutions. For example, exploring low-key solutions before formal actions are taken if this is appropriate, or proceeding straight to a formal investigation if necessary. Inland Revenue will ensure the principles of natural justice are applied and both parties are treated fairly, and respected and supported through t e process. Regardless of whether the complaint is recent or historical, the complainant will be supported to decide what to do next and kept informed of the progress of any formal investigation. The options, reporting and process steps are detailed in the ‘Making a complaint’ guidelines in our People Policies and Guidelines (see Topic 4 – ‘Healthy, Safe & Equitable Workplace). DISCIPLINARY ACTION If an allegation of harassme t, bullying or discrimination is proven through a formal employment investigation process, the behaviour may amount to misconduct or serious misconduct, and could result in disciplinary action up to and including summary dismissal. Our disciplinary investigation guidelines provide details about this process and the potential outcomes (see Topic 3 – ‘Conduct & Behaviour’ in our People Policies and Guidelines). Inland Revenue would not expect any negative consequence for a staff member making a complaint and will take all reasonable steps to protect them from any form of victimisation or retaliation occurring). However, if a staff member raises a complaint that is found to be fictitious or vexatious, Inland Revenue may take disciplinary action against them. Document control v2 June 2018 (definition update April 2019; reformat Sept 2019) (v1 – 2 March 2016) Review dates Date reviewed: April 2019 Next review: June 2020 Policy owner Employment Relations, Policy & Remuneration Manager, People & Culture Policy contact Email the ERP&R team Released under the OIA