Hon David Parker, Minister of Revenue Information Release Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 April 2023 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s tax policy website at https://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2023/2023-ir-cab-leg-23-sub-0014 Documents in this information release # Reference Type Title Date 1 IR2023/003 Policy report Use of money interest rates review 26 January 2023 2 LEG-23-SUB-0014 Cabinet paper Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 9 March 2023 3 LEG-23-MIN-0014 Minute Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 9 March 2023 Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Legislation Committee on 9 March 2023 and confirmed by Cabinet on 13 March 2023. One a ttachment to the Cabinet paper is not included in this information release as it is publicly available: •Order in Council - Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 1 In formation withheld Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act 1982 (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply are identified. Where information is withheld, no public interest was identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Section of the Act under which information was withheld: 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people Accessibility Inland Revenue can provide an alternate HTML version of this material if requested. Please cite this document’s title, website address, or PDF file name when you email a request to policy.webmaster@ird.govt.nz 1 https://www.legislation.govt.nz/regulation/public/2023/0028/8.0/whole.html#LMS820068 Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] POLICY AND REGULATORY STEWARDSHIP Tax policy report: Use of money interest rates review Date: 26 January 2023 Priority: Medium Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2023/003 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Finance Agree to adjust the use of money interest rates as set out in the report. 02 February 2023 Minister of Revenue Agree to adjust the use of money interest rates as set out in the report. Sign and refer the attached paper to the Cabinet Office for consideration at the LEG meeting on 23 February 2022. 02 February 2023 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Paul Fulton Principal Policy Advisor Mila Maxon Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) Doc 1 In Confidence IR2023/ 003: Use of money interest rates review Page 1 of 6 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 26 January 2023 Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue Use of money interest rates review Purpose 1. This report discusses the outcome of the regular review of the use of money interest (UOMI) rates. It seeks your agreement to increase the rates in line with the latest increases in market interest rates. Context and background 2. The UOMI rates, along with other rates used in the tax system, 1 are reviewed regularly to ensure that they align with market interest rates. The rates are calculated using formulae based on the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) survey of interest rates. 3. The UOMI rates are an important component of the tax compliance rules. By changing in line with underlying market rates, the UOMI rates provide taxpayers with the incentive to pay the right amount of tax at the right time. They apply to all revenue and duties. UOMI rates 4. There are two UOMI rates: 4.1 the taxpayer’s paying rate (also known as the UOMI underpayment rate), which is charged on underpayments of tax to Inland Revenue; 4.2 the Commissioner’s paying rate (also known as the UOMI overpayment rate), which is paid by the Commissioner on money paid to Inland Revenue above a taxpayer’s tax liability. 5. The underpayment rate is currently 9.21%, while the overpayment rate is currently 2.31%, based on RBNZ figures from August 2022. Principles for updating the rates 6. Longstanding administrative principles in setting the rates provide that both UOMI rates should be adjusted if: 6.1 the RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate or the floating first mortgage new customer housing rate moves by 100 basis points or more from the figures used to calculate the last rate change; or 6.2 one of these indexes moves by 20 basis points or more and the UOMI rates ha ve n’t been adjusted in the last 12 months. 1 The other rates are the FBT interest rate on employment-related loans and the deemed rate of return on attributing interests in foreign investment funds. In Confidence IR2023/ 003: Use of money interest rates review Page 2 of 6 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 7. When regulations are made altering the UOMI rates, the adjustment is applied from the day after the next standard provisional tax payment date – which, in this case, is 7 May 2023. However, 7 May 2023 falls on a Sunday which makes 8 May 2023 the date that tax payable is due. Therefore, the increased UOMI rates should apply from the next day which is 9 May 2023. 8. The formula for setting the rates is set out in the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Regulations 1997 as follows: 8.1 Section 2 of the Regulations provides that the taxpayer’s paying rate is set at the RBNZ floating first mortgage new customer housing rate plus 250 basis points (or 2.5%); 8.2 Section 3 of the Regulations provides that the Commissioner’s paying rate is set at the RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate less 100 basis points (or 1 percentage point). However, if this calculation would produce a figure lower than 0%, the rate is instead set at 0%, to ensure overpayments do not accrue negative interest. 9. The floating first mortgage new customer housing rate is a proxy for a debt that a taxpayer might prioritise over their tax obligations. In the absence of a UOMI charge, a taxpayer wanting to borrow money could simply underpay their tax and use Inland Revenue like a bank rather than borrow from a bank at a commercial interest rate. A conservative margin of 250 basis points is added to the mortgage rate in calculating the underpayment UOMI rate because the Commissioner does not have information about the likelihood of any individual taxpayer paying the UOMI charged to them (i.e., the taxpayer’s creditworthiness). 10. The Regulations provide that the methodology for setting the interest rate for overpaid tax is the latest RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate less 100 basis points. The RBNZ 90-d ay bank bill rate is the monthly average of the daily standard rates, and approximates the return a taxpayer might expect on a low-risk investment in the New Zealand Government. Ensuring that the Commissioner pays less interest to the taxpayer on overpaid tax than the taxpayer would receive as a return from a low- risk bond aims to prevent a payment of tax to Inland Revenue being used as an investment. Results of latest RBNZ figure review 11. According to RBNZ figures from December 2022, both the floating first mortgage new customer housing rate and the 90-day bank bill rate have risen more than 100 basis points from their positions at August 2022, which triggers the UOMI rates to be reset. 12. The UOMI underpayment rate should be increased to 10.39%, while the UOMI overpayment rate should be increased to 3.53%. 13. The RBNZ floating first mortgage new customer rate has risen by 118 basis points since August 2022 (the last time the UOMI rates were set). Accordingly, the underpayment rate should be increased by 118 basis points, from 9.21% to 10.39%. 14. The RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate has risen by 122 basis points since August 2022. Accordingly, the overpayment rate should be increased from 2.3 1% to 3.53%. Fiscal Impact 15. UOMI applies to both overpayments and underpayments of tax. More is charged by the Commissioner on underpayments than is paid to the taxpayer on overpayments. In Confidence IR2023/ 003: Use of money interest rates review Page 3 of 6 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] However, the charges to underpayments are impaired in the Crown accounts to reflect that most UOMI charged is never paid, and therefore must be written-off. This means that an increase in the underpayment rate also produces an increase in impairment expenditure. The rate of impairment reflects the average repayment rate of recent debt, updated in October each year. The impairment rate for the year ended 30 June 2022 is 67.63%. 16. The full year net saving for the 2022/23 fiscal year is estimated to be $1 million, and $3 million per annum for 2023/24 and later years. These savings comprise a revenue increase of $6 million in 2022/23 and $38 million per annum for 2023/24 and later years, and an increase in impairment expenditure of $5 million in 2022/23 and $35 million per annum for 2023/24 and later years. This is shown in the following tables: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 6.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 Total Operating (6.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non-Departmental Other Expenses: Impairment of debt and bad debt write- offs 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 Total Operating 5.000 35 .000 35 .000 35 .000 35 .000 Consultation 17. Inland Revenue has consulted with the Treasury and the New Zealand Customs Service (Customs) on this report. They agree with the recommendations. 18. Customs advise that a change in the underpayment UOMI rate will have some small operational and financial impacts. Customs’ compensatory interest rate is aligned with the UOMI underpayment rate, and an increase in the underpayment rate will correspondingly result in an increase to the compensatory interest rate. 19. Since the rate change to 7.96% on 30 August 2022, Customs have collected $116,516.44 in compensatory interest. 2 If the compensatory interest rate had been 10.39%, they estimate they would have collected $152,086.16 instead over that period, an increase of $35,569.72. Customs also estimate that, over the next 12 2 As the 9.21% rate only came into effect on 17 January 2023, Customs provided data from the rate change prior to that. In Confidence IR2023/ 003: Use of money interest rates review Page 4 of 6 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] months, they would collect $375,077.35 in compensatory interest if the rate were set at 10.39%. 3 20. Customs note that in the last quarter there were more transactions with compensatory interest than expected and some were of high value. Next steps 21. Officials have advised PCO that a draft Order in Council changing the rates may need to be prepared depending on your decision. 22. Attached is a paper to the Cabinet Legislation Committee, recommending that it approve the Order in Council and authorise their submission to Cabinet and the Executive Council. If you decide to increase the UOMI rates, the paper should be referred to Cabinet Office by 10am, Thursday 16 February 2023. This would enable the Cabinet Legislation Committee to consider the paper on 23 February 2023. 3 Note that this projected figure excludes compensatory interest that may be collected as a result of Customs’ investigation and trade audit activities. In Confidence IR2023/ 003: Use of money interest rates review Page 5 of 6 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Recommended action I recommend that you: Recommendations Minister of Finance Minster of Revenue a) agree to increase the UOMI underpayment rate to 10.39% (from 9.21%) and the UOMI overpayment rate to 3.53% (from 2.31%), effective from 9 May 2023. Agreed Not agreed Agreed Not agreed b) note the following changes as a result of the decision in recommendation (a) above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 6.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 Total Operating (6.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) Noted Noted c) approve the following forecast change in appropriations for Non-Departmental Other Expense as a result of the decision in recommendation (a) above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non- Departmental Other Expenses: Impairment of debt and bad debt write-offs 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 Total Operating 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 Approved Not approved Approved Not approved d) note that the fiscal impacts will be treated as a forecast change, and so will have no impact on allowances. Noted Noted e) agree that the proposed change to the Impairment of Debt and Debt Write-offs appropriation for 2022/23 above be included in the 2022/23 Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase(s) be met from Imprest Supply. Agreed Not agreed Agreed Not agreed 1 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee TAXATION (USE OF MONEY INTEREST RATES) AMENDMENT REGULATIONS 2023 Proposal 1 This paper seeks the Cabinet Legislation Committee’s agreement to submit an Order in Council amending the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Regulations 1998 to the Executive Council. 2 It is proposed to amend the regulation so the underpayment use of money interest (UOMI) rate is set at 10.39%, while the overpayment UOMI rate is set at 3.53%. Policy 3 The UOMI rates play an important role in the tax compliance rules. By moving in line with underlying market rates, the UOMI rates provide taxpayers with the incentive to pay the right amount of tax at the right time. The rates apply to all revenue and duties. 4 The Tax Administration Act 1994 provides for the UOMI underpayment and overpayment interest rates to be set by Order in Council. Once the rates are set, they remain the prescribed UOMI rates unless subsequently changed by Order in Council. 5 The methodology for calculating the rates is set out in the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Regulations 1997 (the Regulations). The Regulations provide that the interest rate for underpaid tax should be set at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) floating first mortgage new customer housing rate plus 250 basis points. The floating first mortgage new customer housing rate reflects the variable interest rate offered by surveyed institutions to new borrowers for residential property, weighted by each surveyed institution’s total lending outstanding for housing purposes. 6 The Regulations provide that the interest rate for overpaid tax is set at the latest RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate less 100 basis points, or, if this would produce a negative figure, at 0%. The RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate is the monthly average of the daily standard rates. 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:12:37 Doc 2 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 7 The current underpayment and overpayment rates are 9.21% and 2.31% respectively. The UOMI rates were last changed by Order in Council with effect from 17 January 2023 and were based on the interest rates for August 2022. 8 The RBNZ interest rates for December 2022 indicate that the 90-day bank bill rate has changed by 122 basis points since the rates were last adjusted. I consider that an adjustment of the UOMI rates is necessary to avoid a long- term misalignment. I therefore recommend the overpayment rate be increased to 3.53%. 9 The floating first mortgage new customer housing rate has also changed by 118 basis points since the rates were last adjusted. Therefore, I also recommend that the underpayment rate be increased to 10.39%. Timing 10 I propose to submit the Order in Council giving effect to the change in the UOMI underpayment rate to Cabinet for approval and submission to the Executive Council at its meeting on 23 February 2023. In order to minimise compliance costs, it is proposed that the new rate comes into force on 9 May 2023, the day after the due date for the third standard instalment of provisional tax. Compliance 11 The regulations comply with the principles, Acts, guidelines, and requirements set out below as follows: 11.1 the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi Not applicable 11.2 the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 Not applicable 11.3 the Human Rights Act 1993 Not applicable 11.4 the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 1993 Not applicable 11.5 relevant international standards and obligations Not applicable 11.6 the Legislation Guidelines (2018 edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee Complies Regulations Review Committee 12 There are no anticipated grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Order in Council to the attention of the House under Standing Order 319. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel 13 The Parliamentary Counsel Office has certified that the attached Order in Council is in order for submission to Cabinet. 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:12:37 3 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Impact Analysis 14 A regulatory impact assessment is not required as the proposal is of a minor and routine nature and does not substantially alter existing arrangements. Financial Implications 15 The proposal to increase the UOMI rates, with the effective date of 9 May 2023, is estimated to result in net positive revenue of approximately $13 million over the forecast period. This number comprises the impact of the changes on tax revenue and on impairment expenditure. 16 The forecast net tax revenue impact of the increased revenue from the underpayment adjustment and the increased cost of the overpayment adjustment is shown in the table below. $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 6.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 Total Operating (6.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) 17 However, as a large part of underpayment debt is typically written off, there is a larger cost to revenue than is factored above. To represent estimated write- offs, underpayments are impaired in the Crown accounts. The impairment rate of 67.63% is based on debt repayment rates for the year ending 30 June 2022. Forecast impairment expenditure is presented in the table below: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non-Departmental Other Expenses: Impairment of debt and bad debt write-offs 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 Total Operating 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:12:37 4 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Publicity 18 Inland Revenue will publish an item about these changes in the next available issue of its Tax Information Bulletin. Proactive Release 19 I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers in whole within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Consultation 20 The Treasury and the New Zealand Customs Service have been consulted in the preparation of this paper and agree with its recommendations. Recommendations I recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1 agree that the UOMI underpayment rate increase from 9.21% to 10.39%; 2 agree that the UOMI overpayment rate increase from 2.31% to 3.53%; 3 agree that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 give effect to the rates referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 above; 4 agree that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 come into force on 9 May 2023; 5 note the following changes as a result of the decision in recommendations 1 and 2 above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 6.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 Total Operating (6.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:12:37 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 6 approve the forecast change in appropriations for Non-Departmental Other Expenses set out in recommendation 5, as a result of the decision in recommendations 1 and 2, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non-Departmental Other Expenses: Impairment of debt and bad debt write-offs 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 Total Operating 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 7 agree that the proposed change to the Impairment of Debt and Debt Write-offs appropriation for 2022/23 above be included in the 2022/23 Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase(s) be met from Imprest Supply; 8 authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023. Authorised for lodgement Hon David Parker Minister of Revenue 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:12:37 I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-23-MIN-0014 Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 PortfolioRevenue On 9 March 2023, the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1agreed that the use of money interest underpayment rate increase from 9.21% to 10.39%; 2agreed that the use of money interest overpayment rate increase from 2.31% to 3.53%; 3noted that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 (the Regulations) give effect to the rates referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 above; 4noted the following changes as a result of the decision in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/232023/242024/252025/262026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 6.00038.00038.00038.00038.000 Total Operating(6.000)(38.000)(38.000)(38.000)(38.000) 1 I N C O N F I D E N C E 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:16:34 Doc 3 I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-23-MIN-0014 5approved the forecast change in appropriations for Non-Departmental Other Expenses set out in paragraph 5, as a result of the decision in paragraphs 1 and 2, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/232023/242024/252025/262026/27 & outyears Non-Departmental Other Expenses: Impairment of debt and bad debt write-offs 5.00035.00035.00035.00035.000 Total Operating5.00035.00035.00035.00035.000 6agreed that the proposed change to the Impairment of Debt and Debt Write-offs appropriation for 2022/23 above be included in the 2022/23 Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase be met from Imprest Supply; 7authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 \[PCO 25277/3.0\]; 8noted that the Regulations come into force on 9 May 2023. Rebecca Davies Committee Secretary Present:Officials present from: Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Hon Andrew Little Hon David Parker Hon Kieran McAnulty Hon Dr Duncan Webb Hon Willow-Jean Prime Tangi Utikere, MP Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG 2 I N C O N F I D E N C E 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:16:34