1 Ref: 23OIA2395 N OE XR N OE XR N OE XR \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 20 July 2023 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 12 June 2023. Y ou requested: 1) Why does the Inland Revenue department deliberately lie, mislead kiwis by informing and notifying sole parents that their child support payments have been paid direct to Work & Income? 2) Is it acceptable that kiwis believe their child support entitlements is has was paid direct to MSD when in fact it actually hasn’t and instead it has been retained by the crown in full. Do you accept this deliberately misleads NZers? 3) Do you intend to update the MYIR system to reflect updated accurate info all the time so kiwis are not misled? 4) Does the IRD know or have any knowledge of how many customers, IRD staff engaged with since April 1 2022 re child support and their entitlements having been paid direct to MSD. 5) Can you please provide me with a copy of all data and any supporting documents, notes, meta data related to child support payments in general. On 21 June 2023, you amended question 5 of your OIA request to: ( ... ) Please provide all data related to: 6) Collection of child support payments from one parent to IRD. (total amount paid by one parent and collected by the crown to support kids.. all info for the last 5-6 financial years since labour have been in government). 7) The total distribution/payout of those funds collected being paid direct to the child via their primary parent/caregiver/guardian. a) So basically how much of child support funds actually went to support the development or early childhood for which the payment was collected and paid for in the first place? 8) Policy & decision making records, dates and file notes including internal communications, minutes, emails to or from executive management, commissioner, minister/government related to child support. 9) Records of complaints received, investigated, resolved in the last 5-6 years related to child support. 10) I want to know how many New Zealand citizens reached out and enquired about their child support and who were deliberately misled and told to contact MSD because it was paid to MSD. a) I want to know if IRD accept that they wasted kiwis time and cause significant distress and frustration by referring individuals to MSD. 2 Ref: 23OIA2395 N OE XR N OE XR N OE XR \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Provide all information related to this. If you cannot I suggest you do the hard mahi and investigate then get back to me with an answer. b) How many people called to discuss child support every day, week, month and year? Please answer each. c) Then tell me how frequently IRD refer these individuals to MSD — keeping in mind IRD have notified the customer that their child support payment was paid directly to MSD. 11) How much child support money is transfer moved between MSD & IRD accounts on the daily, weekly, monthly and per annum? 12) Also be sure to include all decision making process data/information notes especially related to child support payment collections and disbursements I want to see all the notes and advice given from senior executives including ministers or the government so I can determine or understand whether or not the laws were applied correctly. I want everything related to child support. Questions 1, 2, and 10a Questions which require an agency to form an opinion or provide an explanation are not considered a request for official information, and are therefore not subject to the provisions of the OIA. All government departments are part of the Crown. Money is not transferred from Inland Revenue’s bank account to the Ministry of Social Development’s (MSD) account. Question 3 Inland Revenue has noted your comments and will amend the wording in myIR. Inland Revenue is continuously working to improve its services to its customers. For receiving carers, myIR shows up-to-date information about their child support entitlement and any payments that have been made to them. For receiving carers who are beneficiaries, myIR sets out their entitlement, the amount that has been retained by the Crown to offset their benefit, and the amount of child support in excess of their benefit that has been paid to them. For liable parents, myIR does not show a breakdown of payment distribution. This is because to do so would breach the receiving carer’s privacy. Question 4 Inland Revenue is unable to provide this information as we do not record customer contacts to the level of detail requested. This part of your request is therefore refused under section 18(g) of the OIA, as the information requested is not held by Inland Revenue and I do not believe that the information is held by or more closely connected with the functions of another agency. However, Inland Revenue can advise that, from 1 April 2022 to 31 May 2023, it received 79,751 web messages about child support and answered 158,957 calls about child support. Questions 6 and 7 The following table shows child support payments collected from liable parents, the amounts retained by the Crown, and the amounts paid to receiving carers f or the last six financial years. The table shows child support payments to all carers (not just payments where the carer may be receiving a benefit). 4 Ref: 23OIA2395 N OE XR N OE XR N OE XR \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Question 9 The number of complaints received about child support from 1 January 2018 to 6 July 2023 is 5,405. The number of complaints includes calls that were escalated when customers have called the contact centre, and formal complaints managed by Inland Revenue’s Complaints Management Service. Complaints about child support can include many topics, such as child support liability, child support deductions, child support payments not received, collection processes, assessments, objections, applications for administrative reviews (a departure from the formula assessment), changes in care circumstances, debt, and refunds offset to arrears. The details of complaints received, investigated and resolved cannot be made available without substantial manual collation and research. In addition, records of child support complaints contain sensitive personal details that are considered sensitive revenue information as they are reasonably capable of being used to indirectly identify taxpayers. Sensitive revenue information can only be released in certain circumstances, as set out in section 18D to 18J and schedule 7 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). In this case, there are no grounds that permit me to release this information to you. Therefore, this part of your request is refused under section 18(c)(i) of the OIA as releasing this information would be contrary to section 18 of the TAA, and under section 18(f) of the OIA, as the information cannot be made available without substantial collation and research. Question 10 Inland Revenue deals with customers in good faith and provides as much information as possible to assist people on a case-by -case basis. The help it gives is based on the information the customer provides and the issue being discussed. This part of your request is therefore refused under section 18(g) of the OIA, as the information is not held by Inland Revenue, and I do not believe that the information is held by or more closely connected with the functions of another agency. Question 10b There has been a substantial downward trend on the number of phone calls received regarding child support matters over the past 6 years. Changes to Inland Revenue’s c hild support system were introduced in 2021 as part of Inland Revenue’s Business Transformation. These changes have provided more efficient digital and other services for customers which have had a positive effect on how often customers need to communicate with Inland Revenue over the phone. I am releasing, attached as Appendix A, the number of calls that customers made to Inland Revenue’s c hild support phone numbers per month from October 2017 to June 2023. The daily number of calls cannot be made available without substantial manual collation. Therefore, this part of your request is refused under section 18(f) of the OIA, as the information cannot be made available without substantial collation. Question 10c Inland Revenue regularly suggests that customers contact MSD. This can be for a variety of reasons. Inland Revenue is unable to determine how many times it has referred customers to MSD, as it do es not record customer contacts to the level of detail requested. Therefore, this part of your request is refused under section 18(g) of the OIA, as the information requested is not held by Inland Revenue and I do not believe that the information is held by or more closely connected with the functions of another agency. 5 Ref: 23OIA2395 N OE XR N OE XR N OE XR \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Question 11 All government departments are part of the Crown. Money is not transferred from Inland Revenue’s bank account to MSD’s account. Therefore, this part of your request is refused under section 18(g) of the OIA, as the information requested is not held by Inland Revenue and I do not believe that the information is held by or more closely connected with the functions of another agency. Rights of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. Publishing of OIA response Pleas e note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider that this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details, and any information that would identify you, will be removed before it is published. Thank you for your request. Yours sincerely Sue G illies Customer Segment Leader, Families Attachment: Appendix A