Ref: 23 OIA1653 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 30 January 2023 Tēnā koe Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 12 December 2022. You requested: Official information under the Official Information Act 1982 relating to the Motion Sickness campaign discussed here: https://motionsickness.co.nz/case-study/ird 1) How much was spent by IRD on the Motion Sickness campaign referred to above? 2) When did work on this campaign begin and when was it in market? 3) Please provide any briefing documents that IRD supplied Motion Sickness for the campaign. 4) What were the goals and/or KPIs for the campaign? Were they achieved? 5) Motion Sickness say on their website “Inland Revenue NZ had an identity problem, people saw them as only as tax agents...” – was this a concern for IRD and a driver for the campaign? Question 1: How much was spent on the Motion Sickness campaign The cost of the Wo rking for Families tax credits (WFF) awareness campaign was a total of $126,400. The cost of working with the advertising agency was $110,000. This included an additional $10,000 for further outdoor and mainstream radio advertising, to ensure we were reaching Māori and Pasifika families, and areas with low-medium income households. The remaining $16,400 was spent advertising on Radio Samoa and the Pacific Media Network. Question 2: When work on the campaign began and ended ( was in the market) The campaign started on 21 March 2022 and finished on 29 May 2022. Question 3: Briefing documents supplied for the campaign The campaign brief Inl a nd Revenue supplied to the advertising agency is released to you and is attached. Some personal details are withheld under section 9(2)(a) of the OIA, to protect the privacy of natural persons. Question 4: The goals for the campaign and if they were achieved The three key objectives and results of the campaign are below. All t he objectives were achieved. Ref: 23 OIA1653 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Objective 1: Raise awareness of WFF payments with customers who may be eligible but do not know they could qualify Results: • Social media views reached 670,587, resulting in 27,599 clicks to our website • YouTube views reached 223,240, with 29% watching the video until the end • Google adverts drove 59,862 clicks to our website • Plus radio, Trade Me, out-of-home (posters in 35 supermarket and recreational locations). Objective 2: Raise awareness of WFF with support and advocacy organisations and other government agencies Results: The following organisations shared our messages with their communities: o First Class Accounts Auckland West o De lta Accounting & Business Consultancy Services o 531 Pacific Island Radio o The NZ Federation of Women’s Institutes o Volunteer Nelson o Te Puni Kōkiri o Te Puni Kōkiri – Tāmaki Makaurau o Birthright Canterbury o Citizens Advice Bureau Whakatane o Citizens Advice Bureau Wellington o Tamaki Health o Oranga Tamariki o Ministry of Pacific Peoples o Pacific Business Trust o Pacific Leadership Forum o Pacific Business Hub o Radio Samoa o Pacific Media Network o Consumer Protection NZ o The Port Hills Foundation o Levin Budget Service o Rotorua Budget Advisory Service Objective 3: A baseline number of targeted families apply for and receive WFF Results: • There was a 6.5% increase in WFF applications compared to the same period in 2021 • 14,185 applications were received during the campaign reporting period. Of these, 6,666 applications were received by customers who were directly targeted by the campaign • Of the 6,666 campaigned customers who applied for WFF , 5,338 applications were accepted. Question 5: If the statement “Inland Revenue had an identity problem, people saw them as only as tax agents” was a concern and driver for the campaign? The statement was not s upplied by Inland Revenue. Many people know that Inland Revenue deals with core tax, but we also wanted New Zealanders to know that we administer social support products. F or this campaign, we wanted customers to be aware of WFF payments, and that they can apply for the payments via Inland Revenue. Ref: 23 OIA1653 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Rights of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider that this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details, or any information that would identify you, will be removed before it is published. Thank you for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Ngā mihi Pip K night Domain Lead, Marketing and Communications – Marketing \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Creative brief IR project name: Working for Families awareness campaign Date: 22.11.2021 Prepared by (and Point of contact): Kendl – kendl@ird.govt.nz Job description: Step one: Develop two creative concepts for the Working for Families awareness campaign. Step two: If one of the creative concepts is chosen, progress to develop and implement an advertising and engagement campaign. The campaign needs to build awareness of Working for Families payments with potential customers and their peers/influencers. Deliverables: - Step one – Develop two concept ideas - Step two – On the basis one of the concept ideas is chosen, progress to develop full campaign/advertising approach. This would include: o Design refinement and production rollout o Media strategy o Media planning and buying o Account/project management o Video concept + production o Campaign reporting – during and post campaign We may use in-house research capability to test the concept ideas with our Working for Families audience. Background Working for Families Tax Credits are supporting many New Zealand families. Existing customers are aware of eligibility criteria and what they need to do to ensure they are getting the correct support. However, we know there are also many customers who may be eligible for Working for Families but aren’t aware, because they: • have never qualified before • have had little experience (or negative experience) dealing with Inland Revenue or other government agencies • have been affected by COVID-19 and had a recent reduction in pay/change in employment • don’t have access to support and advocacy services that would link them up with social support • belong to a minority group who believe social support is not available to them – we have seen evidence of this within the Pacifica community regarding the resurgence support payment. We need to reach these groups with targeted advertising so we can raise their awareness and understanding of Working for Families. Inland Revenue is striving to be responsive to meet the changing and increasing expectations of New Zealanders. Inland Revenue is also striving to make it easier for customers to access what they’re entitled to. This campaign contributes to achieving that goal. We need to ensure Working for Families messaging and creative is approachable and empathetic. Reassurance is key for this customer group, who may lack trust in Inland Revenue and are likely to be feeling vulnerable. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] In addition to reaching end customers, we also want to target employers of potentially eligible employees with support material, as well as support and advocacy organisations. We know that customers are more likely to trust their peers and support networks, so it is important that we approach this effort in a united way. We will use IR customer data as well as channel-specific targeting. Objectives and desired outcomes: • Raise awareness of Working for Families payments with customers who may be eligible but do not know they qualify. o We will have a particular focus on key ethnic groups such as Māori, Pacific peoples and Asian communities and any others we identify from our data/research lack understanding of our services • Raise awareness and understanding with support networks, including employers and advocacy and support organisations (i.e. CAB, parenting groups) • Baseline number of targeted families applying for Working for Families (running custom audience data over registration data) • Baseline number of targeted families receiving (end up being entitled to) Working for Families (running custom audience data over registration data). • Baseline number of targeted families visit ing the Working for Families eligibility page on our website • Baseline number of targeted families visiting the Working for Families eligibility calculator on our website We will baseline these results for subsequent year’s campaigns. Target audience People who may be eligible for one or more of the Working for Families tax credits. We will use IR customer data to target those potentially eligible. We can also overlay this with channel- specific targeting if we believe it will be advantageous. We need to focus on key ethnic groups, such as Māori, Pacific peoples and Asian communities, where our data/research tells us they have low awareness/low trust in our services. We’d also like to target employers (of those customers who may qualify), along with support and advocacy organisations who we know play an important role in building trust and linking families to social support at IR. In terms of data profiling for end customers, we will look at: • Seg 1 - For Families tax credit customers, families who: o have a child or children o earn between $0-$120,050 before tax • Seg 2 - For Minimum family tax credit customers, families who: o have a child or children o earn between $0 and $35,873 before tax • Seg 3 - For In-work tax credit customers, families who: o have a child or children o earn between $0-$120,050 before tax o are normally in paid work • Seg 4 - For Best Start customers, families who: 3 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] o have a child under one o have a child under 3 and earn under $93,858 o are at the end of their six- month paid parental leave period (Best Start only kicks in once paid parental leave ends) • Seg 5 - We could also look at those who have a COVID-19 related dip in income. We can flag (via BIC codes) those customers employed in tourism, travel agencies, hospitality, forestry and retail – industries we know have been hit hard by COVID and are likely to have people who’ve experienced a dip in income . Other considerations for data inclusion: o having a dependent child or children in their care under the age of 18 or between 18 and 19 and still at school or in tertiary study o being the principal caregiver of the child/children o being aged 16 or older o meeting residency requirements We’ll exclude those who are (or have children) on income-tested benefits, student allowance, parent’s allowance or children’s pension under the Veteran’s Support Act 2014. We’ll also exclude from the population those who are already receiving Working for Families or those who have previously applied. The most important message Single minded proposition You may be eligible to receive Working for Families payments – check to see if you qualify. Key messages: (provide more detail for direct marketing/segments etc): • You may be eligible to receive Working for Families payments o Seg 1 - Are you earning while raising a family? You may qualify to receive Family tax credit payments o Seg 2 - Are you earning $31,096 or less a year? You may qualify to receive Minimum family tax credit payments o Seg 3 - Are you working while raising a family? You may qualify to receive in-work tax credit payments o Seg 4 - Do you have a newborn baby? You may qualify to receive Best Start payments o Seg 5 - Have you experienced a dip in income due to COVID-19? Check to see if you qualify for Working for Families payments. All segments: • Check out our eligibility calculator to see if you qualify • You’ll need your family details and income information handy • Visit ird.govt.nz/working-for -families/eligibility Tone or potential direction: Approachable Clear Empathetic Reassuring Considerations: • If you’d like to understand more about Working for Families and how it works, visit https://www.ird.govt.nz/working-for -families/