1 Topic 5 – Flexible Working PEOPLE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES Working from Home Guidelines These guidelines provide information and expectations in relation to working away from an IR office (particularly from home) and outline the process for establishing working from home arrangements. Note: These guidelines apply to working from home in the context of normal business operations. In the event of any crisis or emergency or forced building closure etc. the response and what that might mean in relation to viable work locations and arrangements will be determined as part of specific business continuity planning for the event. IR’s Adverse Event Guidelines provide information on attendance and leave when an adverse event impacts the ability to attend the office (immediate or short-term response). It’s important that our people feel connected, included, and have a sense of belonging no matter where they work. Any arrangements need to balance individual, team, and business needs. Flexible location (as described in our policy) is only one type of the broader options that fall under the banner of flexible working. It relates to the options that might be available in relation to where work is performed. As far as ‘work location’ Inland Revenue is primarily an office-based organisation, with most people working most of the time in an IR office. Working all your working hours from home is unlikely to meet IR business needs. This is consistent with government expectations and we know that being in the office and connecting face-to-face has lots of benefits to the way we work and learn, as well as supporting important social interaction. An office presence is part of how we best service the needs of our internal and external customers/stakeholders and deliver on business priorities. Working from home doesn’t automatically change your existing arrangements regarding your working window and hours of work. Requests for flexibility in work location, just like other types of flexibility will be considered on a case by case basis and can be formal and informal, as covered in the policy, and the formal and informal guidelines. If having reviewed the relevant policy and guidelines you have any questions around working from home, you should talk with your leader. You can also seek advice from your union both generally and in relation to a particular request etc. Leaders can seek advice from People & Workplace Services: Not in scope 6 \] Your workstation: In your home it’s expected that your work area is set up to ensure you can work safely. Your workstation should be arranged so that it is comfortable and ergonomically sound, and the space should be kept clear and free from obstacles or tripping hazards. You need to assess your intended workspace and confirm whether it is acceptable (the Working from Home Checklist supports this and includes workstation set up guidance). A virtual assessment may be a requirement if you’re working predominately at home. If you move around your home during your workday you must ensure each workspace is hazard free and ergonomically sound. If you have any concerns around your home workstation, please discuss them with your leader. Work/non-work injury: If you have an accident whilst working at home, this may be considered a work-related incident, however this depends on the circumstances of the incident and activity being undertaken (work vs non work activities). For any incidents, you should seek medical treatment if required and report the incident. Your wellbeing: You need to ensure you are managing your workload and fatigue/ taking appropriate breaks/ keeping connected / staying safe and are generally taking care of yourself. Keeping in touch with your leader can help ensure they are aware of any wellbeing concerns and if the arrangement isn’t working for you for any reason. You can check out our Hauora Hub for general wellbeing information and EAP contact information etc. Online H&S reporting: The H&S reporting requirements remain the same from home. You must report any incidents/accidents or discomfort using the Online H&S Reporting tool. Required Working from Home Checklist: (Quick link on the Flexible Working hub: Working from Home page). Everyone working from home in any regular way (formally or informally) must complete the checklist as part of the approval process. If working from home continues to be your practice, this checklist will need to be revisited at least annually and/or to reflect any change in ‘home’ location/s etc. If your working environment is not safe, or you don’t have the required equipment then this would prohibit your ability to utilise this flexible working option. INFORMATION SECURITY AND PRIVACY It’s important you are always vigilant about the personal or customer information you are working with and the risks associated with that information. We are all required to keep IR information confidential (Section 18, Tax Administration Act). That is a constant, irrespective of where you are working. When working away from the office the risk of inadvertently disclosing personal and customer information to others needs to be carefully managed. This includes ensuring screens aren’t visible/ household members don’t have access to your device/ conversations involving sensitive information can’t be overheard/ and IR material is appropriately stored. The normal expectations around business tools, clear desk practices, passwords etc. and conduct expectations continue to apply and any data or privacy breaches must be reported through normal channels. You need to take care when transporting documents between office and home, ensuring the documents are secured in a closed bag and that you dispose of IR documents and information appropriately. 7 \[\] ABLE TO MEANINGFULLY PERFORM WORK In any working from home arrangements ‘working’ is the key purpose of the arrangement. As such the ability for you to meaningfully perform work, in a focused way, free of distraction is a key consideration. It’s important both for work quality and productivity and your own health, safety, and wellbeing that you are not distracted or taking on too much and are taking the breaks and time for rest and relaxation you need. For that reason, the most appropriate option in these ‘juggling’ scenarios needs to be carefully considered and may involve a mixed approach to try to get the balance right. Caring for dependants It’s important not to treat working from home as a substitute for childcare or dependant care. When working from home you will structure any personal/childcare arrangements so you can complete your work as you would normally. Trying to manage your normal IR duties and the important but distinctively separate role of caring for children or dependants at the same time, can compromise both tasks. Leaders need to consider on a case by case basis the degree to which meaningful work is possible. It’s recognised that from time to time there may be some overlaps, particularly in relation to school holidays or before or after school care. The level of care and attention required by the dependant (e.g. child’s age) and the duration of the overlap period may influence the decision. It may be that other flexibility can make these arrangements more feasible. For school holidays for example, a variation in start and finish times so some work can be done before children are awake or after they are in bed/ mix of leave and working from home/ mix of childcare or school holiday programmes and working from home around the edges/ using flexi- credits for some shorter days etc. Other flexible options may better support caring for dependants, for example: part-time hours or using salary trade to purchase additional annual leave to support having some more leave to help cover the school holidays etc. Dependant sick leave: It may make sense to work from home when a dependant is unwell depending on the nature of illness/injury and the extent to which you are actively required to take on the caring role. You may feel you can work your usual day/hours or only part of them. You may be able to agree with your leader regarding a mix of sick leave and working time, based on how much time you were able to work uninterrupted. There is a specific entitlement to sick leave (which includes care for a dependant) and if active care is required this would be the most appropriate option. While you are sick or injured Generally, if you are unwell then you should take sick leave as intended and focus on your rest and recovery. Irrespective of working from home or not you have the same requirement to notify your leader as soon as possible. In some cases, you may feel well enough to work, but want to avoid going into the office to prevent passing on your illness (e.g. a light cold) or disrupting others (noisy cough etc). Likewise, you may have an injury that you feel able to work with, but it makes travelling and getting to the office more challenging so working from home might be more appropriate. 8 \[\] You may be able to agree with your leader to work from home in these types of situations, or the ability to reflect a mix of sick leave and working time, based on how much time you were actually able to work. An arrangement to work from home if you are recovering from an operation, or illness or injury (with medical certificate clearance that allows you to work from home) may be agreed on a case by case basis, or form part of a return to work plan. You should not be working where a medical certificate indicates you are unable to work. While you are on holiday/ annual leave/ not working Technology and working from home arrangements mean our work can come with us, and we can access it outside of a traditional working window. That doesn’t mean you should. If you’re on annual leave you should not be working. Make sure you take the time for rest and relaxation. SECURITY AND ACCESS TO YOUR HOME You must not meet with customers or external business contacts or have them visit you in your home. IR has robust security arrangements and fit for purpose facilities in the office for meeting with customers, non-IR business contacts and your colleagues. On rare occasions, when you are working from home there may be the need for IR/ your leader/ union representatives etc. to visit you. They would only come into your home with your permission. COSTS AND EXPENSES As noted in the Flexible Working Policy, there will be no additional compensation or allowance for expenses arising from a request to work from home, as part of flexible working. If you elect to work from home and access the wider benefits that flexible working offers, you won’t be reimbursed for general household expenses. Any increases in general household costs are potentially counterbalanced by related expenditure decreases, e.g. parking, travel. Leaders may continue to approve reimbursement for legitimate claims of actual and reasonable business expenses that arise in the course of your work, e.g. the cost of specific toll calls made to customers, on the production of receipts. Your leader needs to consider the tax status of any claim, and can seek advice from Finance or refer to the Tax Manual. Any travel between the home and office is in your own time and your own cost. Exceptions to this can be considered on a case by case basis (for example if it’s pre-agreed that you are working from home and are then requested by IR to come into the office at short notice, part way through your working day, then payment of the travel time (T1) would likely be appropriate). 9 \[\] EQUIPMENT AND TOOLS IR generally only provides one full set of IT/office equipment. As we are primarily office based then usually that equipment needs to be in the office. The equipment and tools required and whether they are provisioned by IR or personally should be discussed with your leader and considered as part of any request to work from home. Suitable and reliable network connectivity (with necessary bandwidth for work efficiency) is a prerequisite for working from home and is at your own cost. It may be achieved via home Wi- Fi or hotspotting from a personal mobile phone. IR data SIMS are not intended to support working from home as they are for brief and occasional use only, where no Wi-Fi networks are available. Some unique set up requirements e.g. a sit/stand desk can only be provided for in the office and may prevent you from working from home. Employees may make requests for reasonable accommodation(s) to assist in managing disabilities in line with the Guidelines. The Use of Business Tools policy and guidelines continue to apply when working from home. You must take reasonable steps to keep IR’s technology, equipment and information safe and in working order. Any IR owned equipment (laptop etc.) that you are using to support working from home is IR property and normal process should be followed if this equipment is lost, stolen or damaged. It is insured by IR and does not need to be covered in your personal/home insurance. If unforeseen circumstances (e.g. power outage, Wi-Fi interruption, equipment failure) mean you can’t perform your IR duties from home, you may need to work from the office (if not also affected) for the period of the disruption. CONDUCT/ MONITORING When working at home you remain bound by our Code of Conduct – Tikanga Whanonga and our policies and guidelines. The “Making the Right Decision Checklist” in the Code is a great tool to make sure you are doing the right thing and acting with integrity no matter where you are working. When working from home your system access and use (e.g. START) remains as per the Code, and your system activity remains monitored at all times. Accurate time reporting and ensuring you work the hours you are scheduled and paid to work each day is essential if you are working from home.