Page 1 of 8 Ref: 23 OIA1990 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 1 May 2023 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 28 April 2023. You requested the following: 1. Any IRD internal communications to its staff that relate the definition of a “seasonally affected business” as defined in the application process for Covid Support Payments and or Covid Resurgence Payments. Including any references to terms and conditions. 2. Any IRD internal communications to its staff that relate to results, targets, values, numbers, quantity, and expected outcomes of any audits conducted of businesses defined as self-employed or sole trader. 3. Please provide the number of businesses that made applications as “seasonally affected business” for Covid Support Payments and or Covid Resurgence Payments. 4. Please provide by category and or type the businesses that made applications as “seasonally affected business” for Covid Support Payments and or Covid Resurgence Payments. 5. Please provide the number of self-employed and or sole trading businesses that have been audited by IRD for compliance to the terms and conditions of the Covid Support Payments and Covid Resurgence Payments. 6. Please provide the number of self-employed and or sole trading businesses that have been audited by IRD for compliance to the terms and conditions of the Covid Support Payments and Covid Resurgence Payments and have been found in breach of the terms and conditions of the Covid payments. Question 1 The information you have requested is attached in Appendix A. Internal communications we have provided include e-learning pages, knowledge pages and Microsoft Teams group posts. Some information relating to the provision of legal advice is withheld under section 9(2)(h) of the OIA, to maintain legal professional privilege. Some information is also withheld under section 9(2)(g)(i) of the OIA, to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinions. No public interest in releasing the withheld information has been identified that would be sufficient to outweigh the reasons for withholding. Question 2 The COVID-19 Post-Payment Verification (PPV) work programme (similar to an audit work programme) did not set any specific results, targets, values, numbers or expected outcomes. It focused on customers who were at a higher risk of not being entitled to the COVID-19 funds they received. Therefore, your request for any internal communications to staff that relate to results, targets, values, numbers, quantity, and expected outcomes of any audits conducted of businesses defined as self-employed or sole trader is refused under section 18(e), the information does not exist. Question 3 When making an application for the COVID-19 Support Payment (CSP), applicants could select one of two specified comparator periods – if they chose a period outside of those specified periods, this is an indicator that they may be a seasonal business. We have used this indicator www.ird.govt.nz Page 2 of 8 Ref: 23 OIA1990 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] to identify a business as being seasonally affected. However, it is possible that some businesses incorrectly used a different comparator period and should have used the specified periods as their income was not seasonal. Based on this indicator, a total of 34,419 seasonally affected businesses made applications for one or more CSP. The total number of businesses that made a COVID-19 Resurgence Support Payment (RSP) application as a seasonally affected business is unavailable as the information is not held by Inland Revenue, and we do not believe it is held by another agency. Your request for this information is therefore refused under section 18(g) of the OIA. Question 4 The information you have requested is outlined in Appendix B. Where the total numbers of businesses are less than 10, the information is considered to be sensitive revenue information. These businesses have been merged with “other services” as making the information available would be contrary to the provisions of a specified enactment, namely Inland Revenue’s confidentiality obligation in section 18 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Disclosure of this information does not fall within any of the exceptions to the confidentiality obligation listed in section 18D to 18J of the TAA. Questions 5 and 6 Part of the COVID-19 Post-Payment Verification work programme involves reviewing cases to determine whether a business was entitled to receive the CSP or RSP. Inland Revenue selected applications for a review based on their likely risk of not meeting the terms and conditions of a payment. We have used a full-time equivalent band to establish whether an applicant was self- employed or a non-individual sole-trading entity with 0 or 1 employees. Applicants were allowed to claim the business owner as an employee. As at 14 April 2023, a total of 414 PPV risk based reviews have been completed for self-employed customers or sole traders. Of this, a total of 412 businesses did not meet the Terms & Conditions for at least one payment of either CSP or RSP. Right of review If you disagree with my decisions on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decisions. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz . Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decisions. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. If you choose to have an intern al review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. Publishing of OIA response Please no te that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you for your request. Yours sincerely Sharyn Rea Customer Segment Leader, Significant Enterprises Page 4 of 8 Ref: 23 OIA1990 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] COVID-19 Post-Payment Verification guidance What is seasonal & irregular? • There is scope for applicants who earn their revenue on a “seasonal” (irregular) basis to use a week outside of this 6 week period as being the comparator week if the 6 week period does not reflect what they typically earn from their business. • A seasonal business is one which earns the majority of their income in a certain period within the year as compared to the rest of that year. For example, ski field which derives the majority (if not all) of their income during the winter. • Seasonal does not include businesses who generate regular revenue throughout the year and then have a busy period, for example over Christmas This also does not apply to businesses who have the usual peaks and troughs of business revenue. • The comparator week chosen still needs to be a “typical” week. Inland Revenue’s web- site states, in this regard: “Seasonal businesses and organisations Businesses or organisations with highly seasonal revenue must meet the revenue decline test as set out above. However, they may select a 7 day comparison period outside the six weeks prior to 17 August 2021 and which may be from a prior year, which reflects their typical revenue.” • Below is an example of how the revenue decline test can be applied in the context of seasonal businesses (i.e. businesses who derive their revenue irregularly throughout the year). Example 1 – Business earning majority of revenue in September - March An applicant applies for a RSP on 24 October 2021 choosing an affected week of 17-23 October 2021. The applicant derives their revenue irregularly throughout the year. They earn the majority of their revenue in the Spring/Summer months (September-March) than the Autumn/Winter months (April-August). The applicant has contended they should be able to use a comparator week outside of the 6 week period prior to 17 August 2021. This is because this 6 week period falls in the period of the year when they earn significantly less revenue, so it is not a good comparison for the revenue they would have earned in the affected week. The applicant has asked whether they can use the week of 17-23 October 2020 as the comparator week for the purposes of the RSP revenue decline test In this instance they are able to choose a comparator week from the same point in the seasonal cycle as the affected week (the week of 17-23 October 2020). They will then need to show their revenue in the affected week (17-23 October 2021) was 30% lower than their revenue in the comparator week (17-23 October 2020) due to the raise in alert levels.