24OIA1472 and 24OIA1473 Page 1 of 7 11 December 2023 Dear Thank you for your requests made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 23 November 2023. The information you requested is enclosed as Appendix A. 24OIA1473 – Section FE 16B(3) of the Income Tax Act 2007 Section FE 16B(3) was inserted into the Income Tax Act 2007 as part of the amendments made to section FE 16B by section 120 of the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Act 2020. Section 120 was first introduced into the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill at the second reading stage as clause 81B. The changes made by section 120 were discussed in an officials’ report (report) to the Bill at pages 143-144. The relevant information from pages 143-144 is set out below. The full report is available on Inland Revenue’s website at Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans and Remedial Matters) Bill – officials’ report to the Finance and Expenditure Committee on submissions on the Bill (October 2019) (ird.govt.nz). Issue: Non-debt liabilities – shareholder loans Submission (Deloitte) The wording “a shareholder that is a member of the group” in section FE 16B(1)(b) should read “a shareholder”. This wording is likely to be an unintentional drafting error. This is because the wording will, essentially make the provision redundant as, if the shareholder was a member of the New Zealand group, the debt would be consolidated away. Comment Section FE 16B(1)(b) excludes from non-debt liabilities, in the thin capitalisation rules, financial arrangements providing funding that are pro rata with shareholding or by a substantial shareholder. As thin capitalisation is calculated on a group basis, a financial arrangement between a company and a shareholder where both were members of the group would not increase the debt of the group as the arrangement would disappear upon consolidation. Therefore, the submitter is correct that the current wording would apply only to arrangements that would not affect the group’s debt levels. Also, officials have been made aware of situations where two members of a wholly- owned group exist where the first member is a shareholder of a New Zealand group member and the second member provides either an interest free loan or redeemable preference shares in proportion with the first members shareholding. By removing the wording discussed in the paragraph above this situation will be covered by the associated person reference in section FE 16B(1)(b)(ii) and (c)(ii) but there is no equivalent for proportional shareholdings where the total shareholding in the New Zealand group member is less than ten percent. Officials recommend changes to section FE 16B(1)(b)(i) and (c)(i) to ensure this situation is also excluded from being a non-debt liability. Recommendation That the submission be accepted, subject to officials’ comments. www.ird.govt.nz 24OIA1472 and 24OIA1473 Page 3 of 7 Appendix A – OIA requests 24OIA1472: 1. What were the policy reasons (officials report and any other IRD analysis) behind the addition of s FE16B(3) into the Income Tax Act 2007 by virtue of the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Act 2020? 2. Please provide copies of the relevant documents. 24OIA1473: 3. Please provide the reasoning for the insertion of CD 44(7)(b) into the Income Tax Act 2007, excluding the fact that it carried over from a previous New Zealand income tax act. 4. Please provide the initial reasoning of including in any earlier New Zealand income tax acts, including a provision for gifted capital gains - i.e., the relevant sections that were equivalent to CD 44(7)(b). Please provide any policy documents - officials reports, tax bulletins etc. regarding the introduction of CD 44(7)(b). 5. Please provide any relevant policy documents for including in the previous equivalent sections in previous income tax acts a provision for excluding gifted capital gains from the meaning of dividend. What was the original Act that a provision for treating gifted capital gains like in ITA 2007, CD 44(7)(b), was included? 6. What was the reasoning for including in the original act this treatment of capital gains? 7. Please provide any policy documents about this - including tax bulletins, official reports, or any other reasoning for the inclusion. 8. If the reasoning was a particular case before NZ courts, what was that case? 24OIA1472 and 24OIA1473 Page 4 of 7 Appendix B – History of section CD 44(7)(b) of the Income Tax Act 2007 Section 4(3)(b) of the Land and Income Tax Act 1954 24OIA1472 and 24OIA1473 Page 5 of 7 Section 4(5)(b) of the Income Tax Act 1976 24OIA1472 and 24OIA1473 Page 6 of 7 Section CF 3(7)(b) of the Income Tax Act 1994 Section CD 33(7)(b) of the Income Tax Act 2004 24OIA1472 and 24OIA1473 Page 7 of 7 Section CD 44(7)(b) of the Income Tax Act 2007