\[UNCLASSIFIED\] Hon Barbara Edmonds, Minister of Revenue Information Release Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2) 2023 August 2023 Availability This information release will be made available following announcement of the decision on Inland Revenue’s tax policy website at https://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2023/2023-ir-cab-leg- 23-sub-0118 Documents in this information release # Reference Type Title Date 1 IR2023/190 Policy report Use of money interest rates review (No 2) 29 June 2023 2 LEG-23-SUB-0118 Cabinet paper Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2) 2023 20 July 2023 3 LEG-23-MIN-0118 Minute Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2) 2023 20 July 2023 Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Cabinet Legislation Committee on 20 July 2023 and confirmed by Cabinet on 24 July 2023. One attachment to the Cabinet paper is not included in this information release as it is publicly available: •Order in Council – Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2 ) 2023 Information withheld Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act 1982 (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply are identified. Where information is withheld, no public interest was identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. Sections of the Act under which information was withheld: 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Accessibility Inland Revenue can provide an alternate HTML version of this material if requested. Please cite this document’s title, website address, or PDF file name when you email a request to policy.webmaster@ird.govt.nz Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). POLICY AND REGULATORY STEWARDSHIP Tax policy report: Use of money interest rates review 2023 (No.2) Date: 29 J une 2023 Priority: Medium Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2023/190 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Finance Agree to adjust the use of money interest rates as set out in the report. 13 July 2023 Associate Minister of Revenue Agree to adjust the use of money interest rates as set out in the report. Sign and refer the attached paper to the Cabinet Office for consideration at the LEG meeting on 20 July 2023. 13 July 2023 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Paul Fulton Principal Policy Advisor Elizabeth Lee Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) DOC 1 I n Confidence IR2023/ 190: Use of money interest rates review 2023 (No. 2) Page 1 of 5 29 June 2023 M inister of Finance Associate Minister of Revenue Use of money interest rates review 2023 (No. 2) Purpose 1.This report discusses the outcome of the regular review of the use of money interest (UOMI) rates. It seeks your agreement to increase the rates in line with the latest increases in market interest rates. Context and background 2.The UOMI rates, along with other rates used in the tax system, 1 are reviewed regularly to ensure that they align with market interest rates. The rates are calculated using formulae based on the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ ) survey of interest rates. 3.The UOMI rates are an important component of tax compliance rules. By changing with the underlying market rates, the UOMI rates provide taxpayers with the incentive to pay the right amount of tax at the right time. They apply to all revenue and duties. UOMI rates 4.There are two UOMI rates: 4.1 the taxpayer’s paying rate (also known as the UOMI underpayment rate), which is charged on underpayments of tax to Inland Revenue; 4.2 the Commissioner’s paying rate (also known as the UOMI overpayment rate), which is paid by the Commissioner on money paid to Inland Revenue above a taxpayer’s tax liability. 5.The underpayment rate is currently 10.39% while the overpayment rate is currently 3.53%, based on RBNZ figures for December 2022. Principles for updating the rates 6.Longstanding administrative principles in setting the rates provide that both UOMI rates should be adjusted if: 6.1 the RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate or the floating first mortgage new customer housing rate moves by 100 basis points or more from the figures used to calculate the last rate change; or 6.2 one of these indexes moves by 20 basis points or more and the UOMI rates ha ve not been adjusted in the last 12 months. 1 The other rates are the FBT interest rate on employment-related loans and the deemed rate of return on attributing interests in foreign investment funds. I n Confidence IR2023/ 190: Use of money interest rates review 2023 (No. 2) Page 2 of 5 7.When regulations are made altering the UOMI rates, the adjustment is applied from the day after the next standard provisional tax payment date – which, in this case, is 29 August 2023. 8.The formula for setting the rates is set out in the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Regulations 1997 as follows: 8.1 Section 2 of the Regulations provides that the taxpayer’s paying rate is se t a t the RBNZ floating first mortgage new customer housing rate plus 250 basis points (or 2.5%); 8.2 Section 3 of the Regulations provides that the Commissioner’s paying rate is set at the RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate less 100 basis points (or 1 %). However, if this calculation would produce a figure lower than 0%, the rate is instead set at 0%, to ensure overpayments do not accrue negative interest. 9.The floating first mortgage new customer housing rate is a proxy for a debt that a taxpayer might prioritise over their tax obligations. In the absence of a UOMI charge, a taxpayer wanting to borrow money could simply underpay their tax and use Inland Revenue like a bank rather than borrow from a bank at a commercial interest rate. A conservative margin of 250 basis points is added to the mortgage rate in calculating the underpayment UOMI rate because the Commissioner does not have information about the likelihood of any individual taxpayer paying the UOMI charged to them (i.e., the taxpayer’s creditworthiness). 10.The Regulations provide that the methodology for setting the interest rate for overpaid tax is the latest RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate less 100 basis points. The RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate is the monthly average of the daily standard rates, and approximates the return a taxpayer might expect on a low-risk investment in the New Zealand Government. Ensuring that the Commissioner pays less interest to the taxpayer on overpaid tax than the taxpayer would receive as a return from a low- risk bond aims to prevent a payment of tax to Inland Revenue being used as an investment. Results of latest RBNZ figure review 1 1.According to RBNZ figures for May 2023, the 90-day bank bill rate ha s increased by 114 basis points from its rate as at December 2022, which triggers both UOMI rates to be reset. T he UOMI underpayment rate should be increased to 10.91%, while the UOMI overpayment rate should be increased to 4.67%. 12 .The RBNZ floating first mortgage new customer rate has risen by 52 basis points since May 2023 (the last time the UOMI rates were set). Accordingly, the underpayment rate should also increase by 52 basis points, from 10.39% to 10.91%. 13 .The RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate has risen by 114 basis points since May 2023. Accordingly, the overpayment rate should also increase by 114 basis points, from 3. 53% to 4. 67 %. 14.As the 90-day bank bill rate has increased more than the RBNZ floating first mortgage new customer rate, the margin between the UOMI underpayment and overpayment rates will narrow from 6.86% to 6.24%. Fiscal impact 15.UOMI applies to both overpayments and underpayments of tax. More is charged by the Commissioner on underpayments than is paid to the taxpayer on overpayments. I n Confidence IR2023/ 190: Use of money interest rates review 2023 (No. 2) Page 3 of 5 However, the charges to underpayments are impaired in the Crown accounts to reflect that most UOMI charged is never paid, and therefore must be written-off. This means that an increase in the underpayment rate also produces an increase in impairment expenditure. The rate of impairment reflects the average repayment rate of recent debt, updated in October each year. The impairment rate for the year ended 30 June 2022 is 67.63%. 16.There is an estimated net reduction of $6 million for the 2023/24 fiscal year and $8 million per annum for 2024/25 and later years. The net reduction of $6 million for the 2023/24 fiscal year is comprised of the $7 million increase in revenue and $13 million increase in impairment expenditure. The net reduction of $8 million per annum for 2024/25 and later years are comprised of the $8 million increase in revenue and $16 million increase in impairment expenditure. 17.These are shown in the following tables: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 7.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 Total Operating (7.000) (8.000) (8.000) (8.000) $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non-Departmental Other Expenses: Impairment of debt and bad debt write- offs 13.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 Total Operating 13.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 1 8.To meet the forecasted change to the revenue as above, the Impairment of Debt and Debt Write-offs appropriation needs to be amended. While the change is proposed via the 2023/24 Supplementary estimates, in the interim, the increase in the net debt should be met from Imprest Supply. C onsultation 19.Inland Revenue has consulted with the Treasury and the New Zealand Customs Service (Customs) on this report. They agree with the recommendations. 20.Customs advise that a change in the underpayment UOMI rate will have some small operational and financial impacts. Customs’ compensatory interest rate is aligned with the UOMI underpayment rate, and an increase in the underpayment rate will correspondingly result in an increase to the compensatory interest rate. I n Confidence IR2023/ 190: Use of money interest rates review 2023 (No. 2) Page 4 of 5 Next steps 21.Attached is a paper to the Cabinet Legislation Committee that recommends the approval of the Order in Council, and authorise their submission to Cabinet and the Executive Council. If you decide to increase the UOMI rates, the paper should be referred to Cabinet Office by 10am, Thursday 13 July 2023. This would enable the Cabinet Legislation Committee to consider the paper on 20 July 2023. Recommended action I recommend that you: Recommendations Minister of Finance Associate Minister of Revenue a)agree to increase the UOMI underpayment rate to 10.91% ( from 10.39%) and the UOMI overpayment rate to 4.67 % ( from 3.53%), effective from 29 August 2023. Agreed Not agreed Agreed Not agreed b)note the following changes as a result of the decision in recommendation (a) above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 7.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 Total Operating (7.000) (8.000) (8.000) (8.000) Noted Noted c)approve the following forecast change in appropriations for Non-Departmental Other Expense as a result of the decision in recommendation (a) above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and net debt: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non- Departmental Other Expenses: Impairment of debt and bad debt write-offs 13.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 Total Operating 13.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 Approved Not approved Approved Not approved d)note that the fiscal impacts will be treated as a forecast change, and so will have no impact on allowances. Noted Noted Recommendations Minister of Finance e) agree that the proposed change to the Impairment of Debt Agreed and Debt Write-offs appropriation for 2023/24 above be included in the 2023/24 Supplementary Estimates and that, Not in the interim, the increase(s) be met from Imprest Supply. agreed f) agree that PCO draft an Order in Council to adjust the Agreed UOMI rates. Not agreed g) approve and refer the attached Cabinet paper to the N/A Cabinet Office by 10am Thursday 13 July 2023 for consideration by Cabinet Legislation Committee at its meeting on 20 July 2023. Paul Fulton Principal Policy Advisor Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance Hon Dr. Deborah Russell Associate Minister of Revenue I /2023 I /2023 IR2023/190: Use of money interest rates review 2023 (No. 2) In Confidence Associate Minister of Revenue Agreed Not agreed Agreed Not agreed Approved Not approved Page 5 of 5 1 In Confidence Offic e of the Associate Minister of Revenue Cabinet Legislation Committee TAXATION (USE OF MONEY INTEREST RATES) AMENDMENT REGULATIONS (NO 2) 2023 Proposal 1 This paper seeks the Cabinet Legislation Committee’s agreement to submit an Order in Council amending the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Regulations 1998 to the Executive Council. 2 It is proposed to amend the Regulations so the underpayment use of money interest (UOMI) rate is set at 10.91%, while the overpayment UOMI rate is set at 4.67%. Policy 3 The UOMI rates are an important component of tax compliance rules. By changing with the underlying market rates, the UOMI rates provide taxpayers with the incentive to pay the right amount of tax at the right time. They apply to all revenue and duties. 4 The Tax Administration Act 1994 provides for the UOMI underpayment and overpayment interest rates to be set by Order in Council. Once the rates are set, they remain the prescribed UOMI rates unless subsequently changed by another Order in Council. 5 The rates are calculated using formulae established in the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Regulations 1997 (the Regulations) and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) survey of interest rates. 6 The Regulations provide that the interest rate for underpaid tax should be set at the RBNZ floating first mortgage new customer housing rate plus 250 basis points. The floating first mortgage new customer housing rate reflects the variable interest rate offered by surveyed institutions to new borrowers for residential property, weighted by each surveyed institution’s total lending outstanding for housing purposes. 7 The Regulations provide that the interest rate for overpaid tax is set at the latest RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate less 100 basis points, or, if this would produce a negative figure, at 0%. The RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate is the monthly average of the daily standard rates. 8 The current underpayment and overpayment rates are 10.39% and 3.53% respectively. The UOMI rates were last changed by Order in Council with effect from 9 May 2023 and were based on the interest rates for December 2022. DOC 2 2 9 The RBNZ interest rates for May 2023 indicate that the 90-day bank bill rate has changed by 114 basis points since the rates were last adjusted. I consider that an adjustment of the UOMI rates is necessary to avoid a long-term misalignment. I therefore recommend the overpayment rate be increased to 4.67%. 10 The floating first mortgage new customer housing rate has also changed by 52 basis points since the rates were last adjusted. Therefore, I also recommend that the underpayment rate be increased to 10.91%. Cost-of-living implications 11 The proposal effectively increases the cost of tax debt and so may have an impact on people and businesses that have underpaid their tax. The impact i s consistent with movements in market interest rates. Conversely, people and businesses that have overpaid their tax will receive slightly more compensation for doing so. Timing and 28-D ay Rule 12 I propose to submit the Order in Council giving effect to the changes in the UOMI rates to Cabinet for approval and submission to the Executive Council. To minimise compliance costs, it is proposed that the new rates come into force on 29 August 2023, the day after the due date for the first standard instalment of provisional tax. Compliance 13 The regulations comply with the principles, Acts, guidelines, and requirements set out below as follows: 13.1 the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi Not applicable 13.2 the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 Not applicable 13.3 the Human Rights Act 1993 Not applicable 13.4 the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 1993 Not applicable 13.5 relevant international standards and obligations Not applicable 13.6 the Legislation Guidelines ( 2021 edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee Complies Regulations Review Committee 14 There are no anticipated grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Order in Council to the attention of the House under Standing Order 327. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel 15 The Parliamentary Counsel Office has certified that the attached Order in Council is in order for submission to Cabinet. 3 Impact Analysis 16 A Regulatory Impact Assessment is not required because the proposal is of a minor and routine nature and does not substantially alter existing arrangements. Use of external resources 17 No external resources were used for developing this proposal or in the preparation of this paper. Financial Implications 18 The proposal to increase the UOMI rates, with the effective date of 29 August 2023, is estimated to result in net negative revenue of approximately $30 million over the forecast period. This number comprises the impact of the changes on tax revenue and on impairment expenditure. 19 The forecast net tax revenue impact of the increased revenue from the underpayment adjustment and the increased cost of the overpayment adjustment is shown in the table below. $m increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 7.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 Total Operating (7.000) (8.000) (8.000) (8.000) 20 However, as a large part of underpayment debt is typically written off, there is a larger cost to revenue than is factored above. To represent estimated write-offs, underpayments are impaired in the Crown accounts. The impairment rate of 67.63% is based on debt repayment rates for the year ending 30 June 2022. Forecast impairment expenditure is presented in the table below: $m increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non-Departmental Other expenses: Impairment of debt and debt write-offs 13.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 Total operating 13.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 21 T o meet the forecasted change to the revenue, the Impairment of Debt and Debt Write- offs appropriation needs to be amended. While the change is proposed via the 2023/24 4 Supplementary Estimates, in the interim, the increase in the net debt should be met from Imprest Supply. Communications 22 Inland Revenue will publish an article about these changes in its Tax Information Bulletin. Proactive Release 23 I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers in whole within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Consultation 24 The Treasury and the New Zealand Customs Service have been consulted in the preparation of this paper and agree with its recommendations. Recommendations I recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1 agree that the UOMI underpayment rate increase from 10.39% to 10.91%; 2 agree that the UOMI overpayment rate increase from 3.53% to 4.67%; 3 agree that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2) 2023 give effect to the rates referred to in recommendations 1 and 2 above; 4 agree that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2) 2023 come into force on 29 August 2023; 5 note the following forecast changes as a result of the decisions in recommendations 1 and 2 above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and/or net debt: $m increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 7.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 Total Operating (7.000) (8.000) (8.000) (8.000) 6 a pprove the forecast change in appropriations for Non-Departmental Other Expenses as a result of the decision in recommendations 1 and 2, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and/or net debt: 5 $m increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non-Departmental Other expenses: Impairment of debt and debt write-offs 13.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 Total operating 13.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 7 agree that the proposed change to the Impairment of Debt and Debt Write-offs appropriation for 2023/24 above be included in the 2023/24 Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase(s) be met from Imprest Supply; 8 authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2) 2023. A uthorised for lodgement Hon Dr Deborah Russell Associate Minister of Revenue I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-23-MIN-0118 Cabinet Legislation Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2) 2023 PortfolioAssociate Revenue On 20 July 2023, the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1agreed that the UOMI underpayment rate increase from 10.39% to 10.91%; 2agreed that the UOMI overpayment rate increase from 3.53% to 4.67%; 3agreed that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2) 2023 give effect to the rates referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 above; 4agreed that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2) 2023 come into force on 29 August 2023; 5noted the following forecast changes as a result of the decisions in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and/or net debt: $m increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 7.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 Total Operating (7.000) (8.000) (8.000) (8.000) 6approved the forecast change in appropriations for Non-Departmental Other Expenses as a result of the decision in paragraphs 1 and 2, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance and/or net debt: $m increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non-Departmental Other expenses: Impairment of debt and debt write-offs 13.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 Total operating 13.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 1 I N C O N F I D E N C E 1mf8qlhgwl 2023-07-25 13:15:59 DOC  I N C O N F I D E N C E LEG-23-MIN-0118 7agreed that the proposed change to the Impairment of Debt and Debt Write-offs appropriation for 2023/24 above be included in the 2023/24 Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase(s) be met from Imprest Supply; 8authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations (No 2) 2023 \[PCO 25679/4.0\]. Rebecca Davies Committee Secretary Present:Officials present from: Hon Grant Robertson (Chair) Hon Andrew Little Hon Kiri Allan Hon David Parker Hon Kieran McAnulty Hon Barbara Edmonds Hon Willow-Jean Prime Hon Dr Duncan Webb Hon Dr Deborah Russell Tangi Utikere, MP (Chief Government Whip) Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG 2 I N C O N F I D E N C E 1mf8qlhgwl 2023-07-25 13:15:59