Ref: 23OIA1710 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 10 February 2023 Tēnā koe Thank you for your request of 9 January 2023, made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA). You requested: A copy of your complaints process. A copy of our complaints process, Complaints Management Service (CMS) – Managing Complaints in START: Guidelines is released to you and is attached. Some personal details have been withheld under section 9(2)(a) of the OIA, to protect the privacy of natural persons. No public interest in releasing the withheld information has been identified that would be sufficient to outweigh the reasons for withholding. Rights of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider that this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details, or any information that would identify you, will be removed before it is published. Thank you for your request. Ngā mihi Sam Rodgers Domain Lead, Planning and Performance www.ird.govt.nz 1 COMPLAINTS MANAGEMENT SERVICE (CMS) Managing Complaints in START Guidelines for Case Management Officers 5 CMS Email Process INTRODUCTION The mailbox is used by business units to provide CMS with information that may affect customer contacts. Other business units may refer a customer through to us if they want to make a complaint. WORKFLOW The person responsible for the triaging will sort through the CMS email inbox every morning and lodge customer feedback cases in START or refer the submission through to the appropriate business unit to action. This person is also responsible for sending the customer an acknowledgement advising that a complaint case has been lodged and is being managed. This will give them a timeframe of 10 working days, if you pick up a case and it is going to exceed that timeframe please contact the customer to let them know. LODGING A COMPLAINT CASE When lodging a complaint case from an internet submission or phone call, paste the full email or complaint information from submission into the case description. Ensure that the formatting is correct. Make sure you enter the contact details provided into the case. Also note in your case notes in START what preferred method of contact the customer has noted, this allows us to communicate with the customer in the most appropriate way. TIMEFRAMES Our timeframe is 10 working days which applies for completing the case. If you need to refer a work item to one of our liaisons, remember to request that they respond within 5 working days. FILING OF RECEIVED EMAILS Each email received in the inbox should be personalised to show the details of the case. The subject should provide a reference of who actioned the email and what it relates to. There are nine folders in the email account which are to be used when filing actioned emails. Folder What goes in there Personalising the subject (minimum info required) Complaints All emails that are lodged as a case - this category overrides the other categories Customer Name Case number CMO name Compliments All compliments – staff, unit or process Customer Name Case number CMO name Forwarded elsewhere to be actioned e.g.Ministerial and Escalated Complaints Customer Name Forwarded to <where> CMO name Internal emails Responses and general emails to CMS from internal staff CMO name Unable to action Unidentifiable customer No contact detail provided Not IR related Customer Name Reason it has not been actioned CMO name USING NON-SECURE EMAIL TO CORRESPOND WITH CUSTOMERS 7 •IR Communications Guidelines/Policies •IR Style Guide PROCESS FOR EDITING AND SENDING A RESPONSE Editing Process Before issuing a response to a customer you need to get another member of the CMS team to check these. It is their responsibility to check the technical quality of the letter as well as formatting, grammar and general readability. The process to follow is: 1.Send a message to the CMS group chat asking for a response check, include a brief summary i.e, FAM web message check, members of the team will ‘Like’ your message signalling they are available to do your peer review. 2.Send a copy of your response to the relevant team member, a.Use the ‘Track Changes’ review option to clearly identify changes in a word document b.Use Red font for changes and Strikethrough for removed wording in an email 3.Peer reviews should be completed as soon as possible. If there are concerns about the technical quality, this should be discussed. 4.Once the peer review is completed, this will be sent back to the CMO for final review. 5.Update case notes and include the name of the CMO that completed your peer review. 6.Issue your response to customer 9 Staff Complaint INTRODUCTION Customers may contact Complaints Management Service (CMS) to make a complaint against a specific staff member. Key points to note \*If the staff complaint relates to an alleged breach of secrecy, or any other code of conduct concern, this will need to be referred to Integrity Assurance. Refer to the separate instructions for Integrity Assurance cases. •It is the customer’s decision to provide feedback and CMS notes should remain impartial. •The staff member should not be identified in START records. Staff complaints are held in a folder out of START. •The staff member the complaint was laid against may wish to see a copy of the response sent to the customer and has the right to request it. •Staff complaints are not processed unless the customer is able to be identified. If the customer does not want to be identified the case can be lodged as customer feedback, however the manager and staff member are not advised. •In most cases when lodging a staff complaint in START, Cause of contact is ‘Staff’ and Detail of cause ‘conduct’ unless there is ‘serious misconduct’ •If the customer only wishes to lodge feedback about a staff member, this will be lodged like a staff complaint as depending on the allegation made, we may need lodge the feedback information as per step PROCESS Step Action 1. Take details of the complaint Obtain as much information from the customer as you can. For example, if the customer tells you the staff member was ‘rude’ ask them to tell you specifically what they did that was ‘rude’. If the customer does not know the name of the staff member, ask for details of when and how they dealt with them. If the customer advises you that they do not wish to lodge a formal complaint, but rather the actions of the staff member indicates a need for further training/coaching you will still follow this process as the feedback still needs to be lodged. Let the customer know that as it is only feedback they will not be informed of the outcome of any investigation. 2. Identify the staff member \* If staff member is already identified, go to step 3. Review the START records to identify the staff member, this may include using Verint (call recording system). If allegations are serious and potentially a breach of code of conduct email integrity assurance, they will investigate and respond to you with their findings. If you cannot identify the staff member, a response is sent to the customer to advise you have been unable to identify the staff member concerned, and close the case. 3. Lodge case in START (If complaint received over the phone) 10 Add complaint case as per usual process for creating a case but in brief description add ‘Staff complaint’ In Staff Complaints folder, under the ‘unassigned’ folder, add a new folder to include all information in relation to the staff complaint i.e, complaint description, staff complaint notes, staff complaint referral sheets, copy of emails to/from manager/TL in relation to case, outcome letter. 5. Refer to the Group Lead Complete a staff complaint referral sheet. •Put any direct quotes from the customer in quote marks - so the Manager is aware that these are the customer's words. •Express no opinion of your own (i.e. remain impartial). The Manager will take the appropriate steps to resolve the complaint and we cannot add our own opinions on whether the staff member is in the wrong. •If the staff member is named on a letter, the original letter can be attached to the complaint that goes to the staff member’s manager. If there's an underlying tax issue to be resolved as well as the staff complaint •For complaints about Call Centre CSOs: Keep staff details out of START case, only include underlying tax issue details and actions taken to resolve •For complaints about all other staff: when you forward the case to the manager, you can ask for the underlying tax issue to be resolved at the same time as the complaint. Email the referral sheet to the relevant manager, a template email can be found in One Note. Leave the case unassigned and in the queue to be picked up from a CMS officer. 6. Follow up if necessary If you have picked up a staff complaint and the referral is late coming back, contact the manager again and ask for an update so you can advise your customer of any delays if applicable. Some managers prefer to contact the customer themselves. If the matter is still being considered, contact the customer to provide an interim update. 7. Action response from Group Lead/Team Lead Once the completed referral sheet is received back add a copy of the new version to your staff complaint case folder. 8. Respond to customer Prepare your response to the customer. If sending a letter, use template letter “Staff Complaints” •Do not name the officer in the letter •For female managers use the salutation Ms not Mrs •Do not include any details of any disciplinary action taken as an outcome to the customer’s complaint if the complaint is upheld. If the customer complaint is not upheld, include an explanation as to why the staff member’s actions were correct. 13 Follow the steps below to close the case: 1.Select the case that you need to complete in START. 2.Click Resolution and select the appropriate option from the drop-down box. 3.Click Learning identified and select the appropriate option from the drop-down box. If there is an aspect of the case that you feel lends itself to improving services/products/system, then select the appropriate field in the drop-down box. 4.If learning has been identified, type a short 1-2 sentence explanation into the Details of learning field under suggestion for change. 5.Select Upheld, Not upheld or Partially upheld based on the outcome for the complaint case. 6.Close the case by clicking Next and click Closed