\[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL) Section 2: Problem definition and objectives 2.1 What is the context within which action is proposed? Seismic vessels are used to gather data on potential oil and gas finds, and rigs are used to drill for oil and gas, in the exploration and development stages of petroleum mining. These are very specialist and expensive pieces of equipment that are owned by businesses that specialise in providing these services to petroleum miners who have permits for a specific area. These rigs and vessels do not generally work offshore in winter weather for health and safety reasons. While there is a worldwide industry in rigs and seismic vessels, no New Zealand companies own these assets, so any company seeking to explore natural resources in New Zealand waters needs to use a rig or seismic vessel provided by a non-resident owner. Offshore rigs and seismic vessels owned by non-residents are covered by an income tax exemption that is due to expire on 31 December 2024. Wells generally take between 30 and 90 days to drill and there is significant cost in bringing a rig or vessel to and from New Zealand. Because of this, operators often align their plans in order to conduct their work using the same rig or vessel in the same summer period. There is usually a programme of work that forms the core activities of the rig or vessel, and then there may be opportunistic wells or surveys added because the rig or vessel is already coming. These opportunistic wells or surveys are at particular risk from the expiry of the existing exemption as completing these could result in the rig or vessel being in New Zealand long enough to become a New Zealand tax resident and therefore taxable on income derived from exploration and development activities in New Zealand waters, including from already completed contracts for core activities. In the absence of an exemption these operators leave New Zealand before this time to prevent a New Zealand income tax liability arising. Since 2018, when the exemption was last extended, there have been a total of two offshore non-resident drilling rigs, spending 313 and 226 days in the country each and 14 wells have been drilled. By contrast, between 2000 and 2005 (before the exemption was introduced), no rigs stayed in New Zealand waters beyond six months. Thirteen seismic vessels have operated in New Zealand since 2009, of which one stayed over 183 days. Before 2005, the average length of stay was around four months. Maintaining the exemption removes a barrier for lengthier stays (which have been fewer but are typically more lucrative). There have been 80 offshore wells drilled since 1 January 2009. Twenty-three of these wells have been exploratory in nature, with some hosting sub-commercial discoveries. All of these efforts, successful or not, improve our knowledge of the Crown mineral estate, which is critical to making economic discoveries. A substantial discovery has the potential to significantly benefit the economy and the Government's fiscal position by way of direct economic benefits, royalties, increased tax revenue, and other indirect benefits (e.g. supporting goods and services and consumption). It is likely that a number of wells would not have been drilled without the tax exemption, as the application of income tax would likely have created too large a barrier (due to the high Impact Statement: Extending tax exemption for non-resident offshore oil rig and seismic vessel operators I 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] s 9(2)(h) Impact Statement: Extending tax exemption for non-resident offshore oil rig and seismic vessel operators | 8 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] • While New Zealand is attempting to transition from fossil fuels and will not issue new offshore petroleum exploration permits there continues to be an offshore petroleum industry and that industry, while it exists, will always be reliant on non- resident rigs and seismic vessels. New Zealand does not have a policy to actively disincentivise, or prevent, petroleum production and even if it was to do so in the future there would be more efficient measures to achieve this than a policy that inadvertently encourages churn. • There is no expectation that tax legislation will remain constant. If a decision was made in the future to end this exemption the Government has regular tax omnibus bills and could repeal the provision in a shorter time than leaving the remaining time of a 5-year exemption to expire. While we have not attempted to quantify the cost, the administrative and parliamentary costs of a future repeal would be the same, or likely lower, than the cost of a single 5-year extension. Impact Statement: Extending tax exemption for non-resident offshore oil rig and seismic vessel operators | 13