Page 1 of 5 Ref: 23 OIA2264 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 15 June 2023 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 17 May 2023. Your full request is attached in the Appendix. The OIA enables people to request official information from Ministers and agencies, including Inland Revenue. However, the OIA only applies to information that is already held by Inland Revenue. There is no obligation for Inland Revenue to create information in order to respond to a request. Some of the information you are seeking in this case is not held by Inland Revenue and would need to be created. Parts of your request also require Inland Revenue to conduct research and therefore, create information. These parts of your request are refused under section 18(g) of the OIA, as the information is not held and we do not believe it is held by another agency. Question 1 – Capital gains tax modelling Inland Revenue does not report on the estimated value of capital gains. This part of your request is therefore refused under section 18(g) of the OIA, as the information is not held by Inland Revenue. Reports within the scope of question 1c are available on the Tax Working Group’s website: • https://taxworkinggroup.govt.nz/resources/twg-bg -3933713-extending-the- taxation-of -capital-income.html • https://taxworkinggroup.govt.nz/resources/twg-bg -3998517-potential-high-level- effects-of -proposals-to-extend-the-taxation-of -capital- income.html This part of your request is therefore refused under section 18(d) of the OIA, as the information is publicly available. Question 2 – Goods a nd services tax modelling Inland Revenue does not report on the expected outcomes associated with removing (or currently having) GST on fresh food, education and healthcare. This part of your request is therefore refused under section 18(g) of the OIA, as the information you have requested is not held by Inland Revenue. You can do your own fiscal estimates based on the food proportion of consumption or household expenditure on Statistics NZ’s website: www.stats.govt.nz/information- releases/household-expenditure-statistics-year-ended-june-2019. Please note Statistics NZ calculates average household expenditure every three years, therefore the most recent figures are from 2019. Question 3 – Supera nnuation modelling Inland Revenue does not report on the expenditure incurred from the absence of means- testing the New Zealand Superannuation. I consulted with the Ministry of Social Development on this part of your request who advised they do not hold the information you have requested. Your request for this information is therefore refused under section www.ird.govt.nz Page 4 of 5 Ref: 23 OIA2264 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Question 5 – Tax reform There are no documents further to the reports provided in response to question 1(c) of your request. Right of review If you disagree with my decisions on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decisions. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decisions. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you for your request. Yours sincerely Sandra Watson Policy Lead (Forecasting and Analysis), Policy & Regulatory Stewardship Page 5 of 5 Ref: 23 OIA2264 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Appendix Full OIA request: 1: CAPITAL GAINS TAX MODELLING a: Estimated value of all capital gains derived by New Zealand Tax residents every year for the last five New Zealand financial years. b: Estimated portion of capital gains currently captured under the New Zealand system (including but not limited to: capital gains captured under the FIF regime, the current bright line tests, and event traditionally considered capital in nature but which are considered to be of a revenue nature within the context of New Zealand's taxation regime). c: Any relevant economic reports the IRD has available regarding how a lack of a CGT impacts productivity (e.g "how does a lack of a Capital Gains Tax distort investments and reduce productivity in New Zealand?"). 2: Goods & Services Tax Modelling a: Revenue the IRD would reasonably expect to be foregone, should GST exemptions on fresh food, education, and healthcare be implemented to bring us in line with OECD conventions for sales tax standards. b: modelled healthcare outcomes associated with removing (or currently having) GST on healthcare and fresh food c: modelled education outcomes associated with removing (or currently having) GST on education 3: Superannuation Modelling a: additional expenditure incurred in the lack of means testing the New Zealand Superannuation, outside of the OECD convention for pension payments. b: Tax revenue raised on Kiwisaver earnings as well as on income earned and then deposited into kiwisaver as part of employee remuneration, outside the OECD convention for superannuation schemes. 4: Student Loan Modelling a. Total New Zealand Student Loan living cost loan amounts given out for the last five financial years. b. Costs incurred in recovering overseas student borrowers in default c: revenue derived by collecting from overseas student borrowers in default. d: The estimated current total student loan debt that is wholly just debt incurred from having a GST on education (including associated prorated interest and other fees). e: The number of people moving overseas with student loans each year for the last 7 years, alongside their respective mean and median balances. 5: Tax Reform a: Any and all internal documentation on where New Zealand is considered by the IRD to either be deficient, or at risk of being deficient from OECD taxation conventions and their discussed impact on the New Zealand economy (that wasn't already provided under 1c).