www.ird.govt.nz Page 1 of 2 Ref: 24 OIA1283 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 19 Septem ber2023 Dear Th ank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 11 September 2023. You requested the following (numbered for ease of response): (...) Please supply the following information under the Official Information Act (OIA): 1.Policies guidelines and/or general information provided to IRD employees regarding working from home or other flexible/remote/hybrid working arrangements that were in effect before 21 March 2020. 2.Policies, guidelines, and/or general information provided to IRD employees regarding working from home or other flexible/remote/hybrid working arrangements that have been put in place or changed on or after 21 March 2020. 3.Policies, guidelines, and/or general information regarding reasonable accommodations for disabled employees at IRD that were in effect before 21 March 2020. 4.Policies, guidelines, and/or general information regarding reasonable accommodations for disabled employees at IRD that have been put in place or changed on or after 21 March 2020. Flexible working at Inland Revenue Most working arrangements at Inland Revenue are informal. The balance of home and office-based hours depends on the employee’s type of work, individual situation, and the needs of the business. Inland Revenue employees are generally expected to work in the office more than they would from home. However, there are no set rules to Inland Revenue’s approach to flexible working and there are currently no plans to change this. You can find more information on Inland Revenue’s flexible working approach on our website at ird.govt.nz. Items 1 to 3 The information you have requested is enclosed. The table on the following page provides a description of each document being released. Some information contained in the documents has not been considered for release and has been withheld as it is not in scope of your request. 1 Topic 5 – Flexible Working PEOPLE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES Working from Home Guidelines These guidelines provide information and expectations in relation to working away from an IR office (particularly from home) and outline the process for establishing working from home arrangements. Note: These guidelines apply to working from home in the context of normal business operations. In the event of any crisis or emergency or forced building closure etc. the response and what that might mean in relation to viable work locations and arrangements will be determined as part of specific business continuity planning for the event. IR’s Adverse Event Guidelines provide information on attendance and leave when an adverse event impacts the ability to attend the office (immediate or short-term response). It’s important that our people feel connected, included, and have a sense of belonging no matter where they work. Any arrangements need to balance individual, team, and business needs. Flexible location (as described in our policy) is only one type of the broader options that fall under the banner of flexible working. It relates to the options that might be available in relation to where work is performed. As far as ‘work location’ Inland Revenue is primarily an office-based organisation, with most people working most of the time in an IR office. Working all your working hours from home is unlikely to meet IR business needs. This is consistent with government expectations and we know that being in the office and connecting face-to-face has lots of benefits to the way we work and learn, as well as supporting important social interaction. An office presence is part of how we best service the needs of our internal and external customers/stakeholders and deliver on business priorities. Working from home doesn’t automatically change your existing arrangements regarding your working window and hours of work. Requests for flexibility in work location, just like other types of flexibility will be considered on a case by case basis and can be formal and informal, as covered in the policy, and the formal and informal guidelines. If having reviewed the relevant policy and guidelines you have any questions around working from home, you should talk with your leader. You can also seek advice from your union both generally and in relation to a particular request etc. Leaders can seek advice from People & Workplace Services: Appendix B Not in scope 6 Your workstation: In your home it’s expected that your work area is set up to ensure you can work safely. Your workstation should be arranged so that it is comfortable and ergonomically sound, and the space should be kept clear and free from obstacles or tripping hazards. You need to assess your intended workspace and confirm whether it is acceptable (the Working from Home Checklist supports this and includes workstation set up guidance). A virtual assessment may be a requirement if you’re working predominately at home. If you move around your home during your workday you must ensure each workspace is hazard free and ergonomically sound. If you have any concerns around your home workstation, please discuss them with your leader. Work/non-work injury: If you have an accident whilst working at home, this may be considered a work-related incident, however this depends on the circumstances of the incident and activity being undertaken (work vs non work activities). For any incidents, you should seek medical treatment if required and report the incident. Your wellbeing: You need to ensure you are managing your workload and fatigue/ taking appropriate breaks/ keeping connected / staying safe and are generally taking care of yourself. Keeping in touch with your leader can help ensure they are aware of any wellbeing concerns and if the arrangement isn’t working for you for any reason. You can check out our Hauora Hub for general wellbeing information and EAP contact information etc. Online H&S reporting: The H&S reporting requirements remain the same from home. You must report any incidents/accidents or discomfort using the Online H&S Reporting tool. Required Working from Home Checklist: (Quick link on the Flexible Working hub: Working from Home page). Everyone working from home in any regular way (formally or informally) must complete the checklist as part of the approval process. If working from home continues to be your practice, this checklist will need to be revisited at least annually and/or to reflect any change in ‘home’ location/s etc. If your working environment is not safe, or you don’t have the required equipment then this would prohibit your ability to utilise this flexible working option. INFORMATION SECURITY AND PRIVACY It’s important you are always vigilant about the personal or customer information you are working with and the risks associated with that information. We are all required to keep IR information confidential (Section 18, Tax Administration Act). That is a constant, irrespective of where you are working. When working away from the office the risk of inadvertently disclosing personal and customer information to others needs to be carefully managed. This includes ensuring screens aren’t visible/ household members don’t have access to your device/ conversations involving sensitive information can’t be overheard/ and IR material is appropriately stored. The normal expectations around business tools, clear desk practices, passwords etc. and conduct expectations continue to apply and any data or privacy breaches must be reported through normal channels. You need to take care when transporting documents between office and home, ensuring the documents are secured in a closed bag and that you dispose of IR documents and information appropriately. 7 ABLE TO MEANINGFULLY PERFORM WORK In any working from home arrangements ‘working’ is the key purpose of the arrangement. As such the ability for you to meaningfully perform work, in a focused way, free of distraction is a key consideration. It’s important both for work quality and productivity and your own health, safety, and wellbeing that you are not distracted or taking on too much and are taking the breaks and time for rest and relaxation you need. For that reason, the most appropriate option in these ‘juggling’ scenarios needs to be carefully considered and may involve a mixed approach to try to get the balance right. Caring for dependants It’s important not to treat working from home as a substitute for childcare or dependant care. When working from home you will structure any personal/childcare arrangements so you can complete your work as you would normally. Trying to manage your normal IR duties and the important but distinctively separate role of caring for children or dependants at the same time, can compromise both tasks. Leaders need to consider on a case by case basis the degree to which meaningful work is possible. It’s recognised that from time to time there may be some overlaps, particularly in relation to school holidays or before or after school care. The level of care and attention required by the dependant (e.g. child’s age) and the duration of the overlap period may influence the decision. It may be that other flexibility can make these arrangements more feasible. For school holidays for example, a variation in start and finish times so some work can be done before children are awake or after they are in bed/ mix of leave and working from home/ mix of childcare or school holiday programmes and working from home around the edges/ using flexi- credits for some shorter days etc. Other flexible options may better support caring for dependants, for example: part-time hours or using salary trade to purchase additional annual leave to support having some more leave to help cover the school holidays etc. Dependant sick leave: It may make sense to work from home when a dependant is unwell depending on the nature of illness/injury and the extent to which you are actively required to take on the caring role. You may feel you can work your usual day/hours or only part of them. You may be able to agree with your leader regarding a mix of sick leave and working time, based on how much time you were able to work uninterrupted. There is a specific entitlement to sick leave (which includes care for a dependant) and if active care is required this would be the most appropriate option. While you are sick or injured Generally, if you are unwell then you should take sick leave as intended and focus on your rest and recovery. Irrespective of working from home or not you have the same requirement to notify your leader as soon as possible. In some cases, you may feel well enough to work, but want to avoid going into the office to prevent passing on your illness (e.g. a light cold) or disrupting others (noisy cough etc). Likewise, you may have an injury that you feel able to work with, but it makes travelling and getting to the office more challenging so working from home might be more appropriate. 8 You may be able to agree with your leader to work from home in these types of situations, or the ability to reflect a mix of sick leave and working time, based on how much time you were actually able to work. An arrangement to work from home if you are recovering from an operation, or illness or injury (with medical certificate clearance that allows you to work from home) may be agreed on a case by case basis, or form part of a return to work plan. You should not be working where a medical certificate indicates you are unable to work. While you are on holiday/ annual leave/ not working Technology and working from home arrangements mean our work can come with us, and we can access it outside of a traditional working window. That doesn’t mean you should. If you’re on annual leave you should not be working. Make sure you take the time for rest and relaxation. SECURITY AND ACCESS TO YOUR HOME You must not meet with customers or external business contacts or have them visit you in your home. IR has robust security arrangements and fit for purpose facilities in the office for meeting with customers, non-IR business contacts and your colleagues. On rare occasions, when you are working from home there may be the need for IR/ your leader/ union representatives etc. to visit you. They would only come into your home with your permission. COSTS AND EXPENSES As noted in the Flexible Working Policy, there will be no additional compensation or allowance for expenses arising from a request to work from home, as part of flexible working. If you elect to work from home and access the wider benefits that flexible working offers, you won’t be reimbursed for general household expenses. Any increases in general household costs are potentially counterbalanced by related expenditure decreases, e.g. parking, travel. Leaders may continue to approve reimbursement for legitimate claims of actual and reasonable business expenses that arise in the course of your work, e.g. the cost of specific toll calls made to customers, on the production of receipts. Your leader needs to consider the tax status of any claim, and can seek advice from Finance or refer to the Tax Manual. Any travel between the home and office is in your own time and your own cost. Exceptions to this can be considered on a case by case basis (for example if it’s pre-agreed that you are working from home and are then requested by IR to come into the office at short notice, part way through your working day, then payment of the travel time (T1) would likely be appropriate). 9 EQUIPMENT AND TOOLS IR generally only provides one full set of IT/office equipment. As we are primarily office based then usually that equipment needs to be in the office. The equipment and tools required and whether they are provisioned by IR or personally should be discussed with your leader and considered as part of any request to work from home. Suitable and reliable network connectivity (with necessary bandwidth for work efficiency) is a prerequisite for working from home and is at your own cost. It may be achieved via home Wi- Fi or hotspotting from a personal mobile phone. IR data SIMS are not intended to support working from home as they are for brief and occasional use only, where no Wi-Fi networks are available. Some unique set up requirements e.g. a sit/stand desk can only be provided for in the office and may prevent you from working from home. Employees may make requests for reasonable accommodation(s) to assist in managing disabilities in line with the Guidelines. The Use of Business Tools policy and guidelines continue to apply when working from home. You must take reasonable steps to keep IR’s technology, equipment and information safe and in working order. Any IR owned equipment (laptop etc.) that you are using to support working from home is IR property and normal process should be followed if this equipment is lost, stolen or damaged. It is insured by IR and does not need to be covered in your personal/home insurance. If unforeseen circumstances (e.g. power outage, Wi-Fi interruption, equipment failure) mean you can’t perform your IR duties from home, you may need to work from the office (if not also affected) for the period of the disruption. CONDUCT/ MONITORING When working at home you remain bound by our Code of Conduct – Tikanga Whanonga and our policies and guidelines. The “Making the Right Decision Checklist” in the Code is a great tool to make sure you are doing the right thing and acting with integrity no matter where you are working. When working from home your system access and use (e.g. START) remains as per the Code, and your system activity remains monitored at all times. Accurate time reporting and ensuring you work the hours you are scheduled and paid to work each day is essential if you are working from home. 10 Leading teams in a split office/home working model can require leading a little differently. Some tips for leading flexible teams are available on the Flexible Working hub: Tools and Resources Please see IR’s Flexible Working hub for the Flexible Working Policy and other related guidelines and various supporting resources (including those mentioned in this document) Document control v1. March 2021 (full replacement of earlier guidelines on the topic) Review dates Date Reviewed: Dec 2021 Guideline owner Domain Lead - People Operations & Policy, People & Workplace Services Guideline contact Email the ERP&R team 7 flexibility sought and the wider individual, team and organisation parameters. The operational requirements of Inland Revenue and the services we provide for our customers are a priority when we think about how flexibility can work. Where requests are declined the reason will be provided. The focus should be on the business reason for any refusal. There may be scope for further discussion and consideration of alternative options if not already considered before the final decision is made. People should talk to their leader or one up leader if they are unhappy with the decision. Performance or conduct issues, or health and safety concerns could potentially impact on flexible working arrangements. The specific issue or the support interventions may result in restrictions or removal of flexible working (or specific types or flexible working). If requests are made under 6AA ERA, then specific ‘options for refusal’ are detailed in the legislation and our formal flexible working guidelines. The ERA gives a right to a process for a fair and timely consideration of a request. It does not guarantee the approval of the request. If Inland Revenue does not deal with the request in accordance with the specified process (ERA 69AAE), the Act sets out the process for raising disputes in relation to flexible working arrangements. (ERA 69AAG to 69AAK). HEALTH, SAFETY & WELLBEING Access to flexible working can provide great opportunities to support better work-life balance and positively impact engagement and personal wellbeing. Everyone working at Inland Revenue has a responsibility to ensure a safe workplace as per our commitment to safe and healthy work. Inland Revenue has a duty of care to ensure that wherever a person is working is safe and healthy. Any work arrangement should be designed to be healthy, including ensuring fatigue and workload pressures are managed. For example, variations to hours, days or place of work need to consider any workload impacts for the individual and the team, manage fatigue and mitigate other risks to health, safety and wellbeing. Ongoing communications are important to ensure that the arrangement continues to work. CONDUCT Employees remain bound by our Code of Conduct – Tikanga Whanonga and our policies and guidelines irrespective of any flexible working arrangements or a change in hours, days or place of work. This includes health and safety considerations in relation to hours or patterns of work and ensuring a safe workplace/s as mentioned above. When working in different locations such as your own home or in public places the expectations around confidentiality of information, device security, and use of business tools etc. hold true and need to be carefully considered in the context of the working environment. 8 As such Inland Revenue may require assurance around the adequacy of any measures in place or agreed to, in relation to these expectations and reserves the right to with-hold or withdraw permission to work away from an Inland Revenue Office if that assurance cannot be provided. HR DELEGATION: Level 4 (Formal) and Level 5 (Informal) authority is required for hours of work and flexible arrangement related decisions. See the Delegation policy for the specific HR Matrix details. Document control v1, March 2021 (previously Flexible and Remote Working Policy) Review dates Date reviewed: Dec 2021 Next review: Dec 2025 (review may occur sooner if required) Policy owner Domain Lead, People Operations & Policy, People & Workplace Services Policy contact Email the ERP&R team Topic 5 – Flexible Working PEOPLE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES Informal Flexible Working Guidelines These guidelines describe which flexible working arrangements are considered informal and set out the process for requesting and considering various informal arrangements. INFORMAL INCLUDES THINGS LIKE: Flexitime/ ad-hoc or some short-term flexible needs/ some types of working from home (where you remain in the office more than not and days are not set). See the Informal/Formal split table if you are unsure of the type of flexibility you are seeking, and which guidelines and process applies. Where flexible working arrangements alter your terms and conditions around hours, days or place of work and establish a new regular pattern or impact pay or leave, then this is considered a ’formal’ change and you will need to follow the process set out in the Formal Flexible Working Guidelines. Inland Revenue supports and encourages flexible working. Where the changes are relatively simple then the process can generally be simple too. The process and documentation can be scaled up or down depending on the nature of the request. This kind of informal flexibility is intended to provide ’flexibility in a flexible way’ and is expected to be the most common approach to flexible working at IR. It can help you balance things that pop up in your personal life as a one-off or short-term need but can also support some more regular arrangements with fluid practices around when and where you work. Lots of this informal flexibility is already business as usual and established in our employment agreements and/or current flexible working practices. Informal arrangements don’t change your base terms and conditions of employment related to flexibility (e.g. the core arrangements around hours, days or place of work in your employment agreement, offer of appointment, any variation letters etc.) but rather allow flexibility around that base. If having reviewed the relevant policy and guidelines you have any questions around flexible working, you should talk with your leader. Union members may seek advice from their union delegates/ representatives both generally and in relation to a particular request etc. Appendix C2 Leaders can seek advice from People & Workplace Services: if there is any doubt about whether a working arrangement needs to be formalised or not, or for any support needed around flexible working. When is the arrangement ‘informal’? Informal flexible working usually occurs when leaders agree that employees have flexibility over when and where they carry out their work, subject to meeting role responsibilities and deliverables. This can mean that the exact arrangements can vary and are agreed between leaders and employees as and when needed. While these arrangements can be ad-hoc or in response to an event, they can also include more regular arrangements such as changes around start and finish times, or some working from home arrangements (within specific parameters). The change is considered informal if it doesn’t change terms and conditions of employment or impact pay or leave calculations. Often informal arrangements arise from a specific request but can also be part of proactive discussion with your leader or part of parameters in wider team agreements. INFORMAL EXAMPLES Flexible hours/ Flexitime (See the Flexitime Guidelines for more details) Flexitime specifically covers non-standard work hours allowing some flexibility around start, finish, and break times. The aim of flexitime is to enable you to balance your time credits over a period of time. Certain types of Working from Home (See the Working from Home Guidelines – Informal Working from Home section for more details and a full example table) Working from home arrangements span both formal and informal categories. The working from home arrangement is considered ‘informal’ in situations such as: •Ad-hoc/casual arrangements (where things pop up that prompt a one-off request) •Short term or temporary arrangements (generally a few weeks – 12 weeks max) •‘Fluid’ where you work from home less often than in the office, but still with some regularity and flexibility (e.g. generally a day or two at home each week). Other ad-hoc/or short-term location changes Your home is not the only alternate working location that can be sought (e.g. you seek to work at a different IR office or house in a different city for a short period etc.) These changes are only ‘informal’ if they are ad-hoc or short term as above. Using sick or annual leave flexibly Not in scope Flexible leave options such as anticipating annual or sick leave or working from home if you or a dependant are sick etc. might be options that can help with that work-life balance. ALONGSIDE OTHER FLEXIBLE WORKING ARRANGEMENTS Anyone can request informal flexibility including those who already have established formal flexible working arrangements or other informal arrangements in place. It may be possible for them to occur alongside and complement each other e.g. using flexitime while working from home or doing part-time hours/ working some of your part time hours at home etc. Process for establishing informal working arrangements The process for informal arrangements is conversational by design – but with outcomes still recorded/documented. Given the range of informal requests then the process needs to be fit for purpose and able to recognise individual circumstances. Lots of this is just part of everyday management and practical day to day operational decisions and good communication between you and your leader. There are generally two categories that informal requests might fall under: Pre-established parameters. Upfront conversations around flexible working support having sensible pre-agreed parameters in place. For example, flexitime parameters or common understandings of working from home parameters set in discussion with your leader. These support you being clear on the degree to which approval is required in each case or general comfort with the practice from time to time as needed or within agreed parameters, and the expectations around communication with your leader. Flexitime: As this is within the scope of employment agreement commitments no additional process is required for the day-to-day application of flexitime within your agreed working window and flexitime parameters. See the flexitime guidelines for more details around establishing work patterns and parameters etc. Requests requiring pre-approval. Specific conversations, as the need arises, are an important part of supporting flexible working. This includes those things that life throws at you with little notice or that might require a bit more of a material change for a short period, or looking to change your established parameters or set up some new ones etc. MAKING A REQUEST (WHERE NOT ALREADY WITHIN PRE-AGREED PARAMETERS) You can make the request for any reason and at any time, verbally or in writing. Any request should consider any impact on customers, business and team needs and deliverables. For those ad-hoc, small scale changes the request process should be relatively simple, with the focus on a quick chat or email/Teams exchange with your leader, and a timely decision. Where the request has more business impact (longer duration etc.) or seeks to establish a working from home arrangement for ‘fluid’ days, then a conversation is still the starter but it might take a bit more time for the decision and require more consideration of how any wider team or business impacts could be managed or mitigated or exploring alternative options. The outcome and details will need to be documented (including the required Working from Home checklist in the case of working from home). Informal requests can be event triggered, so they don’t always come with lots of notice, but if possible, don’t leave it until the last moment. Where it’s something you can plan for, you should make the request as soon as you can. You might raise your request with your leader in one of your regular and ongoing conversations etc. There is no documentation required for making an informal request (ideally just have a chat) IR’s Formal Flexible Working email template is NOT needed for an informal request. CONSIDERING YOUR REQUEST AND MAKING A DECISION Your leader will consider your request and make a decision as soon as possible. Often an instant or time sensitive decision is needed and can be made. If the request is a bit more complex, more time might be needed, but leaders will aim to make decisions in a timely manner (no later than a month after the request and generally much sooner). As your core terms and conditions remain unchanged then no formal variation is required. It still makes sense to document what’s agreed to support a common understanding and shared expectations. This might be as simple as your leader confirming their response to your email requesting to work from home on Tuesday morning/all next week for your normal working hours/or to use your flexi-credits to take Friday afternoon off. In other situations where the change is more enduring such as changing your agreed flexitime window/working from a different IR office for the next six weeks/establishing a ‘fluid’ working from home arrangement, then this should be documented and retained on your personnel file. Being open to considering flexible working options doesn’t mean all requests will be able to be accommodated. Where you request is declined the reason why will be provided. The Flexible Working Policy has information on review options if you are unhappy with the decision. There are basic email response template examples to support leaders in documenting the outcome and details of some of the more significant informal arrangements e.g. a materially changed short term arrangement or a longer-term fluid working from home arrangement. Where the arrangement involves working from home the Working from Home Checklist is also needed. People leader considerations •Some of these simpler informal changes are just part of BAU leadership and helping your people access flexible options to help balance their personal and work life. For that reason, we don’t want to add any unnecessary process or administration in the mix. •For any working from home arrangement beyond the one off or occasional occurrences the Working from Home Checklist is an important prerequisite and will need to be completed and revisited at least annually or should circumstances or your home location change. •While you should look at each request with a view to seeing if you can make it happen, that doesn’t mean in all occasions you will be able to accommodate the request. It will depend on what is being sought and if there are legitimate business reasons for refusal or for other alternative arrangements to be explored. You should apply a business reason lens for refusal. This may include things like any detrimental impact on quality or performance, or meeting customer demand, or the inability to reorganise the work amongst others. The ability for IR to accommodate the request is very much dependent on what is being requested and the wider context (type of work/wider team/business requirements etc.). •If the request is made informally but is more correctly addressed via the formal process, ensure the correct process is followed or discuss the difference so your team member is clear what best meets their needs. For more considerations please see the Consideration for Leaders resource on the Flexible Working hub: Tools and Resources page HR delegations: Level 5 authority is required to negotiate and make decisions on informal flexible working arrangements Please see IR’s Flexible Working hub for the Flexible Working Policy and other related guidelines and various supporting resources (including those mentioned in this document) Document control v1 March 2021 Review dates Date reviewed: Dec 2021 Guideline owner Domain Lead – People Operations and Policy, People and Workplace Services Guideline contact Email the ERP&R team Topic 5 – Flexible Working PEOPLE POLICIES AND GUIDELINES Formal Flexible Working Guidelines These guidelines describe what flexible working arrangements are considered formal and set out the process for requesting and considering various formal arrangements. FORMAL INCLUDES THINGS LIKE: A regular change to working hours/days (e.g. part-time) or some types of working from home (where the majority of working hours are from home or the days worked at home are set). See the Informal/Formal split table if you are unsure of the type of flexibility you are seeking, and which guidelines and process applies. If the flexibility you’re seeking is relatively simple and doesn’t change your terms and conditions or impact your pay or leave calculations in any reoccurring way, then see the Informal Flexible Working Guidelines for more details and to see if the flexibility you are after is better managed that way. Note: For those affected by Domestic Violence seeking to make a request in relation to short term flexible working arrangements please see our specific guidelines which relate to part 6AB of the Employment Relations Act (ERA) 2000. Requests relating to exchanging leave are covered separately in the Exchanging Leave Policy and relevant supporting guidelines. The current request and approval process should be used - outside of the formal flexible working form. These documents are available in our People Policies and Guidelines. Inland Revenue supports and encourages flexible working and is open to hearing if workplace flexibility could work for you, and to seeing if it can be accommodated. If you think a formal flexible working arrangement could help you better balance your personal and working life, then HAVE A THINK ... TALK TO YOUR LEADER... MAKE A REQUEST. If having reviewed the relevant policy and guidelines you have any questions around flexible working, you should talk with your leader. Union members may seek advice from their union delegates/representatives both generally and in relation to a particular request. Leaders can seek advice from People & Workplace Services: if there is any doubt about whether a working arrangement needs to be formalised or not, or for any support needed around flexible working. Appendix C3 Not in scope When is the arrangement ‘formal’? The request is ’formal’ where the arrangement involves: •changes to an employee’s terms and conditions of employment as they relate to flexibility (e.g. the core arrangements around hours, days, or place of work in your employment agreement, offer letter, any variation letters etc.) •when a reoccurring work arrangement impacts on pay and/or leave. It may take place for an agreed period or on an ongoing basis with regular review or in some cases be a permanent change. Formal flexibility is more structured and often has a bigger impact so requires more consideration, process and documentation and can be more challenging for the business to accommodate. In relation to working from home, the arrangement is considered to impact your terms and conditions and be formal when the days are ‘set’, or the majority of your time is worked at home. All formal arrangements need to be documented with a formal variation letter. FORMAL EXAMPLES Changing your working hours (number and/or pattern of hours) Looking to change or reduce/increase your working hours or days is a formal change which alters the terms around hours or days of work. The change sought might be to the number of hours worked e.g. part-time hours. Part- time hours might involve working shorter days across the week or working a reduced number of days each week. The change may also involve retaining the same number of working hours but working different length working days in a formally scheduled way. The change to working hours and/or days of work has implications for pay and leave entitlements (e.g. for part-time - reduced annual leave and sick leave, implications for resigning/retiring leave etc., for different working days or different length working days, there are leave and public holidays implications etc.). Those in a scheduled/rostered environment sometimes wish to lock in particular set hours or a tighter window within the wider working window, and this variation would also need to be agreed and documented formally. Certain types of working from home (see Working from Home Guidelines – Formal Working from Home section for more details and examples) Working from home is considered formal where it involves: •The majority of the time working from home rather than the office (for ‘set’ days or otherwise) of the expectations and responsibilities, and that you are willing and able to meet those. Talk to your leader Discussions about working arrangements are encouraged as part of your regular and ongoing Whanake conversations and more generally. This helps to ensure a common understanding of what flexibility you would like (now or potentially in the future) and what might be able to be accommodated, and to check in on how any current arrangements are working. You should talk to your leader before making any formal request. This helps ensure you understand the practicalities and if there are any barriers that create challenges in what you’re seeking. Discussion will also help you understand if it could be managed more informally. If possible, don’t leave it until the last moment to make a request as depending on what is sought it can take some time to consider and work through. For example, if you want changes to start on your return from parental leave, make your request as soon as possible before returning or even discuss it with your leader before taking parental leave. Where current flexible arrangements are already in place keep talking about how they are working. Even with longer term or ongoing arrangements, these should be discussed at least annually to check in on how the arrangement is working for all parties. Make your formal request If following initial thinking and discussion with your leader you decide to make a formal request, you have different options available to you. The principles for flexible working will apply across all requests and IR will ensure a response within a month of receipt of any request irrespective of the request approach you choose. IR Policy/employment agreements allow you to seek flexible working options It is within the scope of IR Policy/employment agreement provisions for you to request a temporary or permanent variation to your working hours, days, or place of work. For this option: Use the IR formal flexible working email request template You and your leader may want to complete email request together following your conversation, especially where you’re in agreement and want to move to formalise the request. If you and your leader are not in agreement you can still choose to put through your formal request for consideration. If you are dissatisfied with your leader’s decision see the Flexible Working Policy for more details. This includes specific information relating to ERA requests. People Leaders considerations in dealing with requests and making decisions •It’s expected that you will have discussed and understood your team members desire for flexibility and have explored the various implications before a formal request is submitted. •You need to consider the parameters in IR’s policy and guidelines and those things which are more challenging for IR to accommodate. While you should look at each request with a view to seeing if you can make it happen, that doesn’t mean in all occasions you will be able to accommodate the request. It will depend on what is being sought and if there are legitimate business reasons for refusal or for other alternatives to be explored. You should apply a business reason lens for refusal. This may include things like any detrimental impact on quality or performance, or meeting customer demand, or the inability to reorganise the work amongst others. The ability for IR to accommodate the request is very much dependent on what is being requested and the wider context (type of work/wider team/ business requirements etc). •You should ensure you don’t discriminate or are negatively influenced by the purpose or reason for the request. The exception to this is should the arrangement create an actual, potential, or perceived conflict of interest (e.g. seeking to reduce hours to take on secondary employment) then this needs to be well understood and mitigated accordingly. •It can be useful to discuss requests with your fellow leaders to assess the impact across different work areas and to support consistency (while considering the privacy of the individual). The higher level 4 delegation for formal flexible working decisions also support this wider lens and consistency considerations. Please see the Consideration for Leaders resource on the Flexible Working hub: Tools and Resources page for more individual, team and business considerations. In relation to receiving the specific request •Make sure the request includes all the key information you need •Further discuss the request with your team member as necessary •Acknowledge receipt of the request •Make sure you deal with the request as soon as possible and within a month of receiving it •Use the appropriate template to document the outcome •If approved, ensure the relevant variation letter (and any supporting documentation –Working from Home checklist etc) are filed on the personnel file and undertake any necessary follow up action. Documenting the outcome Formal arrangements require formal documentation to be developed and agreed to reflect the altered terms and conditions/arrangements. The documentation should be retained on your personnel file. Relevant outcome templates are available on the Leaders Templates and Resources page. See HR Advice for any support in completing these. HR delegations: Level 4 authority is required to negotiate and make decisions on formal flexible working arrangements Please see IR’s Flexible Working hub for the Flexible Working Policy and other related guidelines and various supporting resources (including those mentioned in this document) Document control v1: March 2021 Review dates Date reviewed: Dec 2021 Guideline owner Domain Lead, People Operations and Policy, People & Workplace Services Guideline contact Email the ERP&R team 2 WHAT IS REASONABLE? Factors that will be taken into account when considering reasonable accommodation include: •Whether it is practical to make the adjustment •The effectiveness of the adjustment in assisting you to perform your job •The impact on you if no adjustment is made •How much disruption, if any, would be caused to our business or other employees •Health and Safety requirements •The financial costs of any adjustment. MODIFICATIONS OR ADJUSTMENTS Some adjustments that could be considered and discussed may include: •Specialised hardware (mouse, keyboard) •Visual impairment software •Specialised hearing impairment software •Specialised office furniture •Modifying the recruitment process •Modifying the way the job is done •Modifying the training for the job •Providing flexible work arrangements •Physical changes e.g. rearranging furniture or improving access to a building. RELATED MATERIAL AND LINKS •Workbridge - Workbridge NZ administers support funds on behalf of the Ministry of Social Development. Applications are made by the employee, and any support/equipment provided is owned by the employee going forward. Inland Revenue can help support an application and the process •State Services Commission - LEAD toolkits •The Flexible & Remote Working Arrangements Policy on our People Policies & Guidelines. •The Discomfort, Pain & Injury intranet page •The Human Rights Act •Our supporting positive attendance guidance. Document control v1 March 2019 Review dates Date reviewed: March 2019 (Sept 2019; format change) Policy owner Services & Optimisation Manager, People & Culture Policy contact Not in Scope