www.ird.govt.nz Page 1 of 5 Ref: 23 OIA1772 CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 1 March 2023 Dear T han k you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 31 January 2023 . You requested the following: 1.Any document and/or information supporting your gender non-binary, transgender, and gender fluid workforce. For example, anything related to pronouns, gender transition policy or guidelines, specific action plans or strategies, survey results, workforce data, gender-neutral bathrooms policies or information, and leave provisions for gender reassignment/affirmation. 2.If you do not have any of these, do you intend to produce this information during 2023? And if not, what is the rationale for not having it? Inland Revenue is commi tted to maintaining a safe and positive working environment and culture. This means respecting the rights of our colleagues and customers and ensuring everyone is, and feels, respected and valued. We support an inclusive workplace and have a suite of people-related policies and guidelines that span the employee lifecycle which emphasises this approach. Broad diversity and inclusion messages are strongly reflected in core Inland Revenue policy documentation, which are reviewed regularly. The following policies and guidelines in scope of your request are released to you and are attached: 1.Code of Conduct – Tikanga Whanonga (page 9) 2.Diversity and Inclusion Policy •our commitment to an inclusive culture (includes people from all walks of life) •what diversity and inclusion means (includes diversity of gender and sexual orientation) •our strategic approach to diversity and inclusion and implementation plan (includes Rainbow inclusion and celebration) •where to access Diversity & Inclusion resources (includes Rainbow- specific resources) •support for networks (includes specific mention of the Rainbow Network) •harassment, bullying and discrimination prevention and management. 3.Harassment, Discrimination and Bullying Policy which defines discrimination in line with the Human Rights Act and Employment Relations Act (includes sexual orientation). 4.Recruitment Policy (page 1-2) •This policy is supported through unconscious bias training and the importance of our people understanding, recognising, and knowing how to address it. This awareness supports leaders to make decisions that help us continue to build a diverse and inclusive workplace. Unconscious bias training is now a mandatory part of induction for new starters. 5.LGBTTQIA+ Inclusive Language Guide which includes terms and references to use in relation to diversity, inclusion and the LGBTTQIA+ community. Page 2 of 5 Ref: 23 OIA1772 CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 6.Guide for Inland Revenue Email Signatures 7.Inland Revenue Gender Transitioning at Work Guide 8.Commissioner’s Awards information on how Inland Revenue celebrates building an inclusive culture Additionally, Inland Revenue Acts published on our website (www.ird.govt.nz) were amended in 2005 to remove discrimination on the grounds of marital status or sexual orientation so that revenue laws are consistent with human rights obligations and clearly recognise same-sex relationships and partners. The attached documents contain information that is outside the scope of your request. This info rmation has not been considered for release and has been withheld as “not in scope”. He Toa Takitini – Inland Revenue’s Rainbow network and resources Inland Revenue continues to work with He Toa Takitini, Inlan d Revenue’s Rainbow network, with an aim to improve outcomes for Inland Revenue staff who identify as part of the Rainbow community. Our network works to improve Inland Revenue both as a Rainbow employer, and as a safe and inclusive government agency for LGBTTQIA+ customers. Inland Revenue has a wide range of education material available, alongside extensive use of our communication platforms, in particular Yammer, as a means to communicate and educate our people. One example of this has been to have our people share their stories of , for example, for Transgender Awareness Week the He Toa Takitini team shared some of the stories of the trans people of Te Tari Taake to help build awareness and understanding. Inland Revenue’s approach to learning is based on the concept of ‘self-deter mined learning’ where employees seek learning resources when needed. Inland Revenue has educational Diversity & Inclusion (D&I) resources available online on our D&I web page, along with He Toa Takitini pages, including the following Rainbow-specific ones: LGBTTQIA+ Inclusive Language Guide Developed by He Toa Takitini, the resource provides terms and references to use in relation to diversity, inclusion and the LGBTTQIA+ community. Information on use of pronouns is for the most part linked through to Te Kawa Mataaho’s (Public Service Commission’s ) website and the gender-neutral language guide was developed at Inland Revenue and rolled out across the public service. These can be found here: https://www.publicservice.govt.nz/guidance/rainbow-inclusive-language-guide/ and https://www.publicservice.govt.nz/guidance/pronoun-use-in-email-signatures/ Pronouns are widely used across Inland Revenue, particularly in email signatures, where they are a part of the official guide for Inland Revenue’s email signatures. Gender transitioning at work The IR Gender Transitioning at Work Guide was developed by He Toa Takitini in collaboration with the People & Culture team. It provides practical information on how Inland Revenue supports gender transitioning and relevant processes for: •A person who is thinking of (or is) gender transitioning; •Any leader of a person who is thinking of (or is) transitioning; •Others who may be required to support a person who is transitioning, or their leader or team. The guide includes information such as developing a transitioning plan, access to bathrooms, updating Inland Revenue records, and further resources and contacts. Our He Toa Takitini revisited this guide to make it a visually plain document so that people viewing Page 3 of 5 Ref: 23 OIA1772 CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] the guide at work could do so discretely. This update was a result of feedback from the community. With He Toa Takatinis’s agreement, Inland Revenue does not have an explicit leave policy or provision for gender reassignment/affirmation. A separate approach was not seen to support normalisation. We are committed to supporting people who are transitioning at work and promoting an inclusive culture through our existing leave, special leave, and medical appointment provisions. These policies support the expectation that we will work with individuals on a case-by -case basis. The IR Gender Transitioning at Work Guide is designed to be reviewed and updated as practices evolve and develop. Gender-neutral bathrooms policies or information The ability to provide general neutral bathrooms is considered on a case-by -case basis as building leases come to an end, or we have opportunities to review. Where there is a new build or a full refit, this is included as part of the design. Gender neutral options are considered for other sites where possible. Where applicable, we ensure that our Facilities Management web page contains information about where unisex/gender-neutral bathrooms are accessible in Inland Revenue offices. Supporting Diversity and Inclusion Inland Revenue celebrates a range of diversity and inclusion related events and initiatives. Inland Revenue’s Commissioner’s awards celebrate excellence in a range of categories, including D&I. Further information on the Commissioner’s awards can be found in Item 8 in the attached document. Events and occasions of significance are marked in Inland Revenue’s D&I calendar which is published on the intranet to provide visibility to all staff so that they can celebrate and plan for these things. People can also access educational stories and resources shared by He Toa Takitini on the Rainbow Yammer page. Additionally Inland Revenue designed a Rainbow logo which incorporates the Inland Revenue logo in a brand aligned way. The logo symbolises Inland Revenue’s rainbow staff and the different colours represent the diversity found in the rainbow community. The logo is used in multiple ways: • For email signatures for Rainbow Network members and Rainbow Allies • Branding of Rainbow materials and documents such as IR’s Gender transitioning guide and LGBTTQIA+ inclusive language guide When developing Inland Revenue’s recruitment video promoting careers at Inland Revenue, we actively sought representation from our diverse people, including our Rainbow Network who were featured in the video wearing Rainbow lanyards. Workforce Data and Surveys The 2021 Te Taunaki Public Sector Census included a range of questions about inclusion. However, this information was not Inland Revenue specific and is held by Te Kawa Mataaho. This can be found at https://www.publicservice.govt.nz/research-and-da ta/te- taunaki-public-service-census-2021/. Inland Revenue’s online job application form asks for demographic information for monitoring purposes and allows applicants to select Gender Diverse, Male, Female or Prefer Not to Say, which is in line with the public sector guidance. Additionally, as part of our on-boarding process, for new employee information we enable use of preferred names and gender diverse for gender selection in our HR information management system. However, as this is optional, the information we do hold is not a complete representation of our diverse workforce. Inland Revenue regularly encourages our people to participate in the People Experience (PX) Pulse Surveys, which enable our people to share their experience in the key areas of