www.ird.govt.nz Ref: 23OIA1892 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 8 March 2023 Dear Thank you for your email of 8 February 2023 requesting an explanation for the discrepancy between the number of early childhood education centres (ECEs) listed on the Ministry of Table 1 of our OIA response of 7 February 2023. Additionally, you requested the data supplied on 7 February 2023 be amended to include centres that have registered as a partnership, trust, or other unincorporated business, later clarified to exclude natural persons. You outlined your preference for data matching the full MOE directory to assist your objective to understand financial data for the early childhood education (ECE) sector and whether there was a declining or increasing trend. On 27 February 2023, you also provided an additional list of All active licenced Early Learning Education & Care Servicesprovided by MOE in response to an OIA made to their agency. Clarification of approach The registers supplied do not include IRD numbers and could not easily be matched to Inland Revenue data without significant analytical effort. While the new register you supplied contains the New Zealand Business Number (NZBN), the NZBN is provided to Inland Revenue automatically for newly established companies. There is no requirement for existing companies or for other entities to provide their NZBN to Inland Revenue so matching using the NZBN would not be easily achieved. As discussed by email, Business Industry Classification codes (BIC) remain the method by which Inland Revenue can supply the most relevant information. Volumes There are a number of factors that contribute to the difference between the information supplied in our previous reply and the numbers of entities registered as an ECE. For example, Charitable Trusts (or other organisations that hold charitable status) generally do not file income tax returns, meaning we are unable to provide data about them. Registered ECEs may report to Inland Revenue as a corporate group, meaning several entities trading under different names report to Inland Revenue collectively. We also note, with an apology, that in our original reply we had inadvertently filtered out many of the company-nil returns from Table 1, when they should still have been included. This coding error has been corrected in this updated release below. Information being released As you are aware, we hold each entit chosen Business Industry Classification (BIC) code for our business customers. For incomes and tax, released below are summary statistics from IR4 - company tax returns, IR9 - club/society returns and IR6 - Trust returns where the customer has used any of the business industry codes Q871020 (child minding centre, excluding home- based), P801010 (kindergartens or accredited pre-primary school education) and P801020 (pre-schools providing accredited pre-primary education). Ref: 23OIA1892 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The information provided in Tables 1b and 2b in the Appendix is filtered by taxpayers using these codes, and who have filed any of these three types of income tax returns. We have not provided data for partnerships as their IR7 partnership return does not contain a tax figure because the income tax liability is passed through to the individual partners. We have also excluded unincorporated individuals and partners of partnerships, as there are likely to be many additional variables such as salary/wage income that could distort individual tax liability. You have confirmed that individuals will not likely be the demographic that you are seeking. The amended volume of taxpayers identified through BIC codes as ECE providers is again noted to be low compared to the overall volume as provided in the spreadsheet you submitted on 27 February 2023. We have applied the same assumptions as per the previous response. However, an additional simplifying assumption is that in respect of IR6 returns, the trust tax rate of 33% has been applied to calculate tax regardless of any attribution through to beneficiaries. Table 1b includes nil returns, and Table 2b excludes them. Table 2b may be more useful for your stated intent if you want to focus only on those entities with non-zero tax obligations. The income variable provided is taxable income. This is calculated after any brought forward losses have been claimed which may have reduced taxable income to nil. Any current-year net loss is also treated as nil taxable income in these tables. The tax variable is residual income tax. This is tax payable by the entity directly and is net of any withholding tax credits from any income streams on which the tax has already been paid. Debt Aligning what we are providing for tax, we are releasing debt information for companies, trusts and clubs/societies that have used with BIC Codes Q871020 (child minding centre, excluding home-based), P801010 (kindergartens or accredited pre-primary school education), and P801020 (pre-schools providing accredited pre-primary school education) To align with our standard debt reporting methodology, the debt information provided is the total value of debt as at the last day of each respective tax year, rather than the debt attributed to that tax year. The debt information has been separated by tax product including Income Tax, Employer (PAYE), and GST. The remainder of smaller tax products have been grouped into the The average, median and quartile information provided applies to the total debt value. Information being refused The original request asked for income ranges. Data related to income ranges (maximum amounts) is considered sensitive revenue information as it relates to specific taxpayers. I therefore decided to refuse this part of your request under section 18(c)(i) of the OIA as confidentiality obligation set out in section 18 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Disclosure of this information does not fall within any of the exceptions to the confidentiality obligation listed in sections 18D to 18J and schedule 7 of the TAA. Right of Review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz.