\[\[\[INININ COCOCONNNFFFIDIDIDEEENNNCECECE\]\]\]\[IN CONFIDENCE\] While women are expected to disproportionately benefit from the proposal owing to the greater representation of women among PPL recipients, the proposal would benefit all PPL recipients regardless of gender. Inland Revenue’s preferred option On balance, IR supports the overall proposal of a government payment of a three percent employer contribution. While the solutions to issues such as overrepresentation in lower paid roles and lower rates of labour force participation among women lie outside KiwiSaver, developing comprehensive solutions to these issues represents a long-term project which would require resourcing as part of the government’s work programme. Although the overall impact of the proposal is likely to be small, and disproportionately benefit wealthier households who are able to contribute to their KiwiSaver accounts while a member of the household is on PPL, the proposal would nonetheless go some way toward mitigating the effect of time spent out of work for PPL recipients. Additionally, although the amount paid to a PPL recipient over the course of parental leave would be small, the effect of compound interest over the remainder of a caregiver’s career would increase the absolute value of the contribution and promote an improvement in financial security for caregivers in retirement. While this is a finely balanced assessment, IR supports option 2 over option 3, as this is consistent with current KiwiSaver settings where employers must pay a contribution only if the employee contributes three percent or more from their pay. This alignment with existing KiwiSaver settings means it is likely to be lower in cost and simpler to administer. Additionally, the selection of option 2 would not preclude the subsequent selection and implementation of option 3 at a later date, if a future government decided the proposal had merit and should be adopted as part of a future budget initiative. Views from consultation Due to the time constraints imposed by the budget process and time constraints in preparing advice, consultation with the public or with iwi and hapū has not been undertaken on the options. However, in 2022 a joint agency working group 1 undertook some initial engagement on a range of issues and options for KiwiSaver Enhancement. While the working group engaged on broad issues and enhancement options, it did not get feedback on the PPL options specifically from iwi or hapū, business or small business representatives KiwiSaver providers or the general public. However, feedback from these meetings on the enhancement approach generally indicate it is likely that: • either option would be supported by KiwiSaver providers • iwi and hapū might support option 3 over option 2. 1 This included officials from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Ministry of Social Development (MSD), IR and the Public Service Commission (PSC). Regulatory Impact Statement | 2 \[\[\[INININ COCOCONNNFFFIDIDIDEEENNNCECECE\]\]\]\[IN CONFIDENCE\] 4. These issues affect women’s ability to contribute to their KiwiSaver accounts and otherwise save for their retirement, including their eligibility for the member tax credit (MTC), a government incentive designed to encourage New Zealanders to save for their retirement. 5. The primary solutions to address these inequalities lie outside of KiwiSaver settings. These solutions include labour market interventions as well as education policy relating to childcare. However, providing additional government contributions for recipients of PPL would enable better outcomes for women who are currently in the workforce and others who contribute to KiwiSaver from their PPL. While PPL is available to all parents regardless of gender, we estimate that for the 2020 – 21 financial year, approximately 95 percent of PPL recipients identified themselves as women. 5 What objectives are sought in relation to the policy problem? 6. The objective is to improve retirement outcomes for women. Although the primary avenues for addressing the identified inequities lie outside KiwiSaver, the interventions identified could go some way towards mitigating the effect of labour market and social differences on women. Section 2: Deciding upon an option to address the policy problem What criteria will be used to compare options to the status quo? 7. The options identified will be compared using the effectiveness and efficiency criteria in the table below. In evaluating the effectiveness of the proposal, the “EAST” behavioural insights framework has also been considered. This identifies the successful features of behavioural change interventions as Easy, Attractive, Social and Timely. 5 Gender is taken from individuals preferred titles (i.e., Mr, Mrs or Miss), as disclosing gender is optional upon a Paid Parental Leave application. In a small percentage of cases gender cannot be determined form title (gender neutral or no title provided) Regulatory Impact Statement | 5 \[\[\[INININ COCOCONNNFFFIDIDIDEEENNNCECECE\]\]\]\[IN CONFIDENCE\] What options are being considered? Option 1 – Retain the status quo 11. The government could choose to retain the status quo and take no active steps toward addressing the existing retirement gender equity issues. Wider government work on options to address these issues (e.g. pay equity, access to affordable childcare) would continue as resources allow. Option 2 – The government would pay a matched three percent “employer” KiwiSaver contribution to contributing PPL recipients 12. The government could subsidise the payment of a three percent KiwiSaver “employer” contribution to PPL recipients provided the recipient also pays at least a three percent KiwiSaver employee contribution into their KiwiSaver retirement savings accounts. Option 2 – The government would pay a three percent “employer” KiwiSaver contribution to eligible PPL recipients, irrespective of how much they contribute to their KiwiSaver account from their PPL payments 13. The government could subsidise the payment of a three percent KiwiSaver “employer” contribution to all PPL recipients, regardless of whether or not they were making an employee contribution into their KiwiSaver retirement savings account. Comparison of options against the status quo 14. The following table uses assessment criteria to assess Options 2 and 3 against the status quo (Option 1). Each option is scored on how it contributes to each criterion in comparison to the status quo and the high-level reasons for the score are recorded directly below each criteria score. The final assessment is provided in the final row of the table. Key: ++ much better than doing nothing/the status quo + better than doing nothing/the status quo 0 about the same as doing nothing/the status quo - worse than doing nothing/the status quo - -much worse than doing nothing/the status quo Regulatory Impact Statement | 7 \[\[\[INININ COCOCONNNFFFIDIDIDEEENNNCECECE\]\]\]\[IN CONFIDENCE\] What option is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives, and deliver the highest net benefits? 15. Each of the options considered above has specific costs and benefits. For example: o Option 1 – Status quo: • Taking no additional action would maintain the status quo, with resource continuing to be applied as it is currently and the KiwiSaver gender inequality issues outlined in the problem definition would remain. This assumes that no other KiwiSaver policy enhancements are currently being considered. However, work focused on developing wider solutions to gender pay and participation in paid work could continue as resources allow. • Both options 2 and 3 apply to PPL recipients. Although IR does not have comprehensive data on the gender of PPL recipients it is estimated that 95 percent of those receiving PPL in the 2020-21 financial year were women, with men comprising two percent of PPL recipients. The gender of the remaining three percent of PPL recipients was unknown on his methodology. 6 o Option 2 - government would pay a three percent KiwiSaver employer contribution to PPL recipients provided the PPL recipients contributed at least three percent of their PPL to their KiwiSaver accounts: • Currently, approximately 15% of PPL recipients contribute to their KiwiSaver accounts while receiving PPL. As the proposal would incentivise PPL recipients to contribute to their KiwiSaver accounts, it is possible that the proportion of PPL recipients contributing to their KiwiSaver would increase, along with the KiwiSaver balances of PPL recipients. • At the current maximum government PPL contribution of $661.12 (gross) per week, a three percent government contribution would represent $19.83 per week, for a maximum of $516 over 26 weeks of PPL. As PPL recipients would have to contribute the same amount to qualify for the government contribution, this would represent up to $1,032 in annual KiwiSaver contributions which might otherwise not be made. • Additionally, the proposal’s incentivisation of KiwiSaver employee contributions could also result in KiwiSaver members receiving some portion of the Member Tax Credit (MTC). The MTC matches KiwiSaver employee contributions at 50 percent up to a maximum of $1,042.86, meaning the government contributes up to $521.43 to a KiwiSaver member’s account each year. A KiwiSaver member who contributes $516 over 26 weeks of PPL would receive an MTC of $258 from the government. 6 Gender is taken from individuals preferred titles (i.e., Mr, Mrs or Miss), as disclosing gender is optional upon a Paid Parental Leave application. In a small percentage of cases gender cannot be determined from title (gender neutral or no title provided). Regulatory Impact Statement | 10 \[\[\[INININ COCOCONNNFFFIDIDIDEEENNNCECECE\]\]\]\[IN CONFIDENCE\] • Although the proposal would result in a small contribution in absolute terms, it would account for approximately 20 percent of the shortfall of contributions for a woman on the median wage taking a full year off full-time paid work. Additionally, the impact of compound interest over the remaining course of a retiree’s working life would increase the value of this contribution considerably. • However, as the receipt of the government subsidy is conditional on the PPL recipient also contributing, there is a risk that the benefit of this proposal could disproportionately accrue to higher income households who are able to afford KiwiSaver contributions while on PPL. o Option 3 - government would pay a three percent KiwiSaver employer contribution to PPL recipients regardless of whether they were making employee contributions: • Requiring the member to have contributions deducted from PPL is likely to result in a large proportion of the new benefit being captured by those who are more financially comfortable and so can afford to have deductions made from their PPL. However, it maintains the core KiwiSaver principle of “matched employee contributions”. • Making government contributions while on PPL unconditional would reach a greater number of those unable to afford to make their own KiwiSaver PPL deductions. However, it would not encourage ‘employee’ contributions. • Option 3 would also cost significantly more in fiscal terms. Although the administrative costs of Options 2 and 3 are not expected to be substantially different, the cost of Option 3 is expected to have an upper estimate of $101.8m over the 2022/23 – 2026/27 forecast period. This is more than five times the expected cost of Option 2 (of $19.219m). Trust and confidence criterion – same for options 1 and 2 16. KiwiSaver providers have previously indicated that frequent ‘tweaks’ to KiwiSaver have the potential to reduce trust and confidence in KiwiSaver as a stable long-term government intervention. While these are minor changes, we consider that they are more likely to increase trust and confidence in KiwiSaver than to reduce it, because they are increasing government incentives for participation. 17. By acknowledging structural inequities, these options for providing targeted support have potential to strengthen the ‘social licence’ of the scheme and increase public confidence and engagement in KiwiSaver. 18. The risk that people ”over save” in KiwiSaver and would have better financial wellbeing if they used the funds in the present is mitigated by the opt-in nature of those options which would otherwise affect present spending. Inflation – same for all three 19. Finally, the interventions will not have a material inflationary effect, given the increased government spending would be invested directly into KiwiSaver accounts and not be expended in the economy until a person reaches 65 or is eligible for early withdrawal (e.g. a first home withdrawal or serious illness). The proposed payments would not be Regulatory Impact Statement | 11 \[\[\[INININ COCOCONNNFFFIDIDIDEEENNNCECECE\]\]\]\[IN CONFIDENCE\] considered income and would therefore not affect entitlement to benefits or Working For Families payments Views from initial engagement 20. Due to the time constraints imposed on officials in preparing advice and the budget process it has not been possible to undertake consultation with the public or with iwi and hapū on the options. 21. However, in 2022 a joint agency working group undertook some initial engagement on issues and options for KiwiSaver Enhancement. 7 22. Officials engaged with KiwiSaver and funds management providers, the KiwiSaver lead for the Prime Minister’s Business Advisory Council, representatives from capital markets and academic sectors, the Council of Trade Unions, Business New Zealand, the Small Business Advisory Council and staff at a number of iwi savings schemes. Officials also met with representatives of two iwi without savings schemes and two social services providers who work primarily with Pacific Peoples and whānau Māori. Impacts for iwi and hapū and whānau Māori 23. Engagement with iwi/Māori was limited, but the feedback received indicated that: • there is a strong and widely held interest in saving for the future among Māori, focussed on being able to pass on savings to support tamariki and mokopuna. • KiwiSaver is valued for its support of home ownership, and its rewards and incentives. However engagement with KiwiSaver could be increased among whānau Māori. 24. Survey data indicates KiwiSaver works similarly for Māori as for non-Māori in terms of participation, when controlling for income level, employment status and other factors. 8 Māori who contribute to KiwiSaver are more likely than non-Māori to be contributing at 4 and 6 percent. This is consistent with engagement feedback about the high value placed on saving and on KiwiSaver’s role in saving towards home ownership. 25. KiwiSaver settings do not vary by ethnicity; however, they currently compound the impact of colonisation for Māori. 9 Since Māori are over-represented in low paid work, underemployment and unemployment, incomes are significantly lower than for non- Māori. For this reason iwi, hapū and whānau Māori may potentially • prefer option 3 over option 2, as it better addresses distributional impacts; and 7 These included work to consider KiwiSaver recommendations of the 2019 RRIP, Capital Markets 2029 report and Prime Minister’s Business Advisory Council. 8 Māori have lower rates of membership and of contribution than non-Māori, due to being overrepresented in unemployment, underemployment and low paid work. 9 Māori have lower rates of home ownership, higher rates of unaffordable housing, and are over-represented among the unemployed, as well as in jobs that involve lower pay, fewer skills, and fewer advancement opportunities. Māori have significantly lower net worth and life expectancy than non-Māori. Regulatory Impact Statement | 12 \[\[\[INININ COCOCONNNFFFIDIDIDEEENNNCECECE\]\]\]\[IN CONFIDENCE\] • prefer any option which is not tied to participation in paid work, over PPL based options. Impacts for KiwiSaver providers 26. A range of individual KiwiSaver providers have publicly noted the gender retirement savings gap 10 and need to close it. 11 27. Both options 2 and 3 may have some small implementation costs and impacts on the KiwiSaver industry, such as updating existing information and guidance on government contribution entitlements. Despite these costs, we expect the options would be supported by industry on the basis that they seek to acknowledge and partially address the gender gap in retirement savings and/or drive KiwiSaver membership and contributions. Each option would also increase KiwiSaver funds under management and industry revenue from management fees. Overall assessment 28. Although neither option will directly address the wider issues associated with gender and retirement savings, the assessment model (above) indicates Option 2 is preferable to Option 3. Two key factors in reaching this assessment are the misalignment with the existing matched employee/employer contribution settings which would occur if Option 3 were to be implemented, as well as the significantly lower fiscal cost associated with Option 2. 29. While, as noted above, the overall impact of Option 2 is likely to be small, the proposal would nonetheless go some way toward mitigating the effect of time spent out of work for PPL recipients. 10 ASB Media Release in 2022 (https://www.asb.co.nz/documents/media-centre/media-releases/women-better- off-day-to-day-but-miss-out-on-750-million-at-retirement.html). 11 ANZ Dollars and Sense: A Decade of KiwiSaver (2017); ANZ, KiwiSaver Equity for Women NZIER for KiwiWealth (2022). Regulatory Impact Statement | 13 \[\[\[INININ COCOCONNNFFFIDIDIDEEENNNCECECE\]\]\]\[IN CONFIDENCE\] Section 3: Implementation 30. Provided Cabinet agrees to progress the policy, the proposal would be introduced in the 2023-24 Annual Rates’ Bill and would take effect from the 2024-25 Financial Year (i.e. from 1 July 2024). This would mean that existing PPL recipients who contribute to their KiwiSaver accounts would be eligible for a three percent government contribution on any remaining PPL payments beginning from 1 July 2024 (but not on any PPL payments received prior to 1 July 2024). By contrast, PPL recipients who begin receiving PPL after 1 July 2024 would be eligible for a three percent government contribution for the full duration of their PPL. Section 4: Delivering an option How will the new arrangements be monitored, evaluated, and reviewed? 31. KiwiSaver is jointly administered by the Treasury, MBIE, and IR, and is monitored on a ongoing basis as part of the agencies’ ongoing stewardship obligations, including through regulatory reviews. 32. The operation and progress of the proposal will be observed by the responsible agencies and reported on as required. Additionally, KiwiSaver settings may be considered by the Retirement Commissioner as part of a statutory review of retirement savings settings every three years, (the focus is set in the Terms of Reference issued by the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs). 33. This provides an opportunity for an independent consideration of KiwiSaver’s features and their success in achieving the Government’s objectives. 34. The findings of external reporting frameworks which monitors the performance of pension systems around the world (such as the Mercer CFA Institute Global Pension Index) could also be considered as a method of evaluating the operation of the KiwiSaver scheme. Regulatory Impact Statement | 15