3 Ref: 24OIA1440 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Publishing of OIA response We intend to publish our response to your request on Inland Revenue’s website (www.ird.govt.nz) as this information may be of interest to other members of the public. This letter, with your personal details removed, will be published in its entirety. Publishing responses increases the availability of information to the public and is consistent with the OIA’s purpose of enabling more effective participation in the making and administration of laws and policies, and promoting the accountability of officials. Thank you for your request. Yours sincerely Erina Clayton Enterprise Leader, People & Workplace Services Parental leave at IR - People & Workplace Services Updated - October 2023 Page | 2 Contents Introduction...................................................................................................................................... 3 Who should read this guide? ......................................................................................................... 3 What this guide covers ................................................................................................................. 3 Key reference material ....................................................................................................................... 3 Initial steps and considerations ........................................................................................................... 4 Who can apply for parental leave? ................................................................................................. 4 Parental leave eligibility ................................................................................................................ 4 What type of parental leave can I apply for? .................................................................................... 4 How do I apply for parental leave? ....................................... ......................................................... 4 Applying for paid parental leave (PPL) ................................................. . ......................................... 6 What happens if I have to start parental leave early?....................................................................... 6 Before commencing leave ................................................ ........... ...................................................... 7 What should I do before commencing parental leave? ....................................................................... 7 Enter the approved leave into the system....................................................................................... 7 Am I eligible for the Employer parental leave payment? ................................................................... 8 How to apply for the Employer parental leave payment in the system ................................................. 8 Have you and your leader discussed a handover? ............................................................................ 8 Practical tidies before you go ........................................................................................................ 8 Whilst on leave ........................................... ..................................................................................... 9 Who do I contact while on parental leave? ..................................................................................... 9 IR employee benefits you can access while on parental leave ............................................................. 9 Organising keeping in touch (KIT) days ......................................................................................... 10 Agreeing to a temporary return to work during parental leave? ....................................................... 11 I want to take annual leave while on parental leave, what do I need to do? ....................................... 11 What happens if I resign while on parental leave? .......................................................................... 11 What this means for your leave ................................................................................................... 11 Returning to work ........................................................................................................................... 12 What do I need to do before returning to work from parental leave? ................................................ 12 What happens when I return to work? .......................................................................................... 12 KiwiSaver contribution payment .................................................................................................. 12 Am I eligible for a childcare subsidy? ............................................................................................ 13 How to apply for a childcare subsidy in MIRI .................................................................................. 13 Parental leave at IR - People & Workplace Services Updated - October 2023 Page | 3 Introduction Who should read this guide? Anyone who is looking to apply for parental leave and anyone wondering if their leave request could be covered under the Parental Leave & Employment Protection Act, 1987 (PLEPA) or IR’s parental leave provisions. It’s important to be informed about what could be relevant for you. Talk with your leader if you have any issue’s regarding the parental leave process and have a look at the key reference material. This guide also provides information which will support leaders when a team member is applying for parental leave. It is aligned with the structure of the Leader’s parental leave checklist. What this guide covers This guide looks to provide detail around what you might need to consider and various actions required at different stages of the parental leave process. It covers: • Initial steps and considerations • Before commencing leave • Whilst on leave • Returning to work Key reference material The Employment New Zealand website This site contains lots of parental leave information and specific sections are referenced in this resource. Parental leave » Employment New Zealand Parental leave and payment eligibility table » Employment New Zealand Your Employment Agreement These contain specific clauses relevant to parental leave. Employment Agreements IR’s People Policies & Guidelines Specifically, T opic 2 Parental Leave Guidelines and Leave Policy. People policies & guidelines IR’s Parental leave checklists Useful for all parental leave types and lines up with this more detailed resource. Some, or all of the checklists will be relevant to you and your application. Team member’s parental leave checklist Leader’s parental leave checklist Parental leave at IR - People & Workplace Services Updated - October 2023 Page | 4 Initial steps and considerations Who can apply for parental leave? Anyone may be able to take leave from work to care for their new child. What specific type of leave might be available to you is explained in more detail below. Parental leave eligibility You may be eligible for parental leave: • before your baby’s birth. • after your baby has been born (up until the baby’s first birthday). • when a child under six -years-of -age has come into your care. For more information check the following The key reference material above. The Parental leave and eligibility table can be particularly useful in determining your legislative eligibility. What type of parental leave can I apply for? The leave options available to you will depend on your situation and whether or not you meet the 6 or 12 month legislative eligibility criteria 1 . There are various legislative leave types you may qualify for such as: • primary carer leave • extended leave • partner’s leave • special leave • negotiated carer leave For more information check the following • Types of parental leave » Employment New Zealand – for descriptions of the various leave types • Parental leave eligibility » Employment New Zealand - for more eligibility information as it relates to the various leave types including a tool to help you work out your leave entitlement. NOTE: Even if you don’t meet the service requirements under legislation , IR’s collective employment agreements provide access to up to 26 weeks parental leave. T he employee does not have to have been employed at IR for the minimum 6 month period stipulated in the PLEPA 1987. Generally negotiated carer leave is the legislative option which employees can request if they don’t meet the 6- month PLEPA eligibility criteria, (and are also eligible for paid parental leave). Employees who meet the 6- month PLEPA eligibility criteria but not the 12 month criteria have access under legislation to up to 26 weeks primary carer leave or extended leave, and no further entitlement is available under IR’s collective clause. How do I apply for parental l eave? Talk to your leader: L et them know your circumstances and your intentions regarding parental leave. They will provide you with the appropriate level of support and work with you on your application end-to-end. 1 You must have worked for IR for at least an average of 10 hours a week, for a minimum of 6 months or been back at work for at least 6 months since your last period of parental leave to qualify for 26 weeks primary carer leave or for a minimum of 12 months or been back at work for at least 12 months since your last period of parental leave to qualify for 52 weeks extended leave. 1 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] This is the Parental Leave section from Inland Revenue’s wider Leave Policy, which covers a range of leave types (e.g. annual, sick, bereavement, family violence and parental leave). \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ PARENTAL LEAVE The purpose of parental leave is to provide employees with time away from work when a new child comes into their family. Entitlements are set out in employment agreements and in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 (PLEPA). An employee may also be entitled to paid parental leave through the Government’s paid parental leave scheme. Inland Revenue offers some provisions beyond the legislated entitlement, including the following. Employ er Parental Leave Payment (effective 1 July 2023) 1 If an employee meets the 6 or 12 month employment eligibility criteria under the PLEPA 2 and takes parental leave they will be entitled to either: •A lump sum payment equivalent to six weeks’ pay; or •A lump sum payment pro-rated to the number of weeks they were absent (if the period of leave is less than six weeks). Employees may choose to have this payment made upon commencement of, or on return from, parental leave. Both these options are paid at the salary pay rate that applied when the parental leave commenced. This provision is also included in employment agreements other than those on the standard terms agreements (for whom this provision is extended by policy). STEA 2011 also contains clause 4.8.1 Ex gratia payment, so these employees could elect to apply that clause if they choose to (though this provision is generally more favourable if criteria are met) Contribution to KiwiSaver on return to work following parental leave (effective 1 July 2023) 3 To be eligible for any KiwiSaver contribution payment, a person must meet the 6 or 12-month employment eligibility criteria in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act (‘PLEPA’) and have taken that leave. The employee must meet the requirements of their KiwiSaver scheme to receive employer contributions at the time they commence parental leave, and be receiving employer contributions at that time. If they are not receiving employer contributions at the commencement of parental leave, no lump sum payment will be made on their return. No payment will be made if the employee is on a KiwiSaver contributions holiday at the time parental leave commences. 1 This provision does not apply to the small number of employees who have elected to remain on a version of an Individual Employment Agreement predating 2023. In this case any ‘exgratia/incentive payment’ clause in their employment agreement will apply. 2 Employee must have worked for IR for a minimum of 6 months or been back at work for at least 6 months since their last period of parental leave to qualify for 26 weeks extended leave. Employee must have worked for IR for a minimum of 12 months or been back at work for at least 12 months since their last period of parental leave to qualify for 52 weeks extended leave. 3 This provision does not apply to the small number of employees who have elected to remain on a version of an Individual Employment Agreement predating 2023. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Apply for the childcare subsidy in MIRI if you are eligible and paying for childcare (note: this is applicable from the date you apply so please apply as soon as practical as it is not backdated). Update your bank account and contact details if needed in Ātea Consider if you need to change any of your deductions that you had prior to commencing parental leave (these will automatically restart on your return) If you have had a change in working hours check your first few payslips to make sure everything is being processed correctly. If you are eligible and did not elect to receive the Employer parental leave payment at the start of your parental leave, please note it will be paid as soon as practicable on your return. If you are eligible for the KiwiSaver employer contribution payment it will be paid as soon as practicable on your return.