1 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee TAXATION (USE OF MONEY INTEREST RATES) AMENDMENT REGULATIONS 2023 Proposal 1 This paper seeks the Cabinet Legislation Committee’s agreement to submit an Order in Council amending the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Regulations 1998 to the Executive Council. 2 It is proposed to amend the regulation so the underpayment use of money interest (UOMI) rate is set at 10.39%, while the overpayment UOMI rate is set at 3.53%. Policy 3 The UOMI rates play an important role in the tax compliance rules. By moving in line with underlying market rates, the UOMI rates provide taxpayers with the incentive to pay the right amount of tax at the right time. The rates apply to all revenue and duties. 4 The Tax Administration Act 1994 provides for the UOMI underpayment and overpayment interest rates to be set by Order in Council. Once the rates are set, they remain the prescribed UOMI rates unless subsequently changed by Order in Council. 5 The methodology for calculating the rates is set out in the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates Setting Process) Regulations 1997 (the Regulations). The Regulations provide that the interest rate for underpaid tax should be set at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) floating first mortgage new customer housing rate plus 250 basis points. The floating first mortgage new customer housing rate reflects the variable interest rate offered by surveyed institutions to new borrowers for residential property, weighted by each surveyed institution’s total lending outstanding for housing purposes. 6 The Regulations provide that the interest rate for overpaid tax is set at the latest RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate less 100 basis points, or, if this would produce a negative figure, at 0%. The RBNZ 90-day bank bill rate is the monthly average of the daily standard rates. 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:12:37 Doc 2 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 7 The current underpayment and overpayment rates are 9.21% and 2.31% respectively. The UOMI rates were last changed by Order in Council with effect from 17 January 2023 and were based on the interest rates for August 2022. 8 The RBNZ interest rates for December 2022 indicate that the 90-day bank bill rate has changed by 122 basis points since the rates were last adjusted. I consider that an adjustment of the UOMI rates is necessary to avoid a long- term misalignment. I therefore recommend the overpayment rate be increased to 3.53%. 9 The floating first mortgage new customer housing rate has also changed by 118 basis points since the rates were last adjusted. Therefore, I also recommend that the underpayment rate be increased to 10.39%. Timing 10 I propose to submit the Order in Council giving effect to the change in the UOMI underpayment rate to Cabinet for approval and submission to the Executive Council at its meeting on 23 February 2023. In order to minimise compliance costs, it is proposed that the new rate comes into force on 9 May 2023, the day after the due date for the third standard instalment of provisional tax. Compliance 11 The regulations comply with the principles, Acts, guidelines, and requirements set out below as follows: 11.1 the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi Not applicable 11.2 the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 Not applicable 11.3 the Human Rights Act 1993 Not applicable 11.4 the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 1993 Not applicable 11.5 relevant international standards and obligations Not applicable 11.6 the Legislation Guidelines (2018 edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee Complies Regulations Review Committee 12 There are no anticipated grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Order in Council to the attention of the House under Standing Order 319. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel 13 The Parliamentary Counsel Office has certified that the attached Order in Council is in order for submission to Cabinet. 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:12:37 3 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Impact Analysis 14 A regulatory impact assessment is not required as the proposal is of a minor and routine nature and does not substantially alter existing arrangements. Financial Implications 15 The proposal to increase the UOMI rates, with the effective date of 9 May 2023, is estimated to result in net positive revenue of approximately $13 million over the forecast period. This number comprises the impact of the changes on tax revenue and on impairment expenditure. 16 The forecast net tax revenue impact of the increased revenue from the underpayment adjustment and the increased cost of the overpayment adjustment is shown in the table below. $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 6.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 Total Operating (6.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) 17 However, as a large part of underpayment debt is typically written off, there is a larger cost to revenue than is factored above. To represent estimated write- offs, underpayments are impaired in the Crown accounts. The impairment rate of 67.63% is based on debt repayment rates for the year ending 30 June 2022. Forecast impairment expenditure is presented in the table below: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non-Departmental Other Expenses: Impairment of debt and bad debt write-offs 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 Total Operating 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:12:37 4 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Publicity 18 Inland Revenue will publish an item about these changes in the next available issue of its Tax Information Bulletin. Proactive Release 19 I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers in whole within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Consultation 20 The Treasury and the New Zealand Customs Service have been consulted in the preparation of this paper and agree with its recommendations. Recommendations I recommend that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1 agree that the UOMI underpayment rate increase from 9.21% to 10.39%; 2 agree that the UOMI overpayment rate increase from 2.31% to 3.53%; 3 agree that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 give effect to the rates referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 above; 4 agree that the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023 come into force on 9 May 2023; 5 note the following changes as a result of the decision in recommendations 1 and 2 above, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Crown Revenue and Receipts: Tax revenue 6.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 38.000 Total Operating (6.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) (38.000) 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:12:37 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 6 approve the forecast change in appropriations for Non-Departmental Other Expenses set out in recommendation 5, as a result of the decision in recommendations 1 and 2, with a corresponding impact on the operating balance: $ millions increase / (decrease) Vote Revenue Minister of Revenue 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 & outyears Non-Departmental Other Expenses: Impairment of debt and bad debt write-offs 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 Total Operating 5.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 7 agree that the proposed change to the Impairment of Debt and Debt Write-offs appropriation for 2022/23 above be included in the 2022/23 Supplementary Estimates and that, in the interim, the increase(s) be met from Imprest Supply; 8 authorise the submission to the Executive Council of the Taxation (Use of Money Interest Rates) Amendment Regulations 2023. Authorised for lodgement Hon David Parker Minister of Revenue 2qddsziq5 2023-03-14 15:12:37