25OIA1299 Page 1 of 3 4 October 2024 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 10 September 2024. You requested the following: 1. The total number of staff sent to courses run by wall walks in each of the last three years. a. Please break down number of staff sent by year. 2. Please indicate what course/workshop/training each staff member was involved in is called. 3. The total amount spent on sending staff to Wall Walks courses over the last three years. a. Please break the total amount spent on sending staff to Wall Walks courses down by year. 4. The value of any other funding provided to wall walks, broken down by date, funding purpose, office location and amount. 5. Please provide emails, reports, messages or any other correspondence for the reasoning of staff being sent on these courses and specify whether participation in these courses was compulsory or not. 6. Please provide a copy of documentation including but not limited to emails, reports, messages or any other correspondence that explains the content included in the course or description of activities undertaken through wall walks, or any associated courses/training. 7. Please provide emails, reports, messages or any other correspondence for any measurable outcomes from your agency attending Wall Walk courses. Information released Inland Revenue staff have participated in five Wall Walk workshops the last three years. The amount spent on sending staff these workshops, broken down by year, was: • 10 September 2021-31 December 2021: None • 1 January 2022-31 December 2022: $8,975.00 • 1 January 2023-1 December 2023: None • 1 January 2024-10 September 2024: $12,533.46 Further details are outlined in Appendix A. Correspondence relating to these workshops is attached as Appendix B. Where information is withheld from released documents, the grounds for withholding are outlined in the document. From: Erina Clayton Sent: Wednesday, 10 August 2022 4:26 pm Cc: Enterprise Services; Tiers 1 and 2 - ELT; Tier 3 Managers; Tiers 1 and 2 Support Subject: Wall Walk® interactive half-day workshop raising collective awareness of key events in the history of NZ’s bicultural relations When: Friday, 16 September 2022 9:45 am-2:30 pm (UTC+12:00) Auckland, Wellington. Where: Microsoft Teams Meeting 2nd option – ONLY if you couldn't make the first (30 September) and would like to attend. Hi All Here’s an (optional) development event P&WS and are offering you further grow your bicultural capability. We can take up to 60 people (please accept or decline so we can track numbers). No further sessions planned. Where It’s Wellington-based (room-based) session. What Titiro whakamuri, kokiri whakamua – look back and reflect, so you can move forward. This Wall Walk looks (with a Police lens) at the Crown-Māori history from the early 1800’s to today. It’s an interactive half-day workshop designed to raise collective awareness of key events in the history of NZ’s bicultural relations. The Wall Walk ® It's optional and a little bit confronting - in a good way I thought, I’ve done it before! AGENDA Tuesday 30 August Arrival time 9.45am Senior leader opens at 10am Wall Walk starts at 10.10am Lunch at 12 (for 30 minutes) Wall Walk resumes at 12.30pm and goes through to 2.30pm. A light lunch with tea & coffee will be provided. There will be no morning or afternoon tea, but please feel free to bring your drink and snacks along. We look forward to seeing you. s 9(2)(a) Regards What was before Crown-Māori? By c1300 Māori had come to this land. For ~500 years they lived here before anyone else arrived. There will be other opportunities to develop your understanding of this time in our nation’s history. See these short YouTube videos if you want learning bites for now: 1. He Whenua Rangatira. A Māori land - see the history of Māori arrivals from 1200, European arrivals from 1642 and the signing of He Whakaputanga from 1835 to 1839. 4 minutes 2. He Whakaputanga — Whose hand was it that crafted these words. Here's the story of the writing of He Whakaputanga, the Declaration of Independence which preceded te tiriti. 1 minute 3. The voyages of Te Tiriti o Waitangi - See the voyage of the 9 sheets of the Treaty over 8 months in 1840 across New Zealand. The sheets went to 45 locations and gathered 542 signatures. 3 minutes 4. Land ownership - See major Crown acquisitions since 1840, including confiscations after the New Zealand Wars and peak Native Land Court era. 2 minutes 5. Maori creation stories. Book One (of at least 4) Te Orokotīmatanga o te Ao is the story of the creation of the universe according to Māori. It begins with Io, the Supreme Being and the infinite state of nothingness before you are transported through aeons to the time of Ranginui (Sky Father) and Papatūānuku (Earth Mother). You are then introduced to some of their children who are the source and inspiration for the stories that follow. s 9(2)(b)(ii) \[UNCLASSIFIED\] From: Pat Woodward Sent: Tuesday, 6 September 2022 2:17 pm To: Nael George ; Joanne Petrie Peter Anderson Phil Whittington Jo Bensemann Pamela Lim ; Kriti Kumar; Catherine Brownlie; May Khaing Daphne Alburo ; Molly Puia ; Anu Anand Charmead Schella; Nick Sangwine Emma Faulknor ; Darren Keeling Yirui Cao Jacqueline d Ath Todd Smith; Rosie Perez ; Endah Van Wering ; Yolanda Wilke Eddie O'Conno; Nick Bradley ; Mark Sutherland Sue Gillies Naomi Weeresinghe Kamala Raman Makayla Stewart ; Gabe Secke Cher Liang Patrick O'Doherty Suzie Allum Ali Ward ; Lea Pailate Sharnia Coronno Joanne Leahy Toa Helu; Tracy Bellamy Gareth Phillips Praney Ly-Kemso Maria De Manue Viv Rice Phyllida Crawford; Jane Yeadon Brendan Byrne Lisa Tane ; Jan Werner ; Trevor Cook Joy Taylo; Jiajing Zhang Amy Morris; Louise Kendal ; Lisa Beachen ; Jackie Cassidy; Michelle Tu ; Gurpreet Singh ; Jay Balasubramanian James Maxwe Tash Mills Paul Morrissey Cc: Erina Clayton; Karen Brough Subject: Pre-Work attached - Wall Walk 16 September participants - PLEASE READ - Action required \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Kia ora and thank you for registering to attend the interactive Wall Walk on 16 September. This is a half day workshop where participation is a vtal component and attendees play a small role in the Walk by presenting a topic, which requires a little b t of preparat on. You have been assigned to a group (please refer below) – and each group has a presenter (those highlighted in red). Please allow time to coordinate with your group before the workshop to plan your presentation. Instructions are attached – please refer to these for research tips and links. Prepare a 6-minute presentat on with whomever else has also been assigned your top c and be ready to deliver t together at the workshop. If links are broken, try googling some of the words in your top c and go from there. Your presentation can be delivered in any medium – poetry, song, quiz, hand-outs, poster, interpretive dance. Presentations that require the audience to move around are encouraged. Try to avoid using Powerpoint, reading from notes, or using any of the videos supplied here, if you can. If you do use Powerpoint or rely on technology, please bring your own devce on the day and allow time before the workshop starts to test t. Please feel free to refer to the Posters and/or print out (B&W please) for reference or to make notes on the back of on the day. IMPORTANT: Please reply asap and advise if you have any food allergies or specialist dietary requirements for the light lunch that we need to consider. Given the numbers, we are not able to cater for specific likes/dislikes. We look forward to seeing you 9.45am, St Andrews on The Terrace – 30 The Terrace. .....and don’t forget to connect with your group! Ngā mihi, Pat and Karen s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From:Nic Hema To:CCS-B SME Leadership Team; CCS-B SME Team Leads; CCS-B SME Business Support; SME Analysts Cc: Subject:SME Leadership Hui - Wall Walk Date:Friday, 23 February 2024 10:46:35 am Attachments:image001.png image002.png image003.png WW prep and groups.docx Kia ora koutou, E tumanako au e pai ana o koutou wiki katoa/I hope you’re all having a good week. Our SME Leadership Hui is fast approaching and as you know, we’ll all be participating in a Wall Walk as part of our ongoing cultural uplift through Pūkenga Ahurea. This session is facilitated by Dr Simone Bull and is designed to raise collective awareness of key events in history for Aotearoa. Despite the name, it isn’t a physical walk. It’s a room-based ‘walk’ through time and events and gives you the opportunity to understand the impact of key events for Māori and for wider Aotearoa. One of the amazing parts of this workshop is that it can be tailored to us as an audience and how our role as a public service influences social outcomes, and there is pre-work that we will all take part in to prepare for the session. Below are the groups you’re in and attached is a document with your pre-work topic to complete. The document has links that you might find helpful, but you are also encouraged to do you own rangahau/research to create a 6-minute group presentation on your topic. These topics are key events/subjects that have had targeted and enduring impacts on Māori and you’re all encouraged to meet as a group and wānanga/discuss and ako/learn together. Part of Pūkenga Ahurea is to also lift our segment’s understanding of tikanga māori and how that’s demonstrated practically in a work environment. Like many aspects of Te Ao Māori, tikanga is not easily defined. In essence, is it cultural practices, customs, and principles that protect the physical, mental/emotional, and spiritual wellbeing of iwi, hapū, whānau, and individuals. While most tikanga are quite practical like not sitting on a table because why would you want your nono (backside lol) to go on something you eat off there is also a spiritual element to these practices. For this particular example, food is our way to lift or remove a person from a state of tapu (where you’re in a spiritually vulnerable space). By sitting on a table, you’re inferring that you are an object used to lift this state of tapu and reducing yourself to the ‘level’ of food. See – practical and spiritual, and I’ve got a couply more examples up my sleeve if you want to learn more To that end, after the Wall Walk session there will be a quick mihimihi of thanks to Simone and we’ll sing a waiata tautoko/supporting waiata after this mihimihi. This tikanga is one that most of you are familiar with, where a group will offer physical and spiritual support to a kaikōrero/speaker in the form of a song. So we will be singing all 12 verses of E noho Tūheitia with actions. Jooookes – I’m not that cruel plus not all the rohe/areas that our sites are from support the Kiingitanga, and we won’t even be in the Waikato rohe so that doesn’t make sense. Our waiata Tautoko will be Te Aroha . Please take the time to learn this short waiata so we can flex our vocal skills for our manuhiri/guest. If you have any pātai/questions, please reach out to myself, Raven, or Tracy and we’ll do our best to awhi you along this haerenga/journey ❤ s 9(2)(a) From:Sherree Perfect To:Andrew Stott; Vanessa Jarman Subject:RE: Kaitakawaenga Māori Training Budget 23-24 - The Wall Walk Date:Friday, 19 January 2024 12:19:00 pm Kia ora korua, We are ready to book in the date’s pre-30 June for the event, Holly – Kaitakawaenga Māori Nelson with Amy will be organising on site. Andrew - we need one night’s accommodation and flights for the Kaitakawaenga Māori and their leaders travelling from outside of Christchuch (8) – and a budget for a morning tea for 30/40 say $200 , the experience is like a forum with prework and group work that is fed back so it is preferred min 30 people to gain the full experience, recommended we book 40 to allow for natural reduction. We are planning to go to all CCOM Christchurch and wider segments if needed. Van – we need collab approval? Perhaps just a heads up until we have a date, I can confirm that SME has booked for the same course but theirs is full they will be running from Auckland. If SLT or other leaders want to attend that could also be an option? Ngā mihi Sherree From: Andrew Stott Sent: Tuesday, December 5, 2023 12:00 PM To: Sherree Perfect ; Marie Duffy ; Cy Lochead ; Vanessa Jarman ; Tracey Turner Cc: Amy McGimpsey Subject: RE: Kaitakawaenga Māori Training Budget 23-24 - The Wall Walk Sounds great From: Sherree Perfect Sent: Tuesday, December 5, 2023 9:12 AM To: Andrew Stott ; Marie Duffy ; Cy Lochead ; Vanessa Jarman ; Tracey Turner Cc: Amy McGimpsey Subject: Kaitakawaenga Māori Training Budget 23-24 - The Wall Walk Kia ora koutou, s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) For the second I propose an alternative that has been well utilised by Government Home - The Wall Walk® This was run for People & Workplace Services in September 2022 cost $4500 plus GST( website showing the same) plus cost of venue rental. The course requires pre work and is for a half day. Topics covered Quote from one of our IR people “It was great - I loved it and learnt so much. We didn't have any handouts - you learn through the interactive workshop and the input you put into the pre-course work”. For the next delivery I propose Te Waipounamu - Kaitakawaenga Māori and their CCOM Leaders attend minimum, potential for others if numbers allow. The website indicates that the presenter can come to your location, for an additional fee. Ngā mihi Sherree Perfect | Kaiwhakahaere Kaupapa Māori Mahi | Iwi Whānui Tautukunga | Te Tari Taake Community Compliance | Inland Revenue s 9(2)(b)(ii) s 9(2)(a) Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope s 9(2)(a) \[UNCLASSIFIED\] From: Erina Clayton Sent: Wednesday, April 3, 2024 9:12 AM To: Tier 3 Managers Cc: Erina Clayton Pat Woodward Subject: Learn: which dates could you attend the Wall Walk? What - Titiro whakamuri, kokiri whakamua – look back and reflect, so you can move forward. This Wall Walk looks (with a Police lens) at the Crown-Māori history from the early 1800’s to today. It’s an interactive half-day workshop designed to raise collective awareness of key events in the history of NZ’s bicultural relations. The Wall Walk ® . Some of you may have attended previous ones I’ve organised or been to them at other agencies. They are a safe and engaging way to increase awareness and knowledge of NZ history. I’ve always thought an IR version of this could be so interesting to create. It is not a ‘walk’ per se - the walk occurs in a room (Asteron L5 rooms for this). Arrival time ~9.45am; opens at 10am; starts at 10.10; lunch (self-catered) around noon; resumes at 12.30; ends around 2.30pm. There is pre-work sent out 2 weeks prior. The wider group are put into smaller teams (~10 people) and assigned an historical event. They prepare and present back on the day (~5m). This is designed to be reflective in advance, and to support active participation on the day. Action: are you interested in joining (no cost to you), please indicate now so I can lock in our booking/s before someone else gets them: a. If you’re interested - via poll – indicate which dates you could attend i.e. Tue 4 June and/or Mon 24 June or ‘interested but can’t make either’? (View/vote in browser ). This will give me a level of confidence to book one or both dates (or start looking for more dates). If you are available one or both dates, pop them on hold in your diary. b. If you also wish to pre-select a date – use the voting buttons above to choose one or the other and we’ll put you down for that specific date – we can take up to 60 per day and I anticipate they will be fully subscribed. OR c. If you’re not interested right now, you can ignore this message. d. If you have a direct report you would prioritise for attendance, please let Pat know and they’ll be some of the next people we open this up to. A virtual wall walk is now available – see the ‘on demand’ tab in The Wall Walk link above. s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) 1 Subject:The Wall Walk - Te Hikoi Maumahara - Connecting People to the Past Location:Asteron, Wellington Rooms Level 5, Tokomaru, Aotea & Kurahaupo Start:Mon 24/06/2024 10:00 am End: Mon 24/06/2024 3:00 pm Show Time As:Tentative Recurrence:(none) Meeting Status:Not yet responded Organizer: People & Workplace Services Required Attendees: Joanne Edgecombe; Tanaya Ratima; Fionna Chester; Jordan Takiwa; Mere Paul-Mataa; Vicki Rangitakatu; Kirsten Eden; Prerna Dwivedi; Glenn Richards; Tima Basha; Grace Chatwin; Andrew Tringham; Andrew Robertson; Alex Shaw; Caleb Lerm; Debbie Hamel; Geoff Wintle; Hannah Crawshaw; Jade Tafua; Jane Elley; Kelly Paterson; Mathew Beros; Matthew Prince; Esme Dawson; Tanja Jonson; Samantha Cunningham; Niki Loizou; Shardee Hadfield; Charles Goldsmith; Stacey Tipene; Tegan Workman; Aidan Howell; Hauauru Rae; Marino Rapata; Meesh Gray; Aimee Rudkin; Brianna O'Dea; Molly Puia; Keanu Head; Tim Sharma; Ruth Bromley; Josh Green; Jason Ratima; Suzanne Sherris; Olive Pule; Anya Henarath; Bobbie Tapurau; Jesse Thwaites; Michelle Paul; Denise Birdling; Raksha Bhim; Luke Schaumkell; Kaylynne Bell; Melissa Zhen; Shelley Hayman; Kiaya McLuckie; Mili Herrera; Jamie Robinson; Mongi Kampanga Optional Attendees: Erina Clayton Tēnā Koutou, Thank you for registering for The Wall Walk www.thewallwalk.co.nz on Monday; 24 June 2024, in Wellington Please accept/decline this appointment so that we can keep track of the numbers aƩending and accommodate others on our Wait list if you are unable to aƩend. This is appreciated. This is a half day workshop where you’ll be ‘walking’ through a timeline of key events in NZ history focussing on the relationship between Māori and the Crown. From here you will begin to understand the impact that government policies have had on Māori. Dr Simone Bull (aka Sim) will narrate the story and make links between all the topics. The Day Start time will be 10am (Please arrive 9.45am) 12pm (ish) – break (bring your own lunch) Finish time approx. 2.30pm-3pm Pre-Work Sim will need our help to tell the story surrounding some key events in our country’s history! In readiness for 24 June, at the end of May you will be placed into groups of between 4-6 people and assigned a Wall Walk 2 topic to work together (in your groups) on a 6-minute presentation. Presentations will not be graded (LOL), but we want to be one of the best teams that Sim has done this with! Next Step?  Accept or decline this appointment; and  Keep an eye out for the email in May with your assigned group, Wall Walk topic and instructions! Ngā mihi Pat Pat Woodward (She/Her) Business Support | People & Workplace Services |Tangata me te Wahi Mahi Te Tari Taake | Inland Revenue Supporting Erina Clayton | Enterprise Lead | People & Workplace Services Chat with me in Teams s 9(2)(a) Ngā mihi Pat Pat Woodward (She/Her) Business Support | People & Workplace Services |Tangata me te Wahi Mahi Te Tari Taake | Inland Revenue Supporting Erina Clayton | Enterprise Lead | People & Workplace Services Chat with me in Teams s 9(2)(a) From:Pat Woodward To:Joanne Edgecombe; Tanaya Ratima; Jordan Takiwa; Bobbie Tapurau; Alex Shaw; Mongi Kampanga; Esme Dawson; Grace Chatwin; Hannah Crawshaw; Matthew Prince; Hauauru Rae; Melissa Zhen; Prerna Dwivedi; Debbie Hamel; Vicki Rangitakatu; Ruth Bromley; Tima Basha; Jane Elley; Stacey Tipene; Luke Schaumkell; Jesse Thwaites; Andrew Robertson; Jade Tafua; Marino Rapata; Brianna O"Dea; Molly Puia; Charles Goldsmith; Kirsten Eden; Glenn Richards; Geoff Wintle; Niki Loizou; Tim Sharma; Caleb Lerm; Kelly Paterson; Tanja Jonson; Samantha Cunningham; Tegan Workman; Denise Birdling; Kiaya McLuckie; Mathew Beros; Rebecca McStay; Shardee Hadfield; Suzanne Sherris; Raksha Bhim; Sadie Jolly; Mere Paul- Mataa; Meesh Gray; Oliver Twissell; Olive Pule; Anya Henarath; Mili Herrera; Aidan Howell; Aimee Rudkin; Jason Ratima; Kaylynne Bell; Shelley Hayman; Jamie Robinson; Erina Clayton; Val Davis Subject:Wall Walk Monday 24 June - Thanks & Additional resources Date:Wednesday, 26 June 2024 10:05:53 am \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Kia ora tātou, We hope you enjoyed Monday’s The Wall Walk workshop. Dr Simone Bull was very impressed with the presentations and thankyou to all of you that ‘soldiered on’ despite losing some of your teammates due to flight delays and sickness. Ka rawe! Ngā mihi nui to Jordan Takiwa for welcoming Dr Sim and opening Karakia along with our Māori wahine for their beautiful singing. You may also be thinking about your ongoing learning around Māori, NZ history / hitori, and Crown-Māori (or Māori-Crown) relations. A few of the resources below that Erina has got value from, in case they are of interest to you: What was before Crown-Māori? By c1300 Māori had come to this land. For ~500 years they lived here before anyone else arrived. There will be other opportunities to develop your understanding of this time in our nation’s history. See these short YouTube videos if you want learning bites for now: 1. He Whenua Rangatira. A Māori land - see the history of Māori arrivals from 1200, European arrivals from 1642 and the signing of He Whakaputanga from 1835 to 1839 (4 minutes) 2. He Whakaputanga — Whose hand was it that crafted these words. Here's the story of the writing of He Whakaputanga, the Declaration of Independence which preceded te tiriti (1 minute) 3. The voyages of Te Tiriti o Waitangi - See the voyage of the 9 sheets of the Treaty over 8 months in 1840 across New Zealand. The sheets went to 45 locations and gathered 542 signatures (3 minutes) 4. Land ownership - See major Crown acquisitions since 1840, including confiscations after the New Zealand Wars and peak Native Land Court era (2 minutes) 5. Maori creation stories. Book One (of at least 4) Te Orokotīmatanga o te Ao is the story of the creation of the universe according to Māori. It begins with Io, the Supreme Being and the infinite state of nothingness before you are transported through aeons to the time of Ranginui (Sky Father) and Papatūānuku (Earth Mother). You are then introduced to some of their children who are the source and inspiration for the stories that follow. What other learning can IR offer? Learn about the Treaty of Waitangi and how it fits into the work we do, and basic te reo and tikanga Māori protocols. Ātea learning modules (sharepoint.com) And remember the new Tūrama app - Tūrama (sharepoint.com). We are committed to building stronger relationships with Māori. Looking back and reflecting is a really valuable thing to do, and to keep doing. Ngā mihi Erina & Pat