24OIA1802 Page 1 of 2 14 March 2024 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 16 February 2023. You requested: Can you please legally define personal income. Section YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (ITA), Definitions, defines a person’s income as: Income, for a person, means income of the person under section BD 1(1) (Income, exempt income, excluded income, non-residents’ foreign-sourced income, and assessable income). Section BD 1(1) of the ITA, Amounts of income, states: An amount is income of a person if it is their income under a provision in Part C (Income). Part CA 1 of the ITA, Amounts that are income, states: An amount is income of a person if it is their income under a provision in this Part. An amount is also income of a person if it is their income under ordinary concepts. In addition, the Courts have identified the characteristics of income: • Income is something that comes in, in money or in money’s worth. Income comes in as a return for something, whether it be services rendered, money advanced, premises rented out etc. • Another feature of income is that it often imports the notion of periodicity, recurrence or regularity. Having said that, the Courts have shown that it does not necessarily follow that all receipts of a regular nature constitute income, nor does it necessarily follow that a one-off receipt is excluded from being income. • A further characteristic of income is the quality of the particular receipt in the hands of the recipient. For example, if the recipient relies on the receipt for support and sustenance, it is likely to be income. 24OIA1802 Page 1 of 2 14 March 2024 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 16 February 2023. You requested: 1) Can you please supply the legislation stating people must have a tax file number. 2) Can a natural person cancel or return their Tax number? Item 1 Tax file numbers (also called IRD numbers) are unique identifiers that allow the Commissioner of Inland Revenue to identify information about specific customers or customers generally efficiently and accurately. The Commissioner uses tax file / IRD numbers to help ensure that his obligations under sections 6 and 6A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) are carried out, which include the care and management of the Revenue Acts. Section 3 of the TAA defines a “tax file number” as : An identification number that the Commissioner allocates to a person. Tax file / IRD numbers are used to: • ensure that each person is assessed and pays the correct amount of tax • ensure confidentiality of information • complete certain forms required by Inland Revenue • efficiently handle phone calls and enable callers to use automated telephone systems, and • avoid a person being taxed at a higher, non-declaration rate. The Commissioner requires the use of IRD / tax file numbers to ensure that each person is assessed with and pays the correct amount of tax, as required by the law. All New Zealand residents who earn taxable income need an IRD number to complete an income tax return, or any other form required by the TAA. Schedule 3 of the TAA, Record-keeping requirements, sets out a list of information that employers and PAYE intermediaries are required to keep. The list includes the name and tax file number of every person who derives or receives PAYE income payments. Under section 80KB of the TAA, a person applying for Working for Families Tax Credits in respect of a child must provide the child’s IRD number. 24OIA1802 Page 1 of 2 14 March 2024 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 16 February 2023. You requested: If we are required to file a tax return at all, it must be published in the Government Gazette. 1) Could you please supply the volume date and a page number that this public obligation exists in the public and that the public have been given notice in the Gazette. 2) Can you please legally define “person”. Item 1 A notice in the New Zealand Gazette is not required by legislation for obligations to have effect under tax law. Successive New Zealand Parliaments have been validly held and have passed valid legislation, including the various Inland Revenue Acts. Inland Revenue was originally established through the enactment of the Inland Revenue Department Act 1952 and is now constituted by section 5 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). The general legislative authority for imposing and collecting taxes lies in the various Inland Revenue Acts, which are listed in the Schedule to the TAA. More specifically, Part B of the Income Tax Act 2007 provides for the imposition of tax on income, and Part R provides for payment of tax by customers on their own behalf and by way of source deductions. Section 8 of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 provides for the charging of GST on goods or services supplied in the course of carrying on a taxable activity. As tax obligations are imposed by statute, persons cannot opt out of them, and tax obligations remain obligations whether people comply with them voluntarily or not. This position is supported by the Court of Appeal decision in Shaw v Commissioner of Inland Revenue \[1999\] 3 NZLR 154. The appellant in the case argued that particular tax legislation was invalid. The Court dismissed the appeal.