bL0179 Notice to deduct amounts owed - Wage 2 •You must not change the deduction amount even if your employee, or anyone else asks you to. If you do not make these payments, we cannot pass on child support for the benefit of the children. Paying the child support All child support amounts deducted are to be paid to us at the same time you are paying your PAYE deductions.) Yours sincerely <SIGNATURE> <JOB TITLE> bL0179 Notice to deduct amounts owed - Wage 3 Notice to deduct amounts owed to Inland Revenue CR3 (Urgent) Employee name <DEBT CUSTOMER> IRD number <DEBT IRD NUMBER> CR4 (Address/last known address) <DEBT CUST ADDRESS> CR5 (Date of birth <DATE OF BIRTH>) CR6 (Other ID <OTHER ID INFO>) CR1 (Total amount to deduct $<DEBT AMOUNT>) Deductions to start <START DATE> Amount to deduct The amount to deduct is CR1 (the lesser of either): CR1 ( • $<INSTALMENT AMOUNT> ( 10% per week of the requested amount)) CR7 ( $<CS AMOUNT> 7.1 (each <FREQUENCY>) 7.2 (twice monthly, 7.3 (every 4 weeks) starting from <CS START DATE>.) CR1 ( • 20% of the gross wages or salary including bonuses and overtime payable.) CR1 (You need to start making these deductions from the employee’s next pay. If the: • employee is not paid weekly, multiply the instalment amounts to suit the pay period • deduction amount is less than $10 per week, the amount to deduct is $10 per week - however, do not make a deduction if the employee earns less than $10 • employee asks you to deduct a higher amount, you must do this. Paying the deductions to us You need to pay the extra deductions to us by the end of each calendar month. If a payday falls at the end of a calendar month, the extra deductions are due within 5 days of the date of deduction. These deductions are in addition to the employee’s usual PAYE deductions and must be kept separate.) CR7 (You need to make the payments to us immediately.) Include the following information with the payments: <DEBT IRD NUMBER> as the particulars and CR1 (ARR) CR8 (NCP) CR9 (CPR) as the pay ee c ode. Our bank account is 03-0049-0001100-027. bL0179 Notice to deduct amounts owed - Wage 4 <INSERT KPL1> CR1 (Wh en to stop making the deductions Keep making extra deductions until one of the following situations happens: • we send a notice asking you to stop • the employee stops working for you, If this is the case, let us know the finish date immediately • the total amount owing has been paid.) For more information If you have any questions about making deductions including variation codes, go to our website ird.govt.nz/forms-guides and download the Employer’s guide – IR335 or contact us on <PHONE NUMBER>. CR7 (Legal authority This notice is issued under s154 of the Child Support Act 1991. If you do not make the deductions as required, you may be prosecuted for committing an offence. Thank you for your co-operation.) CR1 (Legal authority This notice is issued under the authority of 1 or more of the Acts listed below. If you do not make the deductions as required you may be prosecuted for committing an offence under 1 or more of the Acts. • Tax Administration Act 1994 - section 157 • Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 – section 43 • Student Loan Scheme Act 2011 – section 193 • Gaming Duties Act 1971 – section 12L.) bL0179 Notice to deduct amounts owed - Wage 5 Prepopulated inserts Document field name Description Display format <SALUTATION> Prepopulated <DEBT CUSTOMER> Name of the employee/customer we are collecting the debt from First name, last name for individuals, or non- individual name as held in start. <DEBT IRD NUMBER> IRD number we are collecting the debt from 000-000-000 <DEBT AMOUNT> Total amount owed 9,9 99,999,999.99 <DATE> Date the previous deduction notice was sent DD MMMM CCYY <PHONE NUMBER> Either the case officer’s DDI or the associated 0800 number <SIGNATURE> Customer segment lead Prepopulated <JOB TITLE> Prepopulated <ADDRESS> Address of employer or other entity who will be making the deductions, includes name <DEBT CUST ADDRESS> Address of debt customer <DATE OF BIRTH> Date of birth of the person who will be having deductions made from wages or other payments due to them DD MMMM CCYY <OTHER ID INFO> other identifying information <START DATE> Date to commence deductions DD MMMM CCYY Next payday <CS START DATE> Date to commence CS deductions DD MMMM CCYY <INSTALMENT AMOUNT> 10% of the total <DEBT AMOUNT> 9,9 99,999,999.99 <CS AMOUNT> Deduction amount per <FREQUENCY> <FREQUENCY> Frequency of payments EG: week, fortnight, month Conditional rules CR# Insert when 1 The person we are recovering the debt from is • Not child support • the employee of the employer receiving the notice 2 This letter replaces letter sent previously. Not used with CR7 3 Deduction notice is urgent bL0179 Notice to deduct amounts owed - Wage 6 4 Address details are included. Not used with CR7 5 Date of birth details are included. Not used with CR7 6 Other ID information included. Not used with CR7 7 There is child support debt 7.1 Amount is paid each week, each fortnight, each month 7.2 Amount is paid twice monthly eg: 15 th and 30 th 7.3 Amount is paid every 4 weeks 8 Payment reference is NCP 9 Payment reference is CPR Known paragraph libraries KPL Name 1 How to make payments Notes