24OIA2255 Page 1 of 4 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 18 June 2024 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 20 May 2024. You requested the following: 1. What online platforms does IRD advertise through? 2. Any privacy impact assessments that have been carried out on the use of targeting features through social media platforms or other online marketing platforms for IRD advertising. 3. When did the use of the "custom audiences" feature to target IRD advertising on Meta/Facebook platforms begin? 4. Could a copy of IRD advertisements run on Facebook in April 2024, that utilised the custom audiences feature, please be provided? 5. In the past six months, what groups have different ads on Meta platforms been targeted at, using the custom audiences feature? e.g. people with student loans, Jobseeker recipients, business owners, etc. 6. How much did IRD pay to Meta for advertising and marketing in the 22/23 financial year? 7. How much has IRD paid to Meta for advertising and marketing, so far, in the 23/24 financial year? 8. How much did IRD spend on advertising and marketing in total in the 2022/2023 financial year? 9. How much has IRD spent on advertising and marketing in total in the 2023/2024 financial year? 10. How much did IRD spend on advertising and marketing through advertising agencies in financial years 2017/2018, 2018/2019, 2019/2020, 2020/2021, 2021/2022, 2022/2023 (excluding in-house advertising and marketing costs)? I would like this data to be provided by each individual financial year.” Question 1 Inland Revenue advertises directly through Meta (Facebook and Instagram), LinkedIn, Google, and YouTube. Inland Revenue also works with advertising agencies on certain campaigns which means its ads are placed through a range of advertising platforms. 24OIA2255 Page 2 of 4 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Question 2 In 2016, Inland Revenue conducted a privacy impact assessment before it began using the custom audience feature within Meta. This assessment is enclosed as Appendix A. The use of the custom audience feature was reviewed and approved by the relevant managers, privacy officer, information security, and the Tax Council office. Final approval was granted by the Marketing and Communications manager. Since then, Meta has made changes to its custom audience feature that allow Inland Revenue to upload customer lists and share a link to the hashed list with external marketing agencies. This approach mitigates the risk of directly sharing customer lists with the agencies. Question 3 Inland Revenue has used the ‘custom audience’ feature within Meta since 2016. Question 4 Advertisements that Inland Revenue generated on Facebook i n April 2024 using the custom audiences feature are enclosed in Appendix B. There are 53 documents that fall in scope of your request. Appendix C provides a description of the type of these 53 documents. Question 5 Customer groups that have been selected for direct marketing since 1 January 2024 until 1 June 2024 have been provided in Appendix D. Question 6 Inland Revenue’s total payments to Meta for advertising and marketing for the 2022/2023 financial year are publicly available on the Parliament website, in response to parliamentary written question 11154 (2023), at 11154 (2023) (parliament.nz). I have therefore decided to refuse this part of your request for this under section 18(d) of the OIA, as the information requested is publicly available. Question 7 A billing report from Meta from 1 April 2023 – 30 May 2024 is enclosed as Appendix E. Question 8 Inland Revenue’s total advertising costs for the 2022/2023 financial year are publicly available on the Parliament website, in the response to question 50 of Inland Revenue’s 2022/2023 Annual Review, at Inland Revenue - Annual Review Written Responses 2022-23 (parliament.nz). I have therefore decided to refuse this part of your request for this under section 18(d) of the OIA, as the information requested is publicly available. 24OIA2255 Page 3 of 4 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Question 9 In land Revenue’s total spend so far for the 2023/2024 financial year on advertising and marketing is $0.618m. This includes advertising and marketing costs from July 2023 to May 2024. Question 10 Inland Revenue’s total spend on external marketing agencies for the 2019/2020, 2020/2021, 2021/2022 and 2022/2023 years are provided in Table 1. Table 1 does not include data for the 2017/2018 and 2018/2019 financial years. This information is stored in our historical database, which has restricted access. Retrieving these records would require extensive manual effort, necessitating significant time and resources, which would adversely impact Inland Revenue's other operations. T herefore, this part of your request is refused under section 18(f) of the OIA, as the information requested cannot be made available without substantial collation. In making my decision, I considered if narrowing the request or extending the timeframe would enable Inland Revenue to answer your request. However, in this case, neither of these options would enable Inland Revenue to grant you the information requested. Table 1 Year Total Spend ($m) 2019/2020 2.555 2020/2021 1.159 2021/2022 0.973 2022/2023 0.872 Right of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: commissionerscorrespondence@ird.govt.nz . Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz . If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. 24OIA2255 Page 4 of 4 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Publishing of OIA response We intend to p ublish our response to your request on Inland Revenue’s website (ird.govt.nz) as this information may be of interest to other members of the public. This letter, with your personal details removed, may be published in its entirety. Publishing responses increases the availability of information to the public and is consistent with the OIA's purpose of enabling more effective participation in the making and administration of laws and policies and promoting the accountability of officials. Thank you a gain for your request. Yours sincerely Kieran Burlace Domain Lead, Marketing and Communications - Marketing Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Use of Facebook’s Custom Audience for advertising campaigns Brief Privacy Analysis Prepared by: Date: About this Document The purpose of this document is to demonstrate that privacy has been considered in a project or process that involves personal information. The Analysis pulls together relevant information to determine whether a full Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) should be completed and records IRs decision of why a PIA has not been done. It will answer the following questions: 1.Does this proposal involve a new way of managing personal information? 2.Does the proposal raise a significant privacy risk for IR? 3.Is a full privacy impact assessment required? 1.Project summary: Data matching for advertising campaigns 1.1 Brief description of the project This project is initially for advertising activity directed at Student Loans customers but would be used more widely in marketing campaigns. For instance, using this service to display banners to social policy customers without a myIR account Currently we provide our advertising agency (FCB) with personal information in the form of a list of email addresses and mobile numbers. This data is then ‘hashed’ (a way of encrypting the data so it cannot be identified to anyone) and matched against Facebook profiles and to be used in targeted advertising campaigns. Facebook has increased the data matching capabilities to include more than just email and mobile numbers. The new data types available for matching include: •First Name •Last Name •Postal Code •City •Date of birth •Gender By providing this information we could greatly improve the results of the marketing activities and direct more relevant messages to customers. In the case of Student Loan overseas-based borrowers we currently have contact details (email and mobile numbers) Appendix A Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] of approximately 55% of the population. If we were to use the full list of data types FCB estimates we would be able to match 87% of the population. This would greatly improve Inland Revenues ability to meet its objectives of increasing repayments and increasing the contact details we have for overseas-based student loan borrowers. The main stakeholders or entities involved in this project will be: •Corporate Legal and Corporate Integrity & Assurance teams to advise any changes required from a legal perspective •Marketing – to implement any changes required •Intel delivery – To provide the data •FCB – Receive the password protected data files and load the data to Facebook’s system. Facebook provide FCB with a Custom Audience for advertising purposes How Custom Audience works Inland Revenue sends its advertising agency (FCB) a list of the people we wish to present adverts to. FCB can create a customer list custom audience as they’re the owner of an ad account connected to Meta Business Manager or the owner has provided admin or advertiser permissions. To make a custom audience from a customer list, Meta is provided with information about existing customers and this is matched to Meta profiles. The information on a customer list is known as an “identifier” (such as email, phone number, address) and is use it to help find the audiences you want your ads to reach. Your customer list can either be a CSV or TXT file that includes these identifiers. A custom audience is created by adding a customer list into Meta Ad Manager and selecting the identifiers to be used (name, email etc). Information in the customer list is hashed and will be unidentifiable at an individual level. Hashing is a type of cryptographic security method that turns identifiers into randomized code and cannot be reversed. For example, for example, John.doe@ird.govt.nz may come out hashed as wLKziR/6RoXDv1MDaXLH1UNUC9nIVr97jrTnL4TcxsM=. It’s important to note that hashing is one way; you can take an email address and hash it, however you can’t take hashed data and turn it back into an email address. After information in the customer list is hashed, it is sent to Facebook. Facebook uses this hashed information by comparing it to its own hashed information and builds a custom audience by finding the Facebook profiles that match. After the Custom Audience is created, the matched and unmatched hashed information is deleted. About custom audiences | Meta Business Help Center (facebook.com) 1.2 Personal information that the project will involve In the table below, describe: •the personal information that will be collected, used and/or disclosed •the source of the information •the purpose of the information for your project. Note: “Personal information” is any information about an identifiable living person. However, a person doesn’t have to be named in the information to be identifiable. Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Type of personal Information Source of Information Purpose of information for the project • First Name • Last Name • Postal Code • City • Date of birth • Gender Inland Revenues database To improve advertising effectiveness and deliver the right message to the right customers at the right time 2. Privacy assessment 2.1 Areas that are risky for privacy Some types of projects are commonly known to create privacy risks. If the project involves one or more of these risk areas, it’s likely that a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) will be valuable. Use this checklist to identify and record whether your proposal raises certain privacy risks. Delete any that do not apply. Does the project involve any of the following? Yes (tick) No (tick) If yes, explain your response Information management generally A substantial change to an existing policy, process or system that involves personal information Example: New legislation or policy that makes it compulsory to collect or disclose information ✓ No substantial change just another way for IR to advertise or market to taxpayers. Any practice or activity that is listed on a risk register kept by IR Note: Check your business unit’s risk register and with Risk Services ✓ Does the project involve any of the following? Yes (tick) No (tick) If yes, explain your response Collection Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Does the project involve any of the following? Yes (tick) No (tick) If yes, explain your response A new collection of personal information Example: Collecting information about individuals’ location ✓ Collecting information which is not necessary for IR to carry out its functions Example: Information is not relevant to tax administration ✓ A new way of collecting personal information Example: Collecting information online or via app rather than on paper forms ✓ Collecting information from someone other than the individual themselves Example: Contacting a person’s employer to obtain information ✓ Storage, security and retention A change in the way personal information is stored or secured Example: Storing information in the cloud ✓ A change to how sensitive information is managed Example: Moving financial records to a new database ✓ We would be sending more information to FCB which would be stored for a short time while they transfer it to Facebook. IR has a contact with FCB to provide services which includes confidentiality obligations. Transferring personal information offshore or using a third-party contractor Example: Outsourcing the payroll function or storing information in the cloud ✓ As above Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Does the project involve any of the following? Yes (tick) No (tick) If yes, explain your response A decision to keep personal information for longer than IR has previously Example: Changing IT backups to be kept for 10 years when previously only stored for 7 ✓ After a Custom Audience is created, the matched and unmatched hashed information is deleted. Does the project involve any of the following? Yes (tick) No (tick) If yes, explain your response Use or disclosure A new use or disclosure of personal information that is already held Example: Sharing information with other agencies in a new way ✓ IR uses customer information in marketing campaigns. For Custom Audience the information is added to a Meta Ad Account and then hashed before being sent to Facebook for matching. Sharing or matching personal information held by different organisations or currently held in different datasets Example: Combining information with other information held on public registers, or an information matching or sharing agreement ✓ Information will be matched by Facebook but the information is hashed before it is sent to Facebook. Facebook matches the hashed data against Facebook’s profiles to serve customers the correct advertisements. The hashed information cannot be reversed. Individuals’ access to their information A change in policy that affects how people can access information that IR holds about them Example: Archiving documents after 6 months into a facility from which they can’t be easily retrieved ✓ Does the project involve any of the following? Yes (tick) No (tick) If yes, explain your response Identifying individuals Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Does the project involve any of the following? Yes (tick) No (tick) If yes, explain your response Establishing a new way of identifying individuals Example: A unique identifier, a biometric, or an online identity system ✓ A new way of linking individuals or entities in a database ✓ It’s the same way of linking individuals just new data types within this. Does the project involve any of the following? Yes (tick) No (tick) If yes, explain your response New intrusions on individuals’ property, person or activities Introducing a new system for searching individuals’ property or premises ✓ Surveillance, tracking or monitoring of movements, behaviour or communications Example: Installing a new CCTV system or GPS in vehicles ✓ Changes to premises that will involve private spaces where clients or customers may disclose personal information Example: Co-location or changing the location of a reception desk, where people may discuss personal details ✓ List anything else that may impact on privacy, such as intrusions into physical space 2.2 Initial risk assessment If you answered “Yes” to any of the questions above, use the table below to give a rating – either Low (L), Medium (M), or High (H) – for each of the aspects of the project set out in the first column. Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] For risks that you’ve identified as Medium or High, indicate (in the right-hand column) how the project plans to lessen the risk (if this is known). If you answered “No” to all the questions in 2.1 above, move on to section 3 below. Aspect of the Project Rating (L, M or H) Describe any medium and high risks and how to mitigate them Level of information handling L – Minimal personal information will be handled M – A moderate amount of personal information (or information that could become personal information) will be handled H – A significant amount of personal information (or information that could become personal information) will be handled M The way we send the data to FCB and the way it is stored is very secure. Hashing the data means that it is un- identifiable when it gets to Facebook and the hashed data is unable to be reversed so the identities would be protected. Sensitivity of the information L – The information will not be sensitive (name, IRD number, or job title) M – The information may be considered to be sensitive (contact details, date of birth plus name plus IRD number, biometric data) H – The information will be highly sensitive (health or financial details, information about high profile individuals) M The details may be considered to be sensitive. We are using: •First Name •Last Name •Postal Code •City •Date of birth •Gender Significance of the changes L – Only minor change to existing functions/activities M – Substantial change to existing functions/activities; or a new initiative H – Major overhaul of existing functions/activities; or a new initiative that’s significantly different L Minor change to existing activities Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Interaction with others L – No interaction with other agencies M – Interaction with one or two other agencies H – Extensive cross-agency (that is, government) interaction or cross- sectional (non-government and government) interaction M Interaction with FCB. Public impact L – Minimal impact on the organisation and clients M – Some impact on clients is likely due to changes to the handling of personal information; or the changes may raise public concern or media attention H – High impact on clients and the wider public, and concerns over aspects of project; widespread media interest is likely M Potential for public concern or media attention, however it is predicted to be minimal. 3. Summary of privacy impact The privacy impact for this project has been assessed as: Tick Low – There is little or no personal information involved; or the use of personal information is uncontroversial; or the risk of harm eventuating is negligible; or the change is minor and something that the individuals concerned would expect; or risks are fully mitigated Medium – Some personal information is involved, but any risks can be mitigated satisfactorily ✓ High – Sensitive personal information is involved, and several medium to high risks have been identified Reduced risk – The project will lessen existing privacy risks Inadequate information – More information and analysis is needed to fully assess the privacy impact of the project. Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 3.1 Reasons for the privacy impact rating There is sensitive personal information involved as well as several medium risks identified, however the risks can be adequately mitigated through the recommended systems/processes. 4.Recommendation Do a full privacy impact assessment Describe: •the likely timing of the PIA •who will be responsible for doing the PIA or A full privacy impact assessment is not required Explain why a PIA is not needed 5.Document Sign off Position Name Sign off Date Project Manager Privacy Officer \[Add others\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 1 Appendix B \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  Item \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 6 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 7 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 8 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 9 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 10 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 11 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 12 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 1 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 1 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 15 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 16 Item 17 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 18 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 1 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 20 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 21 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 22 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 25 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 26 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 28 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 30 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 1 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 36 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 38 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 1 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 44 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 45 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 46 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 48 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 49 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 50 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item 51 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item  \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item Document Type 1.External Marketing – End of Tax Year Campaign video 2.External Marketing – End of Tax Year Campaign Mobile preview 3.External Marketing – End of Tax Year Campaign In-Stream Banner 4.External Marketing – End of Tax Year Campaign Facebook Story 5.External Marketing – End of Tax Year Campaign Post 6.External Marketing – End of Tax Year Campaign Facebook Reel 7.External Marketing – End of Tax Year Campaign Facebook Reel 8.External Marketing – End of Tax Year Campaign Mobile view 9.External Marketing – Interest Limitation Campaign 10.External Marketing – Interest Limitation Campaign – Mobile view 11.External Marketing – Interest Limitation Campaign – Boosted post 12.External Marketing – Interest Limitation Campaign – Facebook Story 13.External Marketing – Interest Limitation Campaign 14.External Marketing – Interest Limitation Campaign 15.External Marketing – Interest Limitation Campaign – Mobile view 16.External Marketing – Interest Limitation Campaign 17.External Marketing – Interest Limitation Campaign 18.Small Business Cashflow 19.Small Business Cashflow 20.Small Business Cashflow 21.Small Business Cashflow 22.Student Loans 23.Student Loans 24.Student Loans 25.Student Loans 26.Student Loans 27.Student Loans 28.Student Loans – Overdue payments 29.Student Loans – Overdue payments 30.Student Loans – Overdue payments 31.Student Loans – Overdue payments Appendix C \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Item Document Type 32.Tax Toolbox Campaign 33.Tax Toolbox Campaign 34.Tax Toolbox Campaign 35.Tax Toolbox Campaign 36.Tax Toolbox Campaign 37.Tax Toolbox Campaign 38.Tax Toolbox Campaign 39.Business – GST Instalment Arrangement 41.Business – GST Instalment Arrangement 42.Business – GST Instalment Arrangement 43.Business – GST Instalment Arrangement 44.Individuals – Instalment Arrangement 45.Individuals – Instalment Arrangement 46.Individuals – Instalment Arrangement 47.Individuals – Instalment Arrangement 48.Individuals – Instalment Arrangement 49.Student Loans – Reduced repayment 50.Working for Families – Eligibility 51.Individuals – Tax obligations 52.MSD/IR collaboration – Superannuation 53.MSD/IR collaboration – Superannuation Appendix D \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Campaign name Ad Set Name Audience Group Working for Families: Notice of Entitlement Campaign 2024 Difficult to estimate customers Working for Families Working for Families: Notice of Entitlement Campaign 2024 General WfFTC customers - $50 or less Working for Families Working for Families: Notice of Entitlement Campaign 2024 New parents Working for Families SBCS campaign 2024 - Top up loans SBCS campaign 2024 - March/April Special Ad Category - student loan NZOBB Student loan NZOBB - April/March overdue date Overseas based with Student Loan Student Loan 23/24 NZ0BB Student loan 23/24 0BB - UPDATE\_2 March REMINDER ALL SEGMENTS Overseas based with Student Loan, NZ based with Student Loan Student Loan 23/24 NZ0BB Student loan 23/24 OBB - February - default March reminder Overseas based with Student Loan Special Ad Category - student loan NZOBB Student loan NZOBB - May/overdue payment Overseas based with Student Loan Working for Families: Notice of Entitlement Campaign 2024 General WfFTC customers – more than $50 Working for Families 7 February 2024 - tax year 2022/2023 Post 1 - 7 February 2022/2023 tax year 7 February 2024 - tax year 2022/2023 Post 2 - 7 February 2022/2023 tax year Student Loan 23/24 NZ0BB Student Loan 23/24 0BB - Jan Compliant/default Fruit burst Overseas based with Student Loan Special Ad Category - student loan NZOBB Student loan NZOBB - May/Fruit burst Overseas based with Student Loan Special Ad Category - student loan NZOBB Student loan NZOBB - April/Chocofish Overseas based with Student Loan Student Loan 23/24 NZ0BB Student loan 23/24 0BB - UPDATE\_1 March ALL SEGMENTS (15 sec & long video) Overseas based with Student Loan, NZ based with Student Loan Construction Tax Toolbox campaign 2024 Construction (15sec video) - Get on with it smash your tax. Construction Tax Toolbox campaign 2024 Construction (15sec Video) - Nah, seriously nail your tax this year Construction Tax Toolbox campaign 2024 Construction (15sec video) - Cut the excuses. Sort your tax. Student Loan 23/24 NZ0BB Student loan 23/24 OBB - February - compliant Overseas based with Student Loan SBCS campaign 2024 - Top up loans SBCS campaign 2024 - May/June Promoting Instalment Arrangements 2021 - 2024 Instalment arrangement IND Feb - May 2024 Promoting Instalment Arrangements 2021 - 2024 Instalment Arrangements IND Nov - Feb 2024 Construction Tax Toolbox campaign 2024 Construction (STATIC - Nah, seriously nail your tax this year. Construction Tax Toolbox campaign 2024 Construction (STATIC - Take your tax as seriously as your trade. Construction Tax Toolbox campaign 2024 Construction (STATIC) - Get on with it smash your tax. Construction Tax Toolbox campaign 2024 Construction (STATIC) - Cut the excuses. Sort your tax. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Promoting Instalment Arrangements 2021 - 2024 Instalment Arrangement - IND April/May Promoting Instalment Arrangements 2021 - 2024 Instalment Arrangement GST Nov - Feb 2024 Student Loan 23/24 SLNZB Student loan 23/24 - May - moving overseas NZ based with Student Loan Student Loan 23/24 SLNZB Student loan 23/24 - April - Overdue payment NZ based with Student Loan Student Loan 23/24 SLNZB Student loan 23/24 - Jan into Feb - Moving overseas NZ based with Student Loan Student Loan 23/24 SLNZB Student loan 23/24 NZB - Feb/Manage myIR NZ based with Student Loan Working for Families: Notice of Entitlement Campaign 2024 Business income verification customers Working for Families Student Loan 23/24 SLNZB Student loan 23/24 - MARCH - Self employed NZ based with Student Loan Promoting Instalment Arrangements 2021 - 2024 Instalment arrangement GST Feb - April 2024 Promoting Instalment Arrangements 2021 - 2024 Instalment Arrangement - GST April/May Working for Families: Notice of Entitlement Campaign 2024 Nil/low-income customers Working for Families 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageMSD - Superannuation NZ Residency myIR login database (all customers) 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageMay 2024 - GST and key dates GST and Business 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageApril 2024 - Business Business 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageMay 2024 - Working for Families Working for Families 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageMay 2024 - Student Loans NZ based with Student Loan 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageMarch 2024 - GST and Deadlines GST and Business 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageApril 2024 - Student Loans NZ based with Student Loan 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageFebruary 2024 - Working for Families Working for Families 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageJanuary 2024 - GST GST and Business 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageJanuary 2024 - Working for Families Working for Families 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageJanuary 2024 - Business Business 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageFebruary 2024 - GST GST and Business 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageFebruary 2024 - Business Business 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageApril 2024 - Working for Families Working for Families 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PagemyIR - Update your details (March-April 2024) myIR login database (all customers) 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageMay 2024 - Business Business 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageMarch 2024 - Student Loans NZ based with Student Loan \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageMarch 2024 - Business Business Working for Families: Notice of Entitlement Campaign 2024 MFTC customers Working for Families Special Ad Category - student loan NZOBB Student loan NZOBB - June/15 sec & long video Overseas based with Student Loan Interest Limitations 2024 - Property Interest Limitations - April 2024 Student Loan 23/24 SLNZB Student loan 23/24 NZB - June/Manage myIR NZ based with Student Loan 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageJune 2024 - GST GST and Business 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageJune 2024 - Business Business 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageJune 2024 - Student Loans Overseas based with Student Loan 2. Mnthly Content - Website Traffic- IR Facebook PageJune 2024 - Working for Families Working for Families Student Loan 23/24 NZ0BB Student loan 23/24 OBB - UPDATED! March - ALL SEGMENTS . Overseas based with Student Loan, NZ based with Student Loan            !  "#$##%& '' ( ,( - &.  /  0 1 2$)) !34 Billing Report: 04/01/2023 - 05/31/2024 05 Date Transaction ID Payment MethodAmountPayment Status 66  +%+)$$$#+7+$++#)+%##) ))) !4:2 8!4 6\*6  ++$+))#\*#+7++$+))$)$ )+ !4: \*8!4 6%6  +$%\*+)##\*#+7+\*#)+#$)#\*+ $ !4:2+ $+8!4 6%6  +\*+)\*#\*$)#%%7+\*++\*%$\*$  !4:)2+ $8!4 6)6  +\*)+\*\*#7+\*\*+$$#+\* #% !4:)2\* +8!4 \*6\*)6  +\*#%+#$%7++++++ # !4:)2%) %#8!4 Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Appendix E \*6%6  +%#$+\*#+7+\*\*))\*##\*% ) !4:)2 8!4 \*6$6  +#)\*\*%$#$7+\*%% #)# !4:)2 8!4 \*66  +\*)++)$$#7+\*)$)#)% % !4:)2 8!4 \*6\*6  +#$$)$#))\*7+\*)$\*\*)+ %$) !4:)2 ))8!4 \*6)6  +\*++\*$+$$7+\*++\*$+$ # !4:+ )8!4 \*6)%6  ++\*%$$++##+7+)#$+$  !4:)2 8!4 \*6)6  +\*+%++$$)#)7++%$+#+ ## !4:)2 #$8!4 \*6)6  +%++%)#%)7+\*$$\*$\*)$%)\* + !4:)2 8!4 Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope \*6)6  +$#%)7+)%%+%)$ ++ !4:)2 8!4 \*6+6  +\*+$#)\*\*7+)%#$#+%$ #\* !4:)2$# )8!4 6#6  +))%$\*\*%\*+)7+))))$$% #$ !4:$\* ))8!4 6$6  +)+$#$\*%#7+)))\*$\*$%#% #) !4:)2$ \*\*8!4 6)#6  +%)%#\*+%#+7+)+\*)+)\* % !4:)2 \*8!4 6+6  +)%#%#\*\*$\*7+#\*%+)))  !4:)2 $)8!4 )6\*)6  +\*)))##%$7+\*+++\*+ ) !4:# )8!4 )6#6+#+\*\*)\*+)$%$7))%\*%$$!4:)2) \*$8!4 )66  +)##+#$#$$7$#$\*++%\*+ ) !4:)2 %8!4 )6\*)6\*$%##$)\*$)7)\*%!4:)2 ++8!4 Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope )6)6\*$#)\*+%+%$)+7)\*#%!4:)2 8!4 ))6\*6\*$#)#+%)+7)\*%)!4:\*\* %)8!4 ))6$6\*$%%$%)+%$\*))7)\*+##)!4:)2 $%8!4 ))6)6\*$+#)##)%\*$7)\*+)%$!4:) $8!4 ))6)6\*$%%%%+%%%))7)\*+)%)#!4:)2) )%8!4 ))6)6\*$%\*))$))+7)\*$\*\*$!4:# 8!4 )6\*)6\*$$$%\*$%+7)\*$)$%!4:)2 \*8!4 )6)6\*$$))$#)\*%$#7)\*\*#$+!4:\*$+ \*8!4 #6\*6\*$$#)\*#%+\*7)\*\*%+$+!4:)2$ ##8!4 #66\*$$)%%#%\*%7)\*\*)#)$!4:)2$ )\*8!4 #66\*$$$%)$+$#%)7)\*\*)$\*\*!4:)2$ $8!4 #6)6\*$%#)$+%7)\*%)))!4:)2$ 8!4 #6)6\*$#++#$%\*\*$#7)\*$!4:)2$ )8!4 #6)6\*$\*\*\*\*\*$+%\*$\*7)\*)%$+!4:+\* $8!4 %66\*$)%%%%\*$7)\*)\*!4:)2 \*8!4 %6)\*6\*$+%)#)%$%7)\*#!4:)2+ %8!4 %6)6\*$#$+%+7)#+$)!4:)2) )%8!4 +6)\*6\*$\*\*)$+%$+$#)7)%)#+$\*!4:)2 8!4 +66\*$\*))\*++%%#+#)%7)+\*%%!4:%+\* $8!4 $6+6\*$\*$%%#%7)+$)!4:)2 $%8!4 $6)6\*$\*$\*))##7)$%+!4:)2$\* +$8!4 $6)6\*$)+))$$##7)$#+)!4:)2$ %8!4 $6%6\*$\*%\*\*%###$#7)$%!4:)2$ $\*8!4 $6)6\*$)\*%\*+\*)++7))+\*$!4:)2)# #\*8!4 66\*$)++\*#\*$#\*7)%\*%!4:)2$ %8!4 6)%6\*$)\*\*\*)$+##$#7)+!4:)2$\* 8!4 Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope 6#6\*$))$)+)%%##)7)\*\*$+!4:)2 %8!4 6\*6\*$)#$##$)$$7)+$$!4:%) #8!4 6%6\*$)+%#$7)$)\*!4:)2# %%8!4 6)#6\*#%%#%)+%%7))#\*+!4:)2 )8!4 6)6\*$)))#%)+7))\*)$)!4:)2 8!4 Total Amount Billed!4:$$2) #$8!4 Total Funds Added!4: 8!4 (<  (!4:  Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope