Hon Simon Watts, Minister of Revenue Information Release Order in Council: Income Tax (Tax Credit) Order 2023 (Increase in Working for Families Tax Credit Rates) February 2024 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s tax policy website at https://taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2024/2024-ir-c ab-23-sub-0465 Documents in this information release # R eference Type Title Date 1 IR2023/267 Policy report CPI indexation of Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit 28 November 2023 2 CAB-23-SUB-0465 Cabinet paper Order in Council: Increase in Working for Families Tax Credit Rates 29 November 2023 3 CAB-23-MIN-0465 Minute Order in Council: Increase in Working for Families Tax Credit Rates 29 November 2023 Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered and confirmed by Cabinet on 29 November 2023. One attachment to the Cabinet paper is not included in this information release as it is publicly available: - Order in Council: Income Tax (Tax Credit) Order 2023 1 Information withheld Some parts of this information release would not be appropriate to release and, if requested, would be withheld under the Official Information Act 1982 (the Act). Where this is the case, the relevant sections of the Act that would apply are identified. Where information is withheld, no public interest was identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. 1 http://www.legislation.govt.nz/regulation/public/2023/0288/8.0/contents.html Sec tions of the Act under which information was withheld: 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people Accessibility Inland Revenue can provide an alternate HTML version or Word doc version of this material if requested. Please cite this document’s title, website address, or PDF file name when you email a request to policy.webmaster@ ird.govt.nz Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). POLICY AND REGULATORY STEWARDSHIP Tax policy report: CPI indexation of Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit Date: 28 November 2023 Priority: High Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2023/267 Action sought Action sought Deadline Hon Nicola Willis Minister of Finance Agree to recommendations In time for Cabinet meeting on 29 November Hon Simon Watts Minister of Revenue Agree to recommendations Agree to lodge th e attached Cabinet paper In time for Cabinet mee ting on 29 November Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Maraina Hak Policy Lead Richard McLaughlan Policy Advisor Doc 1 s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) IR 2023/267: CPI indexation of the Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit Page 1 of 6 28 November 2023 Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue CPI indexation of the Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit Executive Summary 1.This report asks you to agree to changes to the Family Tax Credit (FTC) and Best Start Tax Credit (BSTC) rates in line with inflation, as required by the Income Tax Act 2007. 2.This report also seeks your agreement to lodge the attached Cabinet paper (subject to any changes you may make) ahead of the Cabinet meeting on 29 November 2023. 3.Under current Work ing for Families (WFF) legislation, the FTC and BSTC payment rates must be increased to match inflation at specified times. The rates must be increased once the cumulative value of quarterly increases in the Consumers Price Index (CPI) reaches 5% since the rates were last adjusted. 1 4.As occurred in 2022, the prescribed amount for these changes can be increased by an Order in Council (OIC), but this must be done by 1 December of the relevant year, with the change applying from 1 April of the following calendar year. There is also an ability to amend these rates via primary legislation, however, the 1 December statutory deadline still applies. 2 5.The cumulative CPI threshold released on 17 October 2023 was 5.65% from 1 October 2022 to 30 September 2023, which will automatically trigger a higher rate of WFF payment rates from 1 April 2024. 6.The FTC will be increased for the eldest child rate from $7,121 to $7,524, and the subsequent child rate from $5,802 to $6,130. The BSTC will be increased from $3,632 to $3,838. The expected fiscal costs of the CPI adjustments are included in the fiscal forecasts created in the Half-yearly Economic and Fiscal Update 2023. Next steps 7.To meet the date required by law, the OIC must be made no later than 1 December. We understand that there is a Cabinet and an Executive Council meeting scheduled on 29 November 2023. Officials recommend that the Minister of Revenue submit a Cabinet paper and associated OIC to these meetings for consideration and approval, in order to meet the statutory deadline. 8.The OIC has been prepared by the Parliamentary Counsel Office and is currently with the Cabinet Office. 1 The payment rates for the FTC and BSTC were last set in November 2022 by Order in Council incorporating inflation from 1 October 2021 to 30 September 2022. 2 There will not be a primary legislative vehicle available to make this change that would be enacted prior to 1 December. IR 2023/267: CPI indexation of the Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit Page 2 of 6 Recommended action It is recommended that you: 1 note there is a legislative requirement to index FTC and BSTC rates to the CPI once cumulative inflation reaches 5%. Noted 2 note that the cumulative CPI threshold which was released in October was 5.65% for the year to September 2023, which will lead to a higher rate of FTC and BSTC payment rates from 1 April 2024. Noted 3 agr ee to make a CPI-indexation increase to the FTC eldest child rate by $403 per annum (taking it from $7,121 to $7,524 per annum), and the subsequent child rate by $328 per annum (taking it from $5,802 to $6,130 per annum) by 1 April 2024 by Order in Council. Ag reed / Not agreed Agreed / Not agreed Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue 4 agree to make a CPI-indexation increase to BSTC by $206 per annum (taking it from $3,632 to $3,838 per annum) from 1 April 2024 by Order in Council. Agreed / Not agreed Agreed / Not agreed Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue 5 agr ee to take the attached Cabinet paper to Cabinet and Executive Council on 29 November 2023, which will enable the changes to be published by 1 December 2023, in line with the requirement under the Income Tax Act 2007. Ag reed / Not agreed Agreed / Not agreed Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue 6 no te that the Income Tax (Tax Credit) Order 2023 has been prepared by the Parliamentary Counsel Office to reflect the new rates for the FTC and BSTC. Noted IR2023/ 267: CPI indexation of the Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit Page 3 of 6 7 note that the expected fiscal costs of the CPI adjustments are included in the fiscal forecasts created in the Half-yearly Economic and Fiscal Update 2023. Noted Maraina Hak Policy Lead, Policy and Regulatory Stewardship Inland Revenue 28 / 11 / 2023 Hon Nicola Willis Minister of Finance Hon Simon Watts Minister of Revenue ..... / ...... / ...... ..... / ...... / ...... s 9(2)(a) IR 2023/267: CPI indexation of the Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit Page 4 of 6 CPI inflation adjustment of FTC and BSTC 9.The Family Tax Credit (FTC) is the ‘base unit’ of the Working for Families (WFF) tax credit. This payment is available to families with dependent children and is not conditional on work obligations or whether they are receiving a benefit. The amount received depends on the family’s income, the number of dependent children they have and any shared care arrangements. There are approximately 264,100 recipients of the FTC. 3 10.The Best Start Tax Credit (BSTC) is a payment of $69 per week for families supporting a new-born baby and is universal for all families with new-borns in their first year. It was introduced in 2018 as part of the Families Package, replacing the Parental Tax Credit. There are approximately 137,600 recipients of the BSTC. 11.Under the Income Tax Act 2007, the FTC and BSTC payment rates must be adjusted for inflation once the cumulative value of quarterly increases in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) reaches 5%. These inflation-indexed increases ensure FTC and BSTC maintain their real value over time. 12.The standard process for setting and authorising rates through an Order in Council (OIC) is set out in the Income Tax Act 2007. T he OIC must be made no later than 1 December and come into effect and apply from 1 April following that date. There is also an ability to amend these rates via primary legislation, however, the 1 December statutory deadline still applies. 4 13.Th e rates were last set by an OIC incorporating inflation up to the end of September 2022. For this report, the cumulative count of inflation starts from 1 October 2022. The 5% cumulative threshold was exceeded from 1 October 2022 to 30 September 2023 by 0.65%. This was published on 17 October 2023. This will result in a higher rate of WFF from 1 April 2024. 14.Accordingly, the adjustments to the WFF Tax Credits that will take affect from 1 April 2024 are as follows: Tax credit payment (annualised) From ($) To ($) Change ($) Family Tax Credit Approximately 264,100 recipients Eldest child rate $7,121 $136 p/w $7,524 $144 p/w $403 $8 p/w Subsequent child rate $5,802 $111 p/w $6,130 $117 p/w $328 $6 p/w Best Start Tax Credit Approximately 137,600 recipients $3,632 $69 p/w $3,838 $73 p/w $206 $4 p/w Costs included in forecasts 15.The regular index adjustments are estimated to have the following fiscal costs: 3 Recipient figures are taken from the number of Working for Families claims with non-zero entitlement during the 2022 income tax year. 4 There will not be a primary legislative vehicle available to make this change that would be enacted prior to 1 December. IR2023/ 267: CPI indexation of the Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit Page 5 of 6 Fiscal years ($m) 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 FTC 36 150 152 147 142 IWTC 5 4 17 17 17 16 BSTC 4 17 17 17 16 Debt Impairment 6 1 5 5 5 4 Cash 45 189 191 186 178 Total (Revenue) 44 184 186 181 174 16.The expected fiscal costs of the CPI adjustments are included in the fiscal forecasts created in the Half-yearly Economic and Fiscal Update 2023 and is expected to be $20 million lower than the estimates created for the Pre-election Economic and Fiscal Update 2023. It should be noted that this does not include flow-on implications to the Ministry for Social Development. More specifically, the savings for MSD administered financial assistance. Minimum Family Tax Credit 17.The Minimum Family Tax Credit (MFTC) provides a financial incentive to ensure low income working families remain better off financially in full time work than they would be on a main benefit. This helps support people in moving from a main benefit to full-time work. 7 18.The MFTC rate is tied to main benefit rates. That is, as main benefits will increase with either wage growth or inflation from 1 April 2024, the MFTC should also be increased, to maintain the policy intent of the payment. The confirmed method of indexing main benefits was not established in time for the MFTC adjustment to be included as part of this Order in Council process. Ministers will be asked to take decisions on the impacts of indexation on the MFTC. Officials will report to you at a later date. Ne xt steps 19.The FTC and BSTC adjustments are reflected in the drafting of the OIC which the Parliamentary Counsel Office has provided to the Cabinet Office. The title of this OIC is the Income Tax (Tax Credit) Order 2023. 20.The Cabinet paper and associated OIC will need to be lodged in time for Cabinet consideration (and the Executive Council thereafter) on Wednesday 29 November 2023. This will ensure that the OIC is published no later than 1 December. 5 An increase in the FTC entitlement rate will have a flow-on effect to increase IWTC costs because IWTC abates after FTC. This does not include the proposed increase to the IWTC of $25 per week from 1 April 2024. 6 The impairment ratio represents the amount of Working for Families debt that has been generated as a result of the overpayment of an entitlement. The impairment ratio drives the difference between cash and revenue forecasts as it represents cash paid out was Working for Families entitlements (cash) where no entitlement exists (revenue). 7 Or for sole parents, to work 20 hours or more a week. IR 2023/267: CPI indexation of the Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit Page 6 of 6 21.Inland Revenue will publish an item in its Tax Information Bulletin series informing individuals of the change in early 2024. Existing recipients will be contacted in February 2024 with an updated estimate of their WFF tax credit entitlement for the tax year beginning 1 April 2024. In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet ORDER IN COUNCIL: INCREASE IN WORKING FOR FAMILIES TAX CREDIT RATES Proposal 1This paper seeks Cabinet’s agreement to increase certain Working for Families tax credit rates, as required by the Income Tax Act 2007. Authority is sought for the Minister of Revenue to make a submission to the Executive Council on 29 November 2023 of the required Order in Council, the Income Tax (Tax Credit) Order 2023 (the Order). 2A series of adjustments to the Family Tax Credit (FTC) and Best Start Tax Credit (BSTC), which form part of the Working for Families tax credits, have been proposed to reflect annual price inflation of 5.65% since rates were last adjusted in September 2022. 3In summary, I propose that, from 1 April 2024, the: 3.1FTC rates increase: 3.1.1 For the eldest child, from $7,121 p.a. to $7,524 (i.e. from $136 to $144 per week) after tax; 3.1.2 For a subsequent child, from $5,802 p.a. to $6,130 (i.e. from $111 to $117 per week) after tax; and 3.2BSTC rate increase from $3,632 p.a. to $3,838 (i.e. from $69 to $73 per week) after tax. Policy Best Start Tax Credit and Family Tax Credit 4The Income Tax Act 2007 requires that the FTC and BSTC payment rates must be adjusted for inflation once the total value of quarterly increases in the CPI reaches 5% since the payment rates were last adjusted. 5The payment rates for the FTC and BSTC were last set in November 2022 by Order in Council incorporating inflation from 1 October 2021 to 30 September 2022. Due to the current rates of inflation, the 5% threshold was exceeded at the end of the September 2023 quarter. The annual rate of inflation from 1 October 2022 to 30 September 2023 was 5.65%. 1 2bnpvvfw8u 2023-12-04 09:14:12 Doc 2 Financial Implications 6There are no Budget allowance implications associated with adjusting the rates of Working for Families Tax Credits by inflation. The expected fiscal costs of the CPI adjustments are included in the fiscal forecasts created in the Half-yearly Economic and Fiscal Update 2023 and is expected to be $20 million lower than the estimates created for the Pre-election Economic and Fiscal Update 2023. Timing and 28-day rule 7The Income Tax Act 2007 requires the Order to be made no later than 1 December and to come into effect and apply from 1 April following that date. The Order therefore is in accordance with the rule that regulations must not come into force until at least 28 days after they have been notified in the New Zealand Gazette. Compliance 8The Order complies with: 8.1the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi; 8.2the rights and freedoms contained in the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the Human Rights Act 1993; 8.3the principles and guidelines set out in the Privacy Act 1993 (if the regulations raise privacy issues, indicate whether the Privacy Commissioner agrees that they comply with all relevant principles); 8.4relevant international standards and obligations; 8.5the Legislation Guidelines (2021 edition), which are maintained by the Legislation Design and Advisory Committee. Regulations Review Committee 9The Order will be certified by Parliamentary Counsel Office as being in order for submission to Cabinet. Certification by Parliamentary Counsel Office 10Officials consider that there are no grounds for the Regulations Review Committee to draw the Order to the attention of the House under Standing Order 319. Impact analysis Regulatory Impact Assessment 11The Treasury's Regulatory Impact Analysis team has determined that that the proposals to adjust the FTC and the BSTC for inflation are exempt from the requirement to provide a Regulatory Impact Statement on the grounds that the Government has limited statutory decision making because it is required to make the adjustment by the Income Tax Act 2007. 2 2bnpvvfw8u 2023-12-04 09:14:12 \[ Regulatory Impact Assessment 12The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) teams has been consulted and confirms the CIPA requirements to not apply to these proposals as the threshold for significance is not met. Publicity 13Inland Revenue will publish an item in its Tax Information Bulletin series, and relevant publications and material will be updated to incorporate the new amount. The Ministry of Social Development may also update its publicly available information. 14Existing recipients will be contacted in early 2024 with an updated estimate of their Working for Families tax credits entitlement for the tax year beginning 1 April 2024. 15The Order will be published in the New Zealand Gazette. Proactive release 16I propose to proactively release this Cabinet paper, associated minutes, and key advice papers within 30 working days of Cabinet making final decisions. Consultation 17The Treasury, Ministry of Social Development and Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet have been consulted on this paper. Recommendations The Minister of Revenue recommends that Cabinet: 1Note the statutory requirement that the Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit payment rates must be adjusted for inflation once the total value of quarterly increases in the CPI reaches 5% since the payment rates were last adjusted. 2Agree that the Family Tax Credit increase from: 2.1For the eldest child, $7,121 p.a. to $7,524 (i.e. from $136 to $144 per week) after tax; and 2.2For a subsequent child, from $5,802 p.a. to $6,130 (i.e. from $111 to $117 per week) after tax; 3Agree that the Best Start Tax Credit rate increase from $3,632 p.a. to $3,838 (i.e. from $69 to $73 per week) after tax; 4Authorise the submission of an Order in Council to the Executive Council at its meeting on 29 November 2023, giving effect to recommendations 2 and 3, above. 3 2bnpvvfw8u 2023-12-04 09:14:12 Authorised for lodgement Hon Simon Watts Minister of Revenue 4 2bnpvvfw8u 2023-12-04 09:14:12 CAB-23-MIN-0465 Cabinet Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Order in Council: Increase in Working for Families Tax Credit Rates PortfolioRevenue On 29 November 2023, Cabinet: 1noted that the statutory requirement that the Family Tax Credit and Best Start Tax Credit payment rates must be adjusted for inflation once the total value of quarterly increases in the CPI reaches five percent since the payment rates were last adjusted. 2agreed that the Family Tax Credit increase from: 2.1 for the eldest child, $7,121 p.a. to $7,524 (i.e. from $136 to $144 per week) after tax; 2.2 for a subsequent child, from $5,802 p.a. to $6,130 (i.e. from $111 to $117 per week) after tax; 3agreed that the Best Start Tax Credit rate increase from $3,632 p.a. to $3,838 (i.e. from $69 to $73 per week) after tax; 4noted that the Income Tax (Tax Credit) Order 2023 gives effect to paragraphs 2 and 3 above; 5authorised the submission to the Executive Council of the Income Tax (Tax Credit) Order 2023 \[PCO 25955/3.0\]. Rachel Hayward Secretary of the Cabinet 1 I N C O N F I D E N C E 2bnpvvfw8u 2023-12-04 09:14:50 Doc 3