24OIA2156 Page 1 of 2 14 May 2024 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 22 April 2024. You requested the following (numbered for ease of response): 1. Inland Revenue Report IR2024/027: Restoring interested deductibility for residential property 2. Inland Revenue Report IR2024/015: New bright-line test and removing building depreciation 3. Inland Revenue Briefing note BN2024/058: Additional options for interest limitation phasing 4. Inland Revenue Report IR2024/030: FamilyBoost detailed design decisions and draft Cabinet paper 5. Inland Revenue Report IR2024/029: Online Casino Gaming Duty and Regulation Cabinet paper 6. Inland Revenue Report I R2024/075: Preliminary tax forecasts for the 2024 Budget Economic and Fiscal Update I am refusing your request for the documents in scope of items one, two and five under section 18(d) of the OIA, as the information is publicly available. These documents are available on Inland Revenue’s tax policy website (taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz) by searching for Information Release: Taxation (Annual Rates for 2023–24, Multinational Tax and Remedial Matters) Bill. I am releasing, attached as Appendix A, the document in scope of item three of your request with some information withheld under section 9(2)(a) of the OIA, to protect the privacy of a natural person. I am withholding in full, the documents in scope of items four and six of your request under section 9(2)(f)(iv) of the OIA, to maintain the current constitutional conventions protecting the advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and Officials. These documents are currently part of the ongoing Budget 2024 process. Some documents relating to Budget 2024 will be proactively released after Budget Day which is scheduled for 30 May 2024. Page 1 of 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Policy and Regulatory Stewardship Kaupapa me te Tiaki i ngā Ture 55 Featherston Street PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 New Zealand T.04 890 1500 Briefing note Reference: BN2024/058 Date: 14 February 2024 To: Rev enue Advisor, Minister of Finance – Emma Grigg From: Chr is Gillion Subje ct : Additional options for interest limitation phasing 1.This briefing note provides you with further options and costings on phasing back in interest deductibility for residential investment property. 2.This follows up on an aide memoire sent to the Minister of Finance on 13 February 2024 outlining a range of possible options for phasing back in interest deductibility (T2024/322) on top of the option proposed in the draft Cabinet paper (IR2027/027 refers). 3.Further options for interest limitation phasing are presented on the following page. Page 2 of 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 and outyears Total over forecast period Status quo 50% 25% 0% 0% 0% Cabinet paper 50% 80% 100% 100% 100% Fiscal cost ($m) -5-360-785-855-915-2,920 Option 1 50% 50% 75% 100% 100% Fiscal cost ($m) 0 -225-730-860-920-2,735 Option 2 50% 50% 80% 100% 100% Fiscal cost ($m) 0 -225-745-860-920-2,750 4.The se costings were modelled using the same assumptions and caveats as for those in the previous aide memoire, and are restated here: •The costs are expressed relative to the status quo and were produced using the same model as was used for the draft Cabinet paper. Figures are presented in June fiscal years and are rounded to the nearest $5 million. •The model uses macroeconomic data from the Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2023 and assumes the implementation of the changes to the personal income tax system from the National Party’s Back Pocket Boost document. •The phasing options here assume no changes to settings for the 2023–24 income year, and therefore zero fiscal cost in that year. This differs from previous advice (and the draft Cabinet paper) where there was a fiscal cost for the 2023–24 year because all taxpayers would be permitted to deduct 50% of interest incurred, including those with recently acquired rental properties. •Note the fiscal impacts differ slightly between the Cabinet paper and the new phasing options even for options that allow the same proportion of interest in a given year. This is owing to updated tax return data being used to model the new options, as well as the different treatment in 2023–24 as described in the above bullet-point. •Note that the relationship between the proportion of interest allowed and the fiscal cost is not linear. For example, decreasing the proportion of interest allowed in 2027/28 from 100% to 50% does not decrease the fiscal cost in that year by half. This is because the modelling takes account of loss-ringfencing rules. Interest expenses that are allowed by the interest denial rules, but not claimable in the same year because of loss-ringfencing are accumulated and claimed when the residential income allows for it. This means that in the options that allow a larger proportion of interest to be deducted, there is a larger stock of these unclaimed interest expenses that are carried forward into future years. 5.The Treasury was informed about this briefing note. Chris Gillion Policy Lead s 9(2)(a)