24OIA2048 Page 1 of 3 18 April 2024 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 3 April 2024. You requested the following: ...I am writing to request information regarding the expenditure on Public Relations (PR and Communications support by the IRD. My request is detailed as follows: Actual and Budgeted expenditure: Please provide a breakdown of the actual and budgeted expenditure on PR and Communications support for the current financial year, as well as the previous two financial years, for the IRD. Procurement Process: For each instance of expenditure on PR and Communications support, please indicate whether the services were procured through an open tender process or if it was a closed process. In accordance with the principles of the Official Information Act, I seek to understand the transparency and competitiveness of the procurement process. Service Providers: Please provide the names of the companies, agencies, or individuals that received payment for providing PR and Communications services to the IRD. Additionally, I request the value of the contracts awarded to each service provider. The information you have requested in relation to active projects in the current financial year (2023/24) is outlined in Appendix A. Inland Revenue can directly source services from any supplier who is listed on the All of Government (AoG) Panel. Where a supplier has been sourced from the P anel, this is identified in the appendix. The actual spend is the invoiced spend for the period 01 July 2023 to 31 March 2024. The forecast spend is the forecast spend for the period 01 April 2024 to 30 June 2024. The information you have requested for the previous two financial years has been published in Inland Revenue’s Annual Review Written responses for the 2021/2022 and 2022/2023 financial years. This information can be found in the responses to questions 50 and 51 and can be found on the parliament website via the following links: 24OIA2048 Page 2 of 3 • 2021/22 year: 3b68be77378f7277b799aaef67a7b6465c51c387 (www.parliament.nz) • 2022/23 year: 1da30e5dee7792e113fba4789cf09b81f5ac837c (www.parliament.nz) This part of your request for the previous two years information is therefore refused under section 18(d) of the OIA, as this information is publicly available. Right of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. Publishing of OIA response We intend to publish our response to your request on Inland Revenue’s website (www.ird.govt.nz) as this information may be of interest to other members of the public. This letter, with your personal details removed, will be published in its entirety. Publishing responses increases the availability of information to the public and is consistent with the OIA's purpose of enabling more effective participation in the making and administration of laws and policies and promoting the accountability of officials. Thank you for your request. Y ours sincerely Kieran Burlace Domain Lead, Marketing and Communications - Marketing 24OIA2048 Page 3 of 3 Appendix A Project Agency/company Actual Spend Forecast Spend Sourced Brightline Hemisphere $0 $30,800 AoG Panel Interest Limitations Hemisphere $0 $42,300 AoG Panel Student loans EightyOne $53,462 $30,783 AoG Panel Student loans case study video Wrestler Limited $15,550 $0 AoG Panel Tax 23/24 end of the tax year Hemisphere $20,927 $86,244 AoG Panel 7 July filing due date Hemisphere $0 $99,888 AoG Panel Construction phase two EightyOne $11,234 $68,766 AoG Panel Working for Families awareness Motion Sickness $0 $80,000 AoG Panel Working for Families Notice of Entitlements Hemisphere $14,964 $0 AoG Panel Sharing economy Hemisphere $29,213 $20,469 AoG Panel Social media creative Hemisphere $20,000 $0 AoG Panel Social media placements Facebook, Google $66,927 $35,500 Directly Sourced – One Supplier