Appendix A 25 January 2024 Excerpt from Weekly Status Report PUB00465 Charities – Business income exemption Inland Revenue will release for consultation draft public guidance on the application of the charitable exemption for business income in the week commencing 5 February. The Income Tax Act 2007 provides an exemption for income derived by a registered charity from a business carried out exclusively for charitable purposes, subject to the following two restrictions: •If a registered charity carries out its charitable purposes in New Zealand and overseas it must apportion the business income it derives between those purposes in and outside New Zealand. Only the part apportioned to the charitable purposes in New Zealand is exempt. •Business income is not exempt if a person with some control over the business is able to direct or divert money away from the charity. The items follow an Issues Paper released in December 2022 that sought feedback on the correct approach to the law on technical issues that have caused uncertainty for the sector. POLICY AND REGULATORY STEWARDSHIP Tax policy report: Charities and not-for-profits overview Date: 20 March 2024 Priority: Low Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2024/110 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Revenue Note the contents of this report Refer a copy of this report 19 April 2024 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Stewart Donaldson Principal Policy Advisor Samantha Putt Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) IR2024/110: Charities and not-for-profits overview Page 1 of 6 20 March 2024 Minister of Revenue Charities and not-for-profits overview Purpose 1. This report provides you with an overview of the charities and not-for-profits (NFPs) sector and related tax policy matters. This context may be useful for future tax policy reports and for matters that may be raised with you by stakeholders and other Ministers. 2. This report does not purport to contain a detailed analysis and description of each matter. Rather, it seeks to inform you of the potential range of matters and makes some comment on their attributes so that you can discuss which matters you want to further consider. The appendix contains a summary of these items. 3. We recommend you note this report and invite you to meet with officials to discuss the contents. Background Charities and NFPs framework 4. Charities and NFPs make important contributions to the wellbeing of New Zealanders. The sector supports efforts to bolster our social, human, and natural capital. The economic activities of the sector also affect the accumulation of physical and financial capital in the New Zealand economy. These factors form the basis for the tax exemptions and deduction frameworks provided to charities and NFP organisations. 5. The broad policy setting for this sector is that the Government supports charities and NFPs by providing targeted tax concessions. Inland Revenue administers charitable tax exemptions from income tax, fringe benefit tax, goods and services tax and resident withholding tax. We also approve donee status, which gives tax benefits to people donating to these organisations. NFPs that benefit from the widest range of tax concessions will be registered charities that are well regulated, publicly transparent and provide public benefit. Donation tax incentives have the objective of reinforcing and encouraging giving to approved donee organisations. Income tax and donation benefits for charities with charitable purposes outside New Zealand are restricted. 6. Some of the policy options for this sector will need to be considered in the context of broader objectives the Government has for the sector. Charities and NFPs statistics on Inland Revenue systems 7. There are approximately 90,000 NFPs on Inland Revenue’s system. These include: 7.1 29,000 tax-exempt charities. Based on accounts filed on the public charities register for 2022–23, tax-exempt charities control $81 billion of assets, employ 138,000 people full time (5% of the New Zealand workforce), benefit from 170,000 volunteers each week and contribute about 5% of GDP. IR2024/110: Charities and not-for-profits overview Page 2 of 6 7.2 20,000 tax-exempt amateur sports bodies. 7.3 1,000 tax-exempt local and regional promotion bodies (beautification societies). 7.4 28,000 NFPs that are not tax exempt. About 24,000 of these have net income below a $1,000 deduction threshold available for NFPs, so they do not file income tax returns or pay income tax. About 4,000 file income tax returns and report a taxable income, taxable loss or zero net income. Recent legislative and regulatory change for the sector 8. This sector has been subject to legislative and regulatory change over recent years. Significant changes include: 8.1 The Incorporated Societies Act 2022, which requires approximately 23,000 incorporated societies to re-register by April 2026 and annually report using the same accounting standards as registered charities. 8.2 The Charities Amendment Act 2023, which introduced a number of changes for 29,000 registered charities. The changes include a new requirement for large charities to report the reasons why they are accumulating funds. 8.3 The External Reporting Board (XRB) has introduced changes to the threshold size of some reporting tiers for registered charities, incorporated societies and other public benefit entities. The focus has been to make it easier for small charities to apply the standards and for larger charities to adopt new service performance reporting standards. Current policy work 9. There are three projects involving this sector that our policy staff are currently involved with. Disposals of trading stock at below market value 10. In January 2024, you agreed to progress work related to disposals of trading stock at below market value. Cabinet agreed to the changes on 26 February 2024. These changes will benefit donee organisations because businesses will be able to donate trading stock to them and claim tax deductions on an ongoing basis. These changes are being progressed in an Amendment Paper to the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2023–24, Multinational Tax, and Remedial Matters) Bill. Requests for overseas donee status 11. Every year there are requests from New Zealand charities with overseas purposes to be granted overseas donee status. Overseas donee status is an exception to the current law that restricts tax benefits for donations to charities with New Zealand purposes. Decisions to give overseas donee status that meet certain Cabinet criteria, such as the relief of poverty, sickness, or the ravages of war or natural disaster, or other overseas development aid objectives, require legislative change. 12. We plan to report to you in April 2024 about the next tranche of requests for overseas donee status for inclusion in the next taxation Bill, scheduled for introduction in August 2024. s 9(2)(f)(iv) IR2024/110: Charities and not-for-profits overview Page 3 of 6 Regulatory stewardship 13. Later this year Inland Revenue will complete a regulatory stewardship report on donation tax credits. While this report is not primarily policy-related, it may contain policy recommendations that you decide to include on a future Tax and Social Policy Work Programme. Future policy work 14. A range of potential tax policy matters affecting this sector are identified in the Appendix. Two of these matters will be reported to you shortly and are summarised below. s 9(2)(f)(iv) IR2024/110: Charities and not-for-profits overview Page 4 of 6 22. 23. Next steps 24. 25. We would welcome the opportunity to discuss any other matters raised in this report with you. 26. We are aware that Minister Louise Upston may write to you on certain tax matters and both she and Minister Nicola Willis have an interest in this sector. We recommend you share this paper with them, so that they are kept informed of this context. Consultation with the Treasury 27. The Treasury was informed about this report. s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv) Page 1 of 2 Policy Taukaea 55 Featherston Street PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 New Zealand T.04 890 1500 Briefing note Reference: BN2024/328 Date: 15 August 2024 To: Revenue Advisor, Minister of Revenue – Angela Graham Private Secretary, Minister of Revenue – Helen Kuy From: Stewart Donaldson Subject: Charities and not-for-profits tax briefing for Minister Upston Purpose 1.The purpose of this briefing note is to inform Minister Watts of charity and not-for - profit tax matters officials will discuss with Minister Upston on Thursday 22 August. Background 2.Earlier this year, officials offered to brief the Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector, Hon Louise Upston, about the tax rules which affect charities and not-for -profit organisations. Minister Upston accepted this offer and a meeting is scheduled on Thursday 22 August. Briefing content 3.Minister Watts has referred three charity / not-for -profit tax reports to Minister Upston so far this year and he has corresponded with her about volunteers and honoraria ( IR2024/110, IR2024/161, IR2024/237 and IR2024/238 refers). 4.This tax briefing will allow Minster Upston to clarify tax rules and policy settings for the sector. 5.A powerpoint that will be provided to Minister Upston is attached to this briefing note. The material is consistent with information already provided to Minister Watts in past reports. However, it contains more detailed or up-to-date information in respect of: •Donation tax concession rules and related tax statistics •The donation tax credit regulatory stewardship review •The 2024 Australian Productivity Commission Inquiry Report “Future Foundations for Giving”. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] OVERVIEW 1.Tax policy framework / principles 2.Tax concessions 3.Snapshot of the not-for-profit sector 4.Donation tax concessions 5.Donation Tax Credit Regulatory Stewardship Review 6.Donation policy advice 7.Donationtax statistics 8.Highlights from the Australian Productivity Commission report “Future foundations for giving” (May 2024) 9.Future tax policy considerationsfor charities and not-for-profits 2 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 1. TAX POLICY FRAMEWORK / PRINCIPLES 1.Charities and not-for-profits make important contributions to the wellbeing of New Zealanders. 2.One of the ways the Government supports charities and not- for-profits is by providing favourable tax treatment. For context, the value of tax concessions is about 10% of government grants paid directly to charities and not-for- profits. 3.Registered charities generally receive the most tax benefits, in recognition of the public benefits they provide and their public accountability requirements. 4.Tax benefits for charities with charitable purposes outside New Zealand are restricted. 5.Donations tax incentives are aimed at reinforcing and encouraging giving to support the charitable, community and voluntary sectors. They empower the community to decide funding priorities. 6.Tax expenditures should be subject to continual monitoring and review to determine their effectiveness, both in meeting objectives, and relative to alternative methods of providing assistance. 3 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 2. TAX CONCESSIONS Favourable tax treatment mainly comes in the form of: ▪Income tax exemptions ▪Income tax deductions ▪Tax concessions for donations ▪Fringe benefit tax exemptions ▪GST concessions All tax expenditures are subject to continual monitoring and review to determine their effectiveness 4 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 4. DONATION TAX CONCESSIONS Timeline 1962-2024: Donation tax concessions were introduced in 1962 for individuals, 1972 for corporates and extended for Māori authorities in 2003-04. The maximum claims were increased significantly in 2008-09 (individual caps increased from a $630 tax credit to 1/3 of taxable income; corporate and Māori authority caps increased from 5% to total net income). Payroll giving was introduced in 2010. There are about 25,000doneeorganisations (recipients of donations that qualify for donation tax credits): To qualify, organisations must apply funds for charitable, benevolent, philanthropic or cultural purposes wholly or mainly\* within NZ. Most registered charities and education providers qualify as doneeorganisations. The NZ concessions are generous compared to international benchmarks: •They are payable as a refundable tax credit at a high rate of 33 1/3% (Australia has an income tax deduction so donorswith income below their $18,200 tax-free threshold(including many pensioners) do not benefit) •They have a high maximum claim (cap), and •The list of eligible doneeorganisationsis relatively large (Australia does not allow claims for donations to religious organisationsor schools; in NZ these make up over 70% of claims). •Butconcessions are limited to gifts of money (not gifts in kind) and do not include debt forgiveness or bequests. Recent tax changes to make concessions more generous: •From 1 April 2024 businesses can donate trading stock to doneeorganisations and claim a deduction (there is no maximum cap for trading stock donations) •From 1 April 2019 donors have been able to upload receipts into MyIRduring the tax year and many receive automatic refunds after the end of the tax year •From 1 April 2019 IR relaxed its interpretation of ‘wholly or mainly’from a 1 year to 3 yeartestso more charities with overseas purposes qualify as doneeorganisations. \*Wholly or mainly: At least 75% of funds must be applied in NZ over a three-year period; The amount applied in NZ in any one year cannot fall below 50%. A number oforganisationswhich do not meet this criteriastill qualify as doneeorganisationsif they are specificallylisted in Schedule 32 of the Income Tax Act 2007. 6 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 7 s 9(2)(f)(iv) \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 8 s 9(2)(f)(iv) \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 9 s 9(2)(f)(iv) \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 7.DONATIONTAX STATISTICS (2023 will increase slightly as late claims are filed) 10 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 7.DONATIONTAX STATISTICS 11 1.Totals:The value of total donations subject to tax claims for the 2022-23 year was $1.05b. Thetax value was $341m. 2.Value of donation claims by individuals:$926m was donated by 341,000 individuals. The tax valuewas $309m. 3.Payroll giving:Total donations made by individuals through payroll giving was$6.8m donated by 14,000employees through 1,800employers. The tax value was $2.2m. 4.Recipients of donations:63%of the value of donations went to religious organisations, 8%went to schools and 29%went to other organisations. 5.Corporategift deductions:$89m was gifted by 5,200companies. The tax value, at 28%, was $25m. 6.Compliance activity: For the year ending 30 June 2024, IR identified donation tax credit claims worth $31m ($93m donations) that were either ineligible or fraudulent. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 8. THE 2024 AUSTRALIAN PRODUCTIVITY COMMISSION INQUIRY REPORT“FUTURE FOUNDATIONS FOR GIVING” •Private and Public giving funds (ancillary funds): Set a minimum distribution rate between 5-8% of net assets (currently 4-5%) to increase the amount charities receive today. •Tax concessions: There is no case to change the income tax exemption or GST concessions, however FBT concessions confer a competitive advantage and should be removed. Tax incentives for volunteering should not be adopted. 12 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 13 s 9(2)(f)(iv) Page 1 of 2 Tax Counsel Office Te Tari Tohutohu Tāke 55 Featherston Street PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 New Zealand T. 04 890 1500 Briefing note Reference: BN2024/347 Date: 27 August 2024 To: Revenue Advisor, Minister of Revenue – Angela Graham Private Secretary, Minister of Revenue – Helen Kuy From: Ed Oosterwijk (Group Leader, Tax Counsel Office) Subject: Public guidance – Interpretation Statement – Charities business income exemption Release of public guidance 1. The Tax Counsel Office is preparing to release an Interpretation Statement in early September about the application of the current charitable exemption for business income. The statement’s aim is to provide clarity on how the existing law applies to charities registered as a charitable entity under the Charities Act 2005 that derive business income and carry out charitable purposes in and outside New Zealand. The release is relevant for the Minister because of the level of public interest in the tax rules for charities business income as well as recent statements made by the Prime Minister and Minister of Finance about the tax rules for charities with commercial activities. Background 2. Subject to the following restrictions, broadly the Act provides an exemption for business income derived by an entity registered as a charitable entity under the Charities Act 2005. • If a registered charity carries out its charitable purposes in New Zealand and overseas it must apportion the business income it derives between those purposes in and outside New Zealand. Only the part apportioned to the charitable purposes in New Zealand is exempt. • Business income is not exempt if a person with some control over the business is able to direct or divert money away from the charity. 3. The business income exemption can be contrasted with the exemption for non- business income. Non-business income derived by a registered charity is not subject to the restrictions described in \[2\] above. 4. The charitable exemption for business income has been in place for a long time but uncertainty exists about how the exemption operates. We have raised this uncertainty with you previously (IR2024/237 para 39 refers). The income tax issues 5. Inland Revenue (IR) is aware that there is some uncertainty about how the law applies. This uncertainty includes what income is included in the charities business Page 2 of 2 income exemption (and therefore subject to the restrictions described in \[2\]) and how a tax charity with New Zealand and overseas charitable purposes apportions its business income between its charitable purposes in and outside New Zealand. 6. In December 2022, IR released an Issues Paper explaining the competing views on how the charitable exemption for business income applies and proposing an approach to how the law applies. The responses received from interested persons to this Issues Paper and the draft version of the statement that we are about to publish, helped form our view of the correct approach. 7. The statement provides guidance on what amounts are income from a business, the requirements that must be satisfied for business income to be exempt and guidance on how a charity with charitable purposes in and outside New Zealand should apportion its business income between those purposes. Industry response. 8. We do not anticipate the statement being relevant to a significant number of charities. The charities register shows about 18,000 charities reported business income / loss in 2022. The statement will be relevant to about 2,500 (14%) of these, being charities that reported carrying out a charitable purpose overseas. 9. Some charities may have interpreted the section differently to the interpretation taken in the statement. However, we expect that the number of charities in this position is low. 10. A number of interested persons who commented on the Issues Paper and draft item expressed concern regarding the complexity of the business income exemption and cost of compliance for smaller charities relative to the amount of business income derived. Providing relief for small charities, for example, by way of a de minimis, would require a legislative change and the relevant submissions have been referred to Policy for consideration. In the meantime, the statement clarifies that IR does not require a charity’s apportionment of business income between charitable purposes in and outside New Zealand to be exact to the last dollar but rather reflect what is objectively reasonable in the circumstances. Other 11. Policy have reviewed the item and are supportive of it being published. Ed Oosterwijk Group Leader, Tax Counsel Office DDI: s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)