24OIA2041 Page 1 of 9 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 8 May 2024 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 3 April 2024. You requested the following: Reports or materials held by your organisation: 1. Setting out and/or summarising how and when your organisation has met, or intends to meet, the commitments to transparency and partnership set out in the Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa New Zealand. 2. Setting out or explaining how decisions made by the organisation are informed by algorithms. This may include without limitation "plain English" documentation of the algorithm/s, information about the data and processes involved, or published information about how data is collected, secured, and stored. 3. That demonstrate or detail how your organisation is delivering clear public benefits through Treaty of Waitangi commitments by embedding a te ao Māori perspective in the organisation's development and use of algorithms consistent with the Treaty of Waitangi. 4. That demonstrate or detail how your organisation has, or intends to, identify and consult with people, communities and groups who have an interest in algorithms, including Māori. 5. That describe how your organisation makes sure data is fit for purpose by identifying and managing bias. 6. Showing how privacy, ethics, and human rights are safeguarded by regular peer reviews of algorithms to assess for unintended consequences, and how the organisation acts on this information. 7. Setting out the nominated point of contact for public inquiries about algorithms - together with any internal policies, principles, rules, or guidelines that relate to the above matters. On 9 April 2024, you clarified your request to: For clarity, I am specifically interested in the information in the IRD's possession setting out how and when the IRD has discharged, or intends to discharge, all or any of the commitments made by it in becoming a signatory to the Algorithm Charter of New Zealand. The items listed in points 1-7 of your email below are the commitments set out in the Algorithm Charter of New Zealand. I am requesting any evaluative reports, costing plans, execution or operational reports or plans, reports, internal policies, principles, rules, or guidelines specifically focussed on discharging any or all of the commitments listed in the Algorithm Charter of New Zealand as set out in points 1- 7 below. This will include but is not limited to advice or reporting issued to staff, executives, officials, or ministers. 3 Information Governance Team Support The Authority is supported by the Information Governance team. They are responsible for: • ensuring the Authority follows good governance principles and practices • working with the Chair to set the agenda, considering key enterprise issues and decisions required • providing support, advice and quality assurance for Authority papers, with the mandate to refuse any that do not meet quality standards • ensuring that minutes reflect decisions and key discussion points, and that decisions are communicated to the people who need to know. Attendees and observers At the Chair's discretion, people are invited to attend Authority meetings to provide input as needed. Observers may attend with approval from the Chair. Observers do not contribute to the Authority's discussion unless a member asks them to. Logistics Meetings The Authority meets quarterly, and members are advised of the meeting dates set for the year. Additional meetings may be scheduled when needed, and members are notified of these as early as possible. All procedures, rules and practices for regular meetings stay in place for additional meetings. In some circumstances it may be necessary for papers to be circulated for feedback and decisions outside of meetings. The Chair's agreement is required for these 'out-of-cycle' items. Agendas and papers The agenda and papers are made available to Authority members four working days before the meeting. The Chair decides whether to accept late agenda items and papers on the Information Governance Team's recommendation . Papers should be on the governance template (a choice of Word or PowerPoint) and should include a purpose statement and recommendations . Not in scope 4 Quorum A quorum of 50% of members including the Chair, is required for decisions to be made. If there is no quorum, the Chair decides whether to reschedule the meeting. Minutes of meetings The Information Governance Team writes the minutes and provides them to the Authority for their following meeting. Within that following meeting, the Authority is asked to approve the minutes as an accurate record. Review  To enable ongoing improvement, the Authority will review its performance at approximately six-monthly intervals. Reviews will be recorded in the minutes.  Version Control The most recent document will be included in the footnote 1 for continuity. 1 Version 2.0 2024.03.26 Not in scope Page 3 of 4 • demonstrating the public service principles and values • demonstrating Te Pou o te Tangata - how we do things at IR: Whanaungatanga, Manaakitanga and Mahi Tika • working with IR's commitments as a public sector organisation in mind, including IR's commitment to strengthening the Maori-Crown relationship and to integrating te Tiriti o Waitangi and Māori concepts and perspectives into IR's work • making sure risks, issues and challenges are brought into the open and explored • welcoming different points of view and frank, robust discussion • being clear when allocating responsibility and authority • collectively owning decisions made • operating with an agnostic system, platform, and information form perspective. Information Governance Team Support The Oversight Group is supported by the Information Governance team. They are responsible for: • ensuring the Oversight Group follows good governance principles and practices • working with the Chair to set the agenda, considering key issues and decisions required • providing support, advice and quality assurance for papers and speakers attending meetings • ensuring that minutes reflect decisions and key discussion points, and that decisions are communicated to the people who need to know. Attendees and observers At the Chair's discretion, people are invited to attend Oversight Group meetings to provide input as needed. Panels The Oversight G roup may form Panels of members to focus on specific initiatives or areas of activity. The Chair of the Oversight G roup will appoint the Panel Lead. Panel Leads must be voting members of the Oversight G roup. Panels will report on their progress to the Oversight G roup at each Oversight G roup meeting or as appropriate. Panels have no authority or responsibilities outside the Oversight group. Logistics Meetings The Oversight Group will meet monthly or as decided by the Chair. Additional meetings may be scheduled when needed, and members are notified of these as early as possible. All procedures, rules and practices for regular meetings stay in place for additional meetings. Not in scope Page 4 of 4 Agendas and papers The agenda and papers are made available to Oversight Group members four working days before the meeting. The Chair decides whether to accept late agenda items and papers on the Information Specialist's recommendation . Papers should be on the governance template (a choice of Word or PowerPoint) and should include a purpose statement and recommendations. In some circumstances it may be necessary for papers to be circulated for feedback and decisions outside of meetings. The Chair's agreement is required for these 'out-of -cycle items. Quorum A quorum of 67 % of members including the Chair, is required for decisions to be made. If there is no quorum, the Chair decides whether to reschedule the meeting. Minutes of meetings The Information Specialist writes the minutes and provides them to the Chair for their following meeting. Within that following meeting, the Oversight Group is asked to approve the minutes as an accurate record. Review To enable ongoing improvement, the Oversight Group will review its performance at approximately six -monthly intervals. Reviews will be recorded in the minutes. Version Control The most recent document will be included in the footnote for continuity. 1 1 Version 2.0 2024.02.09 Not in scope Page 2 •Trust – transparency on use so New Zealanders are aware of AI usage and agree with it. Establishment of the Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation. The AI Oversight Group: •Noted that outtakes presented to the group from the recently held AI Forum. Not in scope Not in scope \] 7.External relationship activities. INFORM Presenters: Graham Poppelwell, Domain Lead, Information Governance & Sharing; Makayla Stewart, Change Analyst, Change, Design & Enablement; Brijesh John, Domain Lead - Technology Architecture. Interim Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation (ICDEI) The Interim Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation was established in September 2023 at the Artificial Summit. An invitation came through the Algorithm Charter committee seeking people to join workshops around ethics. The Domain Lead (Information Governance & Sharing) shared an open invite to interested members of the Working Group. Algorithm Charter Cross-Agency Community IR is hosting the next meeting on 6 December 2023 in Asteron Centre. The last meeting was hosted by NZ Police with a good presentation around how they work from a governance perspective. ICDEI will be invited to present as per the draft agenda that will be shared with the group. AI Community of Interest and Auckland Council The AI community of interest group hosted speakers from Auckland Council (AC) to talk about the intelligent solutions they are using to solve business problems. They discussed the way AC worked with businesses to identify the issues and challenges they were facing and then working with them for a solution. AC discussed scenarios of AI reducing working hours for better work life balance and retention of key people. The session recording is available for viewing by contacting the Change Analyst (Change, Design & Enablement). Cross-agency Survey from the Deputy Chief Digital Officer The presenters and the Technical Lead (Information Governance) have completed this. The survey covered areas like the kind of governance in place, its usefulness and the appetite for AI. There are opportunities to influence the programme and establish common capabilities. There will be an upcoming meeting with more updates from other public sector agencies starting their AI journey. Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Date: 17 November 2023 To: Executive Leadership Team and Senior Leaders From: Information Governance Key messages from the 8 November 2023 Data and Information Governance Authority (DIGA) meeting Excerpt from Key Messages: Data and Information Governance Authority Not in scope Not in scope Artificial Information (AI) Governance IR will be hosting the upcoming AI Charter cross-agency meeting in-house at Asteron on 6 December. Guests will also include representatives from the recently established Interim Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation who are within the office of the Government Chief Data Steward. The Artificial Intelligence Te Mātāwai site is going through final review before go-live later in November. IR-wide communications are planned for its launch via Featured News. Not in scope Page 2 7. General Business. INFORM Presenter: Graham Poppelwell, Domain Lead, Information Governance & Sharing Interim Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation There is an open invite to members of the Oversight Group for a workshop. Community of Practice for the AI Charter This brings together government agencies to talk on an informal basis. IR is hosting the next meeting on 6 December 2023 in Asteron Centre. Not in scope \[ Data and Information Quality Model This document is a Model. Models support or expand upon a related Standard by outlining an explicit set of technical requirements. This Model should be read in conjunction with the Data and Information Policy which outlines Inland Revenue’s approach to the stewardship of data, information and knowledge, and the Data and Information Quality Standard which establishes high-level requirements for the quality of our data, information, and knowledge. The Data and Information Quality Standard is being drafted at the time this Model was approved. Contents Data and Information Quality Model ........................................................................................ 1 Why we have this Model ........................................................................................................... 2 What we mean by data and information quality ...................................................................... 3 Why this Model is important ..................................................................................................... 3 What this Model applies to ........................................................................................................ 4 What the requirements of this Model are ................................................................................. 4 The Data and Information Quality Model.................................................................................. 5 Practical application of the Model ........................................................................................... 15 Responsibilities ........................................................................................................................ 17 Appendix .................................................................................................................................. 18 When the Model is effective, reviewed, and what it replaces ................................................ 21 Authorisation ........................................................................................................................... 21 Document information ............................................................................................................ 22 Data and Information Quality Model Not in scope Priv acy & Ethics Impact Assessment Name of Initiative Insert date Author Version Privacy & Ethics Impact Assessment Template \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Artificial Intelligence use case guidelines AI use case guidelines: AI is an area of huge growth. Organisations across public and private sectors are moving to adopt these solutions and identify the ways that these solutions can support them in achieving better outcomes, and also how these solutions pose risk. IR has developed an AI staff use policy which will be available soon which should be read first by all staff at IR to understand what is permitted, and what restrictions have been put in place. To provide additional guidance on how staff should use these tools the classification of the information or question space is important to understand. The tables below are designed to provide more clarity around specific use cases. It is impossible to represent all use cases within IR in a single view, however this table will be regularly updated with new use cases as IR evolves its understanding of this landscape. Artificial Intelligence use case guidelines s18(c)(i) \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Table 2: Use cases mapped to IR examples. This view has mapped a range of IR use cases and visually shows what kind of AI solutions these use cases can be leverage. This is not an exhaustive list and requests for additional rows and any questions can be made to InformationSecurity@ird.govt.nz. Compare your use case against this table to help verify if its permitted. All rows Generative AI /LLM Integrated AI Machine Learning Business Rules s 18(c)(i) If you receive contact from a customer about one of these apps, tools or services, please continue with your normal process and then email AI@ird.govt.nz with the details of the customer contact.  Do Advise customers that official resource we have created (websites, guides, forms etc) and our organisation are the source of truth.  Advise customers asking about our use of Artificial Intelligence that their best and fastest avenue is to make an Official Information Act request through our online facility. Governance and Ministerial Services see Official In formation Requests for more information. Customers can find out more information and make their requests here: About OIA requests. If the customer is unwilling to do so, please receive the information request and contact Governance and Ministerial Services. Only use approved business tools for their intended purpose to complete your work. Be aware of the potential for bad actors to use AI systems to create misleading, incorrect, discriminatory or biased information, and to pose a security risk.  Understand that any information that is produced either in part or whole by an AI system by your use Don't Read any of this material out to customers.  If asked for this material, or any information held by IR in a general sense, consult with Governance and Ministerial Services before taking any actions.  Put customer or IR information into AI systems that have not been explicitly approved for that use, see AI application register for a list of approved tools and their purpose.  Use publicly available AI services such as Chat GPT or Bing Chat to make responses to customers. of that system is your responsibility and ultimately, Inland Revenue's.  Seek guidance from your leader if you are unsure. Unsure? Get in touch Artificial Intelligence AI 1 Ka whakamahi nga kaimahi AI i nga kaupapa here Artificial Intelligence (AI) staff use policy This policy sets out the requirements for using AI products and services for staff at Inland Revenue Note: a glossary of terms is available in this policy. Why we have this policy This policy sets out Inland Revenue’s approach to safely and securely look to use AI in the workplace, to help make good decisions and deliver services that are more effective and efficient. It is a priority for IR to ensure that AI is adopted in a way that considers not only our obligations under the Revenue Acts and Privacy Act but also under the Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa New Zealand and any other NZ Government authoritative guidance. This includes embedding a Te Ao Māori perspective in the development and use of algorithms consistent with the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi. In addition to these absolute requirements, as a leading public agency, we must also robustly assess the security, privacy, operational and technical impacts that any new AI solution or use case brings, and then the associated transparency of this to the public. This is a rapidly evolving area, and this policy is subject to change. Who this policy applies to This policy applies to a user if you are using or considering the use of AI products and services for an Inland Revenue purpose and are: •An Inland Revenue employee •A contingent worker (consultant, contractor or otherwise) working for Inland Revenue with access to Inland Revenue systems and information Your responsibility As someone working for Inland Revenue, you are responsible for understanding and following this policy. This means: Compliance Measurement Inland Revenue may verify compliance to this policy through various methods, including, but not limited to, business tool reports, internal and external audits, and feedback to the policy owner. Artificial Intelligence (AI) Staff Use Policy Not in scope 2 Non-Compliance For IR employees, if any possible compliance issue is identified appropriate action will be taken, including referral to IR’s Integrity team for consideration under Inland Revenue’s Code of Conduct – Tikanga Whanonga. For non-employees (contingent workers/contractors/suppliers) any possible compliance issues would be escalated and managed consistent with written agreements/ contractual arrangements. Exemptions Any exemption to the policy must go through the required process. See the Exemptions Standard for more information. Our policy 1. Principles To help guide our thinking and behaviour, Inland Revenue has defined some key principles to apply to AI use cases. Where these principles are not able to be met, it may present additional risks to Inland Revenue that need to be considered and appropriate action taken. • Transparency - we will maintain transparency by clearly explaining how decisions are informed by algorithms. This applies both internally, promoting transparency within our working teams, and with our customers and partners around how we will utilize these tools. • Human oversight – we will retain human oversight to assess for unintended consequences and act on this information. This includes understanding limitations and identifying and managing bias. • Partnership – we will embed a Te Ao Māori perspective in the development and use of algorithms consistent with the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi. • Ethics – public trust in how Inland Revenue manages data makes us all data stewards. Our AI systems should respect human rights, diversity and the autonomy of individuals and not result in unfair discrimination against individuals, communities or groups. • Integrity - unauthorised access, misuse or security incidents involving the use of AI tools/solutions will be reported to Information Security. • Robust testing – we will use a robust testing and review process to evaluate the use of new AI systems and tools, or updates to existing tools that have adopted increased functionality. 2. Adoption of AI solutions Any new proposed use case for an AI or Large Language Model (LLM) tool, AI integrated tool, or new use of an AI tool should be escalated through Inland Revenue’s AI Oversight Group and AI Working Group (contact InformationSecurity@ird.govt.nz). This ensures adequate testing, review and consideration is applied to all use cases, and prevents effort duplication and risk. Existing common workplace technologies that use AI do not require new consideration or exemption. Some examples are listed in the glossary. If you are unsure about the current approval status of a system for use with your business unit or information, please contact InformationSecurity@ird.govt.nz. Not in scope 3 3. Creation of content Users Must Not: • Use any AI/LLM or other intelligent tool that is not approved for use, or use an approved tool/solution for an unapproved use case. • Use any information classified as Sensitive or above with an AI/LLM solution. • Intentionally generate, or use AI/LLMs to create any misleading, illegal, discriminatory or offensive content. • Process or use in AI/LLM solutions, any information that is reasonably capable of being used to identify an Inland Revenue customer (or Inland Revenue staff) without express approval and consideration from the AI Oversight Group. • Process or use commercially In-Confidence information without express approval and consideration from the AI Oversight Group. • Provide automated financial, legal, tax advice, guidance, or AI/LLM information to another party (either internal or external) without human involvement. • Infringe upon copyright or other right of use in operation of AI/LLMs. Users Must: • Consistently review and confirm the accuracy of any generated AI/LLM output (including text, audio, visual or other) or intelligent system output. This includes specifically checking for code or technical information. Robust technical testing must be performed to ensure this type of content is free from security issues. • Review intelligent system output for potential bias, ethical concerns, and unintended messaging. • Make clear through visual, verbal or written indicators/mechanisms the use of AI/LLM and other intelligent solutions in content they produce or contribute to. • Consider IR’s Enterprise Risk policy and framework to ensure a wider risk consideration is given for the use. • Seek the approval of the AI Oversight Group for proposed use cases of unapproved AI/LLM use cases or solutions. • Acknowledge that any information produced in part or whole by an AI system will be attributable to the Inland Revenue staff working with that information, and ultimately Inland Revenue will be responsible for the quality and outcomes of that information. 4. Disposal of content The retention and disposal of any AI information or knowledge will be handled in conjunction with Inland Revenue current retention and disposal rules and processes. Not in scope 1 Kaupapahere Haumarutanga korero Information Security Policy This policy outlines the approach to information security for Inland Revenue. This policy is our overarching information security policy and is supported by our other specific information security policies and standards. Why we have this policy IR must be trusted by its customers and partners as an organisation for protecting the information they share with us or that is generated by us. This information security policy aims to provide the high-level direction for information security at IR. It provides the guidance for how information which IR collects, processes, shares or stores, in whatever form, is kept secure. This will assist us in complying with our obligations under the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Below are two key extracts from the TAA which set out those obligations: “Every Minister and every officer of any government agency having responsibilities under this Act or any other Act in relation to the collection of taxes and other functions under the Inland Revenue Acts are at all times to use their best endeavours to protect the integrity of the tax system. – Section 6(1).” “A revenue officer must keep confidential all sensitive revenue information and must not disclose the information unless the disclosure is a permitted disclosure that meets the requirements of sections 18D to 18J – Section 18(1).” There are other Legislative, government requirements and industry standards may also govern and control the way we handle and protect information. These are listed in the ‘Finding out more’ section below. Who this policy applies to This policy applies to you if you are: •An IR employee •A contractor working for IR or with access to IR systems/information •A third-party with access to IR systems/information Third-party vendors and contractors are also responsible for any sub-contractors (or any sub-sub- contractors, etc) which have access to IR assets. Sub-contractors of third-party vendors must also meet all IR requirements and be approved by IR. It also applies to all information systems, networks and mobile devices that store, transfer, process, connect with or communicate to our applications and databases, along with internet-based services and services that may be located overseas (or in the cloud). Information Security Policy Not in scope 2 The requirements of this policy apply wherever you are, including whether you are working remotely, travelling overseas or in a business continuity crisis mode (for example, being away from your normal place of work due to a disaster). In this policy, “information” refers to information in any format that IR creates, receives, uses, holds or maintains. An “information system” includes the entire architecture of a service or any subcomponent that stores, processes or transfers information. Your responsibility As someone working for IR, you are responsible for understanding and following this policy. This means: Compliance Measurement The Assurance, Integrity or Cyber Security Operations teams may verify compliance to this policy and in conjunction with the IR Code of Conduct through various methods, including but not limited to, business tool reports, internal and external audits, and feedback to the policy owner. Exemptions Any exemption to the policy must go through the required process. See the information of security exemptions for more information. Non-Compliance If you have been found not to have complied with this policy, then the appropriate action will be taken. Our policy 1.Principles To help guide our Information Security thinking and behaviour IR has defined some key security principles. These principles will not only guide our thinking but help to embed our secure by design approach to our information security for both digital and non-digital pathways. Where these principles are not able to be met, it may present additional risks to IR that need to be considered and appropriate action taken. There are three main information security principles: •Confidentiality – information is accessed to those authorised to have access. •Integrity – Making sure that the information is not modified by unauthorised users, and changes by authorised users are tracked to ensure the integrity is maintained. •Availability – information/systems are accessible when authorised users need it. There are six supporting principles: •Authentication – we will verify a user's identity to ensure that the person requesting access is authorised. •Non-repudiation –the ability for a system to prove that a specific user sent a message and that it hasn't been modified. •Need to know – a person will be provided with only the information that they need to successfully fulfil their role. Not in scope 3 •Least privilege – we will only authorise users the privileges needed to undertake their duties. •Defence in-depth – we will use multiple and coordinated security countermeasures to protect the information assets in our organisation. •Segregation – we will ensure our user roles, systems architecture and design incorporate separation and segregation to establish trust zones, define security domains and enforce boundaries. 2.This Policy It is important that your actions foster a culture of security at IR. You, and any staff you are responsible for (including contractors/non-workers) must be adequately trained by completing the standard onboarding security training, the required annual refresher training and continue to regularly complete security training in our Learning Management Platform. IR has specific policies and standards which provide further guidance on different areas of Information Security. It is important that these other policies and standards are used as the foundation for anything we do at IR. Our corporate Information Security Intranet provides the collection of guidance documents, Policies and Standards to help you in your day-to-day IR life or help you to comply when undertaking projects. This Policy sets the overall direction of Information Security for IR and authorises Policies which need to be read in conjunction with this one. For example, our library of Policies and Standards cover, expectations such as: •Never giving out or share your usernames and passwords. •Using different passwords for different IR systems and personal accounts. •Taking care to use the correct address when sending emails. •Never using a generic account that doesn’t identify you or an account that doesn’t belong to you, to access IR information. •Classification of IR information to manage the security and privacy of internal and external customers. •Ensuring conversations of a sensitive nature are not overheard by others, either at your place of work or in public places. •Taking care to keep documents and information on portable devices protected using encryption and physical security measures if you take them out of the office. •Never representing IR using your private email address, or forward work emails or business information to your private email address. •Accessing and using IR information and systems only for authorised IR business purposes. •Never disabling, circumventing, or removing the security mechanisms on IR provided devices (i.e. laptops, mobile phones). •Never forwarding unknown or suspicious email attachments. •Never clicking on links or attachments in suspicious emails. •Conducting IR business securely always, even in a crisis. •Allowing access to all your equipment and files used in your work at IR if requested for security checks. •Immediately reporting any actual or suspected loss, theft, or improper use of or access to IR information by raising a request in ServiceNow •Following all documented procedures in response to any ICT security incident. Not in scope become. AI systems that use low quality data or small datasets will have less reliable and accurate results.  Types of Artificial Intelligence There are many ways to categorise or group different types of AI including by functionality and capability. The following is a traditional perspective on types of AI: All existing types of AI are known as Artificial Narrow Intelligence or Weak AI. They are built to perform a specific task autonomously and perfectly using human like capabilities.  There are two types of AI known as Artificial General Intelligence and Artificial Super Intelligence, these do not currently exist. Artificial General Intelligence are systems that can learn, perceive, understand and function completely like human beings whereas Artificial Super Intelligence, has similar processing capabilities that humans do, has a greater memory and is faster. For more information see our related resources above.  What are the opportunities? AI presents an opportunity for IR to deliver improved services across our organisation. As an organisation we need to be deliberate in our decision making to balance risk, opportunity and return on our investments.  Consider how these AI functions could help us in future:  Pulling together short summaries of information based on a text prompt such as a question or a meeting recording.  Identifying connections and patterns in data that humans cannot and adjusting actions it takes in real-time.  Acting as a chatbot that provides real time guidance while an individual completes a task.  Automating systems and processes for simple and some complex tasks while flagging more complex work for human review.  Recognising changing trends and behaviours in our society and within specific groups of people. There is significant opportunity to achieve better outcomes for IR and our customers, and significant and unique risks that AI poses or increases that we will need to mitigate. To understand how we do this, we need an understanding of how the technology behind AI works. IR already uses and has invested in AI in a number of areas (see AI application register for more information), your welcome to familiarise yourself with the capabilities we have available to us and understand when/how we should use them. This is something we can do now to deliver better outcomes for our customers.  To understand how we are currently using this technology see Using Artificial Intelligence at IR.  Concepts, categories and definitions within Artificial Intelligence There are key concepts that will be important in helping you navigate the world of AI.   Concepts Diagram: How algorithms function at a high level. An Algorithm is a set of steps or instructions for solving a problem or performing a task.  Categories Business rules are the simplest type of machine ‘intelligence’, they use simple logic and processing to reach an outcome. Examples of this include decision trees and if/else statements. These machines do not undergo a ‘training’ process.  START, Ātea and ServiceNow all utilise business rules to complete some tasks.  Machine learning (ML) is a branch of AI that enables machines to improve at tasks (e.g. decision making) with experience relying on the data, algorithms and training. Haukāinga and our external website searches using machine learning to provide the most relevant results to users, see How we use Artificial Intelligence for more information.  AI integrated tools refers to solutions that already exist in our work where a vendor has integrated an AI component into their tool.  In many cases we may not have an option to stop or control an AI component in a particular solution and over time, AI will increasingly be included in all software tools.  Deep learning (DL) is a type of machine learning that uses neural networks to learn in a way similar to how humans do. It requires massive amounts of data and can learn from its own environment and past mistakes .  Generative artificial intelligence commonly known as GenAI, is a type of AI that can create new content using deep learning.  Gen AI can create a wide range of content including text, audio, videos and computer code.  Definitions Artificial neural networks (ANN) are a branch of machine learning that enables machines to process data in a similar way to how the neurons in our brains do. Neurons send messages or signals to one another. Neural networks do the same using layers of nodes that send data amongst one- another.  Large language model (LLM) are systems that have processed large amounts of text (usually from the internet) using neural networks. It allows you to input a text prompt and will generate a text response by repeatedly predicting the next word in a sentence or paragraph. Natural language processing (NLP) aims to give systems the ability to understand and create human speech. It does this through analysing the relationship between words in sentences (syntactic) and the meaning of words together (semantic).  1 Status Report Weekly update for the Minister of Revenue Week commencing: Monday 20 July 2020 Date issued: Thursday 16 July 2020 Excerpt from Status Report: Weekly update for the Minister of Revenue Not in scope 2 New Topical Issues New items since the last Status Report (issued on 9 July 2020). Not in scope Not in scope 5 Signing of the Algorithm Charter As part of ensuring New Zealanders have trust and confidence in the ways agencies use and steward data and information, the Government Chief Data Steward, a function within Stats NZ, has led the development of an Algorithm Charter (in conjunction with agencies) for agency adoption. Algorithms are used to help make good decisions and deliver services that are more effective and efficient. Algorithms can also mitigate the risk that human biases will impact the administration of government services and result in real benefits for everyone. However, the decisions they make or inform can be impacted by bias in the data the algorithm is created from, what is taken into consideration when making a decision, and how well decisions are validated. The Algorithm Charter focuses on demonstrating agency commitment to the management of algorithms where there is a potentially high risk of these biases being included. It also ensures there is sufficient human oversight throughout the development of an algorithm and how it operates to limit biases and reflect what is intended as much as possible. Inland Revenue is already part way through implementing its formalised enterprise data and information governance approach in which the principles of the charter are already established. The Commissioner of Inland Revenue will be signing the Algorithm Charter for Inland Revenue on 17 July 2020. Not in scope Page 2 government uses algorithms, and the ways Government makes sure algorithms are being used responsibly and transparently. Between August 2019 and July 2020 the Government Chief Data Steward have iterated through several versions of an Algorithm Charter. These iterations have involved agency consultation in August and September 2019, public consultation between October and December 2019, and further agency consultation between January and July 2020. Thro ughout 2019 and 2020 many people across Inland Revenue engaged on the Charter development and provided feedback which was summarised and sent to Stats NZ. The level of support for an algorithm charter varied. Points raised were focused on these areas: •Almost all algorithms implemented at Inland Revenue are partial or full automations of business rules defined by legislation and these are already publicly disclosed on the web site. •Inland Revenue would want to keep some of its algorithms undisclosed to support the integrity of the tax system. •Determination of likelihood and impact as per the Charter risk matrix are largely subjective and will vary by practitioner and agency. •Inland Revenue already incorporates most of the Charter mitigations and controls. The Charter is intended to demonstrate a commitment by government agencies to carefully manage how algorithms will be used to strike the right balance between privacy and transparency, prevent unintended bias and reflect the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi. Inland Revenue has provided comprehensive feedback on each iteration of the Charter. The Government Chief Data Steward have settled on a risk assessed approach to determining the degree of scrutiny and safeguards applied to each algorithm an agency operates. Risk is intended to be assessed before any controls and safeguards have been applied to an algorithm. The Charter commits adopting agencies to: •Making an assessment of the impac t of decisions informed by their algorithms. •Applying the Algorithm Charter commitments as guided by the identified risk rating. The Charter commitments are (abridged): •Maintain transparency by clearly explaining how decisions are informed by algorithms. •Deliver clear public benefit through Treaty commitments. resulting Algorithm Assessment Report was to let New Zealanders know how the Not in scope Page 3 The Charter will be reviewed annually. In July 2020 the Commissioner of Inland Revenue adopted the Charter for Inland Revenue and Stats NZ published the Algorithm Charter on 28 July 2020. Founding signatories to the Charter are: •Te Tari Taake — Inland Revenue Department •Te Ara Poutama Aotearoa — The Department of Corrections •Te Tāhuhu o Te Mātauranga — The Ministry of Education •Te Manatū Mō Te Taiao — The Ministry for the Environment •The Ministry of Housing and Urban Development •Te Tāhū o te Ture — The Ministry of Justice •Toitū Te Whenua — Land Information New Zealand •Te Puni Kōkiri — The Ministry of Māori Development •Oranga Tamariki - The Ministry for Children •The Ministry for Pacific Peoples •Te Manatū Whakahiato Ora — The Ministry of Social Development •Te Tatauranga Aotearoa — Statistics New Zealand •Te Manatū Waka — The Ministry of Transport •Te Kāhui Whakamana Rua Tekau mā Iwa—Pike River Recovery Agency •Te Minitatanga mō ngā Wāhine — The Ministry for Women •Te Hau Tāngata — Social Wellbeing Agency •Te Ope Kātua o Aotearoa — New Zealand Defence Force •Te Kaporeihana Āwhina Hunga Whara — Accident Compensation Corporation •Te Tari Taiwhenua — Department of Internal Affairs •Te Arawhiti — The Office for Māori Crown Relations •Waka Kotahi — The New Zealand Transport Agency •Te Tari Arotake Matauranga — The Education Review Office There are closely related initiatives underway elsewhere in Government and internationally that New Zealand is involved in: •In May 2019 New Zealand along with all OECD member nations adopted the OECD AI Principles. •In November 2019 the Department of Internal Affairs established a partnership project with the World Economic Forum, Reimagining Regulation for the Age of AI, to pilot approaches to artificial intelligence regulation. The first white paper from this project was published June 2020. •Focus on people. •Make sure data is fit for purpose. •Ensure that privacy, ethics and human rights are safeguarded. •Retain human oversight. Not in scope Page 5 Supporting material The Algorithm Charter document spans three pages with the first two covering context, purpose, and the risk assessment foundation. The third page is the Charter proper. See https://data.govt.nz/assets/data-ethics/algorithm/Algorithm-Charter-2020 Final- English-1.pdf for the published Charter. Not in scope Page 6 Not in scope Page 7 Not in scope P a g e | 1 Data and Information Governance Authority Meeting Minutes – 4 August 2020 2.00pm – 3.30pm Attendees: Mike Cunnington (Chair), Martin Smith, Mary Craig, Cath Atkins, David Carrigan, Dawn Swan, Patrick O’Doherty, Chris Hogg, Carol Feuerriegel, Kirsty Gemmill, Doug Lambert. Apologies: Tina MacLean. Secretary: Tanya Williams Agenda items: 4.Statistics NZ's Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa NZ – presented by Doug Lambert 5.Forward Agenda Review – presented by Mike Cunnington Note that Item 2 was not covered in the meeting and members were asked by the Chair to provide feedback directly to the Secretary following the meeting. Excerpt from Data and Information Governance Authority: Minutes Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope P a g e | 3 4. Statistics NZ’s Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa New Zealand The Data Strategy and Governance Lead covered the intent, development, and adoption of the All of Government Algorithm Charter (the Charter). The intent of the Charter is to engender the public’s trust and confidence in how Government agencies steward and use data algorithms. The Charter takes a risk-based approach to minimising the potential negative impacts to New Zealanders from algorithms. Potential impacts on IR to implement the Charter highlighted by members were: o How agencies operationalise the Charter is central to its success. o It’s likely a change in the awareness of principles, processes, and practices will be required along with a strengthening of what is currently in place. o IR might need to increase its transparency about its diligence in its use of data and algorithms. Inland Revenue is incorporating the Charter into work underway within the wider Data and Intelligence work programme, and Data and Information Governance work programme, to operationalise the Charter commitments. Decisions: DIGA endorsed incorporation of the Charter into how Inland Revenue works with data and algorithms. Not in scope Not in scope 1 Status Report Weekly update for the Minister of Revenue Week commencing: Monday 10 August 2020 Date issued: Thursday 6 August 2020 Excerpt from Status Report: Weekly update for the Minister of Revenue Not in scope Not in scope 3 Media Coverage Not in scope Not in scope 4 Reseller news says twenty-one government agencies have signed up to the Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa New Zealand, including Inland Revenue. It’s a new set of standards introduced by the government, and a world first, to guide the use of algorithms by public agencies and to give New Zealanders confidence that data is being used safely and effectively across government. Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Not in scope Inland Revenue r eport: Inland Revenue’s contribution to advancing Government data outcomes Date: 23 August 2021 Priority: Medium Security level: In confidence Report number: IR2021/334 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Revenue Note the contents of this report Refer a copy of this report to members of the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee None None Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Mike Cunnington Deputy Commissioner, Information & Intelligence Services Report to Minister of Revenue: Inland Revenue’s contribution to advancing Government data outcomes s9(2)(a) Not in scope 2 IR2021/334: Inland Revenue’s contribution to advancing Government data outcomes 23 August 2021 Minister of Revenue Inland Revenue’s contribution to advancing Government data outcomes Executive summary 1.Inland Revenue is a very active participant in a number of cross-agency initiatives related to data management and governance. We have adopted the algorithm charter and mandated data standards, and have a very constructive working relationship with Stats NZ as the functional lead for data. Through this work, we are supporting and enabling the New Zealand economy and public service to become increasingly digital. 2.Ensuring that Inland Revenue has appropriate safeguards and protections in place is a critical component of the work we do. Customers entrust us with sensitive information about their financial and personal circumstances, and we take our obligation to protect their information and keep it confidential very seriously. Policies and procedures are in place to ensure that we meet our legislative obligations and retain our customers’ trust. 3.We share information with a wide range of other agencies, to help smooth customers’ experiences when dealing with government and deliver better outcomes for them. Recommended action 4.I recommend that you: a)Note the contents of this report. Noted b)Refer a copy of this report to members of the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee for their information. Referred Mike Cunnington Deputy Commissioner, Information & Intelligence Services 23 August 2021 Hon David Parker Minister of Revenue / /2021 Not in scope 3 IR2021/334: Inland Revenue’s contribution to advancing Government data outcomes Background 5.This report provides information about Inland Revenue’s contribution to the development of data governance and management frameworks and standards across the public sector, and our data governance and management practices. It has been prepared in response to the questions asked when the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner, Transformation appeared before the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee on 8 July 2021 to discuss the Cabinet paper Inland Revenue’s July 2021 Transformation Update. How Inland Revenue manages and uses data and information 6.Inland Revenue has significant data and information collection powers and many information sharing arrangements in place. To ensure we act with integrity and engender trust and confidence amongst New Zealanders, we have established a data and information governance programme. The programme is helping to ensure we have transparent and accountable governance arrangements that provide oversight of our management and use of data, so that we act knowingly, responsibly, and with integrity. 7.We have defined a set of capabilities and established a governance framework (as shown in the diagram below) to: •Support the delivery of our strategic objectives. •Ensure information and tools are in place for our people to access guidance and make the decisions they should. •Provide guidance and decisions where it is most appropriate for a governance group to do so. 8.The programme is not yet complete and continues to focus on incorporating increased due diligence, including ethical considerations, into our collection, use, and stewardship of data and information. The work we do with other agencies is a key input into the programme. Algorithm charter 9.Inland Revenue is a signatory to the algorithm charter for Aotearoa New Zealand, and contributed significantly to its development. The Government Chief Data Steward (GCDS), the functional lead role for data delegated to the Chief Executive Stats NZ, has acknowledged our commitment to ensuring the algorithm charter is of a high quality and Not in scope 4 IR2021/334: Inland Revenue’s contribution to advancing Government data outcomes readily implementable. Stats NZ has favourably recognised our plan for implementing the algorithm charter. 10.To ensure Inland Revenue meets the commitments in the charter, we have developed a plan setting out what we need to do to improve our governance and management of data. We have also incorporated the commitments of the algorithm charter into our data and information policy, which sets the foundations for our data governance. 11.We have already begun putting the foundations in place and have established a data governance framework as noted above, along with policies and standards for managing data ethically. These are consistent with the commitments in the algorithm charter. Our next area of focus will be working with functional areas, such as our analytical teams, to ensure that they understand and adopt the agreed frameworks, policies and standards. 12.It is important to note that the charter does not define what an algorithm is. Each agency is responsible for identifying the algorithms that will have the highest risk of unintended consequences and/or significant impacts if things do go wrong. We are currently refreshing our approach to cataloguing algorithms and analytical models as part of the data and information governance programme noted above. 13.We are sharing our experiences and what we are putting in place with others. We have discussed the work we are undertaking regarding data governance and management with many agencies including Stats NZ, the Treasury, the Social Wellbeing Agency, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment ( MBIE), ACC, and the Ministry of Social Development (MSD). Earlier in 2021, we met with the representatives from the Chilean Government regarding our implementation of the Charter, along with MSD and MBIE. Mandated data standards 14.Inland Revenue has committed to adopting the data standards mandated by the GCDS. The intent of the current standards is to ensure that agencies exchange key data in the same format, for example all agencies using the same format for dates. 15.We have contributed significantly to the development of the three currently mandated standards f or an individual’s date of birth, name and street address. These standards are being incorporated into the guidance we give to the agencies that provide us with data to analyse. 16.We are working closely with Stats NZ on the development of fu rther data standards, and have invited Stats NZ to be members of our data governance groups. Together, we are developing a plan to further improve the way our two agencies work together. 17.Importantly, the outcomes and lessons learned from this plan will be shared with other agencies, to contribute to the broader advancement of data management in the wider pub lic sector. Security and privacy 18.Everyone who works for Inland Revenue has a legislative obligation to protect the integrity of the revenue system and keep sensitive revenue information confidential. It is an obligation we take very seriously. 19.We have strict rules and restrictions on integrity matters such as staff accessing customer information. Routine monitoring is in place to check for potential wrong-doing and ensure that incidents are investigated properly and fairly. Not in scope 5 IR2021/334: Inland Revenue’s contribution to advancing Government data outcomes Privacy 20.We routinely conduct privacy impact assessments whenever we are considering the use of new data and information, and when we use existing data in new ways. The assessment sets out what data we are using and why, how we will store it, who will have access to it, and the controls we have in place. 21.Each year, we complete an assessment of privacy capability using the Government Chief Privacy Officer’s (GCPO) privacy assessment framework. For the year ending 30 June 2021, we met four of the five core expectations, and all but one of the other 11 elements. We were assessed as having strong maturity in culture, breach and incident management, and policies and process. 22.We report to the Office of the Privacy Commissioner each year on the information we share under information matching and approved information-sharing agreements (AISAs). We have AISAs with the Ministry of Social Development (MSD), the Police, the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), and the NZ Gang Intelligence Centre. We also liaise with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner on any new policy or process that may impact on privacy. 23.All privacy breaches are reported. For the year ending 30 June 2021, 124 breaches were reported. The number of breaches has been stable. The majority of breaches are minimal or minor, using the GCPO breach-reporting matrix, as only a small number of people were impacted and there was little or no indication of systemic issues. Security 24.Threats are occurring more frequently and are increasingly sophisticated. Tax agencies are seen as an attractive target, given the data we ho ld and our large volumes and value of financial transactions. We have plans in place should a threat materialise, so we are well prepared. 25.Although we have very good systems and processes in place to prevent privacy and security breaches, it is not possible to fully mitigate against the possibility of human error. Assurance 26.Our internal assurance team have a risk-based assurance programme that includes assessing whether our cybersecurity practices and information matching agreements comply with the rules set by the Office of the Privacy Commissioner. The plan is updated every year and endorsed by the Risk and Assurance Committee, which includes external members and provides independent advice to the Commissioner. This year our focus areas are the AISAs we have with MSD, Police and DIA and the information matching we undertake with Customs. 27.The audit by Archives New Zealand (Archives NZ) of public office record-keeping aims to provide a point-in-time view of core information management practices, identifying strengths, and where there might be opportunities for improvement. The audit is based on Archives NZ’s Information Management Maturity Assessment framework, which consists of eight categories including governance, s elf -monitoring, capability, creation, management, storage and access. 28.We are scheduled to be part of Archives NZ’s 2021–22 audit programme. We have yet to receive formal notification but, to prepare for the audit, we recently conducted our annual Archives NZ self-assessment survey. This will be used as input into the audit. 29.The audit process involves four stages: pre-audit, in-audit (onsite), post-audit and follow-up. Our people will be involved in the p re-audit for onsite activities. The onsite audit will include interviews and focus groups with a range of our people, including me as the Executive Sponsor, information management specialist staff and technology staff. Not in scope 6 IR2021/334: Inland Revenue’s contribution to advancing Government data outcomes Methods of sharing information Who we share information with 30.We exchange information with a wide range of agencies including MSD, MBIE, Stats NZ, Customs, DIA, the Police, and the Treasury. These arrangements are well documented and have a clearly defined purpose. How information is shared 31.Information is exchanged in a variety of ways, from storage devices, such as iron keys, to application programming interfaces (APIs). Given the number and diversity of agencies we share information with, we accommodate what others can work with. This means that we do use channels and technology that we would prefer to move on from; however, our approach is to minimise the burden on the agencies we exchange information with. 32.APIs, or gateway services, enable direct machine-to-machine interactions between systems. They are a fast, high-volume, secure channel we are increasingly making available to both public and private sector organisations. APIs enable us to define what data we will share and then make it available for others to access when they need to. For example, to support the administration of the w age subsidy, introduced in response to COVID-19, we enabled MSD staff to access the information they needed directly from our systems, with the appropriate security permissions to verify applications, rather than having to contact us. 33.The IRD number validation API is being used by banks, KiwiSaver providers, tax agents and payroll providers to ensure that their clients are correctly identified, thus improving data quality and reducing error rates. This API is also available to other agencies to use, such as MSD, when they are ready to adopt it. 34.Protecting information is complex, due to the possibility of human error and the many different mechanisms for sharing that are available. All information-sharing activities undergo formal review, testing and acceptance. Digital identity framework 35.Inland Revenue is actively engaged in advancing the development of the digital identity trust framework being led by DIA. We have considered what our participation could be in terms of digital identity, and have provided example cases to DIA. We are strong advocates for the digital economy, and of business and support initiatives that will advance the digital economy. Working with Stats NZ 36.Inland Revenue participates in many forums led by Stats NZ or the GCDS, including: •Digital Government Leadership Group (DGLG) •Information Group •Strategic Advice on Integrated Data (SAID), and •IDI Investment Advisory Group. Not in scope 7 IR2021/334: Inland Revenue’s contribution to advancing Government data outcomes 37.Inland Revenue has contributed to many initiatives led by Stats NZ or the GCDS, including: •Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa New Zealand •Data Investment Plan •Māori Data Governance •Statistics Bill, and •New Zealand Government Data Strategy and Roadmap. Continuing to develop our data management and use practices 38.We are continuing to implement our data and information governance programme. Two immediate areas of focus are improving how we record and report collection and sharing of data, and building the capabilities of our people. Recording and reporting 39.All the data and information we collect and share, both inside Inland Revenue and with third parties such as other agencies, will be subject to governance. •When we propose to collect and/or share data and information, we will notify all potentially involved parties. •A comprehensive due diligence checklist will guide the involved parties through the process. The checklist requires an ethics assessment to be conducted at the same time a privacy impact assessment is considered. •The information collected will be recorded in a data and information supply register. Our people will be able to access the register at any time to know what is being collected and shared, who to contact, with links to all relevant material (for example the privacy impact and ethics assessments). •All collection and sharing of information will require the endorsement of the Data and Information Supply Working Group. •The Data and Information Supply Working Group and involved parties will be notified of milestones and events such as proposal, implementation, and eventual decommissioning. •Information will be recorded and reported to support performance measurement, risk management, and assurance activities. Building the capabilities of our people 40.The data and information environment Inland Revenue operates within is complex, rapidly changing, and can be challenging for our people. Legislation is clear about our data and information collection and disclosure powers, and clear how data and information held by the Commissioner will be handled and safeguarded. However, legislation is not exhaustive and situations arise where interpretation of legislation and individual judgement will vary. In these situations our people, no matter their role, need understanding and guidance to decide what course of action is right. 41.Policies, strategies, principles, frameworks, and standards are necessary, but alone they are insufficient. We are developing straightforward guidance for our people, along with supporting tools to support our people to do what’s right with data and information. We are: •Producing practical guidance that brings together a range of material including our Code of Conduct and our data and information policy to make clear to our people what “doing the right thing” looks like when working with data and information. Not in scope 8 IR2021/334: Inland Revenue’s contribution to advancing Government data outcomes •Working with our people who manage and use data and information so they understand how to work with the governance groups. •Building self-service tools so our people know what data and information is available to them and for what purposes, and what decisions have been made about data and information by governance groups. •Simplifying engagement with governance groups so guidance and decisions can be more readily accessed. •Establishing working groups focused on developing areas of practice that span Inland Revenue, for example: the Analytics and Research Working Group, and the Digital Service Working Group. 42.We will continue to share our experiences and what we are putting in place with other agencies and will continue to work closely with Stats NZ to contribute to advancing wider da ta outcomes. Not in scope Update on the Government Data Strategy and Roadmap The purpose of this discussion •This discussion is about the whythere is a Government Data Strategy and Roadmap, whatthat Strategy and Roadmap is, howthat Roadmap is being delivered, and whois involved. •This discussion is a pre-cursor to Stats NZ representatives and the DIGA discussing the Government Data Strategy and Roadmap further at the next DIGA meeting Summary •The first Government Data Strategy was published more than three years ago. The Government Chief Data Steward (filled by theChief Executive of Stats NZ) system functional lead role had only recently been established. That strategy was aspirational and did not include a roadmap. •During 2021, Stats NZ facilitated a number of hui to crowd-source an updated strategy and a roadmap. The resultant Government Data Strategy Roadmapis ambitious and with significant dependency on Māori and iwi to collaborate in a co-design manner, and for Stats NZ to be supported by several agencies, including Inland Revenue. •Unfortunately, COVID impacted the availability of many people, including Māori and iwi representatives, and there have been resourcing challenges. •Toward the end of Year One of the Roadmap it is being assertively reviewed by the cross-agency Information Group to produce a more reliably deliverable tranche of change. Not in scope Background on Government data strategies to date The following is largely an excerpt from online material introducing the current Government Data Strategy and Roadmap: The first Data Strategy was published more than three years ago. The ambitions of that strategy were: •making the right data available •building capability and good practice •growing effective partnerships •implementing open and transparent practices. However, the data landscape rapidly changed. Since the first Data Strategy and Roadmap was published, agencies have been workingon a 10- year Data Investment Plan. Stats NZ and the Data Iwi Leaders Group have signed the Mana Ōrite Relationship Agreementto realise iwi data aspirations. A range of initiatives have been developed to increase trust in the data system, including the Data Protection and Use Policyand the Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa NZ. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has completely changed the context in which data is collected, managed, and used. Despite the progress made since 2018, there were some fundamental system issues yet to be resolved: •data about and for some important topics and communities does not exist •settings to realise the rights and interests of Māori and iwi do not exist •many agencies lack capability to take advantage of the power of data •it is difficult to retrieve and re-use data across the system. Throughout the process of refreshing the strategy, key stakeholders have participated in workshops and interviews. These stakeholders came from central government, local government, private businesses and non-government organisations (NGO's). They have tested the Government Strategy and Roadmap's direction to ensure it is future-focused, robust, practical, and able to be adapted to different data sources and uses. Not in scope The Strategy The Government Data Strategy and Roadmapwill be brought to life through principles adapted from the Data Protection and Use Policy, the Mana Ōrite relationship agreement between Stats NZ and the Data Iwi Leaders Group, and the Public Service Act. Manaakitanga: Respect and uphold the mana and dignity of the people, whānau, communities, and groups who share their data and information. Mana Whakahaere: Empower people by giving them a choice and enabling their access to, and the use of, their data and information. Kaitiakitanga: A shared culture of respect, guardianship, care, and protection for data as a strategic and valued resource, recognising that for some Māori, Māori data is a taonga and iwi-Māori are kaitiaki over their taonga. Rangatiratanga: Leadership that focuses on common purpose whilst also respecting the autonomy and independence of individuals, groups and agencies. Whanaungatanga: Strong transparent relationships through respect, integrity, empathy, and commitment to the kaupapa. Not in scope The Roadmap The Roadmap is ambitious and has significant dependency on collaboration with Māori and iwi. Risks have materialised as issues and toward the end of Year One the cross-agency Information Group is re-shaping the Roadmap. IR is contributing to the highlighted initiatives in varying degrees. Year One (2021-2022): FoundationsYear Two (2022-2023): InvestmentYear Three onwards (2023-2024): Maturity Data Investment PlanUpdate the Data Investment PlanEstablish quality stamps on government data releases Open Data Charter Implementation PlanPublished data quality frameworkEstablish an easy-to-use mechanism for anyone to identify a data need Initial delivery of iwi affiliation dataMāori data stocktake Grow data capability through partnership with iwi and MāoriDevelop Analytics and Research in Government (ARG) Graduate Programme pilotRoll out initiatives based on the data capability framework Review Algorithm Charter and offer support to the systemCreate a micro-credential for data ethicsDevelop a data profession involving Communities of Practice, training, evaluation, and monitoring Provide implementation support for using Ngā Tikanga PaihereEnsure consistent job families and descriptions are used across the system Design and deliver a data system maturity assessmentReview data capability framework Implement Government Chief Data Steward agency partnering model Continue Analytics and Research in Government (ARG) Intern Programme Revise system governance including advisory gapsImplement changes aligned to the new Data and Statistics Bill Introduce Data and Statistics ActCo-develop guidance for Māori Data Strategy with Māori Implement new suite of trust proposals in support of the Digital StrategyEstablish inclusive data working group Develop guidance for agencies on Te Ao Māori perspectives on cloud storageDevelop principles and protocols on the production and management of data system assets Finalise and implement Māori Data Governance ModelDeliver next suite of mandated standards Establish an updated approach to mandating and managing standards. Develop Health of the Data System report Develop the Trust Framework for Digitial Identity Services Develop strategic response and seek investment for future of integrated dataEstablish the Integrated Data Infrastructure (IDI) Commons Develop system architectureEstablish consistent approach to release protocols across the system Confirm feasability of a joint property data sourceBegin implementation of integrated data strategic response Development of a joint data and analytics platformReview and agree on consistent data sharing principles and protocols Review Data Lab access requirementsImplement against agreed system architecture Further develop and maintain innovative Māori data platforms Develop a system-wide plan for government investment in data content, capability, and infrastructure Use the Data Investment Plan to inform The Budget and agency planningCreate a public mechanism to identify data needs and embed a quality stamp which is consistently used by agencies Develop a framework to benchmark agency maturity and develop Government Chief Data Steward (GCDS) services to lift agency capability Align agency capability to maturity assessment findings and build capability using Government Chief Data Steward (GCDS) services Build data capability to extend into collection, stewardship, and use of the data cycle Review system settings for trust and data driven technologiesComplete the next suite of mandated standardsImplement system settings for trust and data driven technologies Develop Health of the Data System reportAlign system architecture change across agencies Establish the system architecture required for a connected and inclusive data systemBegin implementation of integrated data initiatives should funding be secured Key changes Data Capability Leadership Implement the system settings for trust and data driven technologies Infrastructure Scope system-wide data integration requirements Not in scope From: Craig Jones <> Sent: Thursday, July 28, 2022 1:33 PM To : ; ; ; Mi ke Cunnington <>; Steve Murray <>; Tin a MacLean <>; ; ; ; S imon Ross <>; ; ; Cc: Wen dy Hamilton <> S ubject: Algorithm Charter review External Email CAUTION: Please take CARE when opening any links or attachments. Kia ora koutou As I mentioned at the Analytics DCE/Dep Sec meeting on Wednesday, the independent review of the first year of operation of the Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa New Zealand, is being sent to the office of the Minister of Statistics this week. Following this, the review will be published on data.govt.nz next week. I have attached a copy of the review to this email, for easy reference. As discussed on Wednesday, I agree with the findings and recommendations in the review. It found that there is strong (‘almost universal’) support for the Charter across government agencies and subject matter experts. It also found that agencies require additional guidance and assistance if we are to realise the required shifts in the ethical use of algorithms necessary to fully and successfully implement the Charter. I look forward to developing, with you, actions in response to the recommendations. That includes working on building data ethics capability across the public sector and understanding any regulatory gaps that need to be filled in order to build a trustworthy data ecosystem. It also includes working across agencies to reduce any duplication and make best use of our collaborative resources, and an increased focus on the importance of Māori data governance and engagement with Treaty partners. Alongside this we have the potential to increase the visibility and public awareness of the use of algorithms and the steps we are taking to provide strong oversight and appropriate use, and to encourage public participation in the discussion. We’ll talk more at our regular meetings, and we’ll share our plans for the approach we hope to take. Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any questions. Thank you, and your teams for your support to this mahi – it really is appreciated. Ngā mihi nui Craig Dr Craig Jones Kaimātai Tauanga Kāwanatanga Tuarua | Deputy Government Statistician Pouārahi Tuarua - Kaiārahi Pūnaha Raraunga | Deputy Chief Executive - Data System Leadership Tatauranga Aotearoa | Stats NZ DDI + | M + | stats.govt.nz About Aotearoa, for Aotearoa Data that improves lives today and for generations to come Email from Craig Jones (StatsNZ) to Mike Cunnington (Deputy Commissioner) and Tina MacLean (Intelligence Leader – Data) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) Page 2 interacting with each other and with other IR system technologies, and the potential to produce adverse results. Again controls, especially security controls, over AI will be key. The guideline doesn’t provide the next level of detail for capability identification and uplift. There is potential here to build upon or augment our capabilities through automation to help with our capacity efficiencies and in a reduction in human error. On Ethics concerning AI decisions, IR needs to evolve its operating environment in order to be better across and more cognisant of the biases that can occur with data analytics. The conversations that currently occur are in pockets, so we need to be broadening the spaces where this awareness of and conversations about data ethics and biases do occur in IR. While high level information will be published, a data ethics approach and a data and ethics standard, the really important controls that sit below the standard (i.e. high level controls) nothing has been developed for those layers yet. The Chair requested members to discuss the following points via email or Teams chat: •Should our AI policy fully focus on generative AI? •What level of involvement is needed with the contact points mentioned in the guidance? •With the document not having the detail we would be looking for to post on our channels, how closely should we follow this guidance in relation to the use of AI for people information? What further messaging should be there on classifications of sensitive and in confidence? The Oversight Group: •Discussed the applicability of the Generative Artificial Intelligence guidance in an Inland Revenue context. •To provide feedback to the questions above posed by the Chair. Not in scope Not in scope Using Artificial Intelligence at IR Makayla Stewart Change Analyst (L2) Using the definitions and concepts outlined in What is Artificial Intelligence, lets look at how we use AI, what the benefits are and what's coming up.  Its important that we, as an organisation be deliberate in the decisions about which systems and tools we use. Only approved business tools can and should be used for their intended purpose.  On 21 March 2023, our Deputy Commissioner of Enterprise Design & Integrity, Mary Craig, sent out an email to all of IR about Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) products at IR which outlined that tools such as Chat GPT have not been approved for use.  Since March we have continued to develop guidance for using Artificial Intelligence at IR and are now in a position to provide you with more information about how to treat this technology. It is important that we understand: Which tools have been approved for business use  What the purpose these tools have been approved for  When these tools should or shouldn't be used Using Artificial Intelligence at IR: authored by Makayla Stewart What data is appropriate for us to input into these tools. To ensure we approach the use of AI at IR both safely, securely and in line with the requirements of us under the Tax Administration Act 1994, use case guidelines and a staff use policy have been developed to support you.  Guidelines for using Artificial Intelligence  You can find the full version of the AI use case guidelines here AI use case guidelines Our use case guidelines have been developed using: IRs classification labels as the basis (see Information classification and handling for more on classification).  The definitions for: Business rules, Machine learning, AI integrated solutions and Generative AI / Large Language Model (see Concepts within AI here What is Artificial Intelligence for more information). Only business tools that have been approved can be used on work devices. Full details of approved applications that have an AI component can be found here Artificial Intelligence Application Register.  The use of Generative AI solutions such as Chat-GPT is still under assessment and IR staff are asked to continue to wait for additional guidance. Some pilot options  have been assessed and are progressing; we hope to share more on these in the near future.  If you are unsure whether the actions you are intending to take are within the guidelines, check with your leader or contact AI@ird.govt.nz.     Policy for using Artificial Intelligence You can find the full version of the AI staff use policy here Artificial Intelligence (AI) staff use policy This policy applies to all of IR and sets out our approach to safely and securely look at how we can use AI to deliver more effective and efficient services. Our policy has been developed using: The definitions for: Business rules, Machine learning, AI integrated solutions and Generative AI / Large Language Model (see Concepts within AI here  What is Artificial Intelligence for more information). Our obligations under the Inland Revenue Acts, Privacy Act, Te Tiriti o Waitangi, and The Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa New Zealand As IR people we are responsible for adhering to this policy and reporting any abuse, misuse or non-compliance with the policy to our Information Security Team.  Have an idea for how we should use AI? Check out how to Get involved with the future of using AI at IR.  Related Resources AI use case guidelines  Artificial Intelligence Staff Use Policy 