From:Mike Cunnington To:Craig Thomas; Kim Gray; Pip Knight; Mary Craig Subject:RE: Proposed naming Guidelines for inclusion in IR Writing and Style Guide Date:Friday, 31 May 2024 3:32:38 pm Attachments:image001.png Kia ora tātou Thanks for this, approved from me as well. Have a lovely long weekend Ngā mihi Mike From: Mary Craig Sent: Friday, May 31, 2024 3:11 PM To: Craig Thomas ; Mike Cunnington Cc: Kim Gray ; Pip Knight Subject: RE: Proposed naming Guidelines for inclusion in IR Writing and Style Guide Kia ora Craig, I’m comfortable to approve the guidelines and implementation as outlined in your email. Many thanks for bringing this together with Kim. Nga mihi Mary Mary Craig (she/her) Deputy Commissioner – Enterprise Design & Integrity – Hinonga Hoahoa me te Tika Inland Revenue | Asteron Centre | 55 Featherston Street | PO Box 2198 | Wellington 6140 Appendix A s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) From: Craig Thomas Sent: Friday, May 31, 2024 3:05 PM To: Mike Cunnington ; Mary Craig Cc: Kim Gray ; Pip Knight Subject: Proposed naming Guidelines for inclusion in IR Writing and Style Guide Kia ora kōrua, Earlier this week, Kim Gray spoke to me about the ELT discussion about how the department refers to itself in our internal and external communications. This conversation happened at the 29 April 2024 ELT meeting. Over the past years, we have increasingly used Te Tari Taake Inland Revenue to describe the Department, and Aotearoa to talk about the country in our internal and external communications. Although we have not received ministerial direction about the use of these terms, we recognise the benefit of having a consistent approach to their use in communicating with our people and in the delivery of messaging and services to the public. The following proposed guidance aligns to this and codifies the ELT meeting conversation. We are presenting this for your approval to proceed with the guidelines and the implementation approach. Proposed guidelines The National and New Zealand First Coalition Agreement requires public service departments have their primary name in English. \[1\] The Minister of State Services stated, “Our coalition agreements reflect this view with a commitment that in most instances public agencies will communicate their names and services in English, alongside any use of te reo Māori”. \[2\] Guideline 1: For internal and external communications, we would follow the direction set in the coalition agreement and use Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake at the first use of our name in any communication. Guideline 2: For any subsequent use of the department’s name, we would continue to use existing protocol referring to the department as IR or We. Guideline 3: In talking about the name of the country, we should follow a similar protocol to the department’s name. For internal and external communications, we would use New Zealand Aotearoa at the first instance in any communication. Guideline 4: For any subsequent use of the country’s name, we would use New Zealand. \[1\] Commitment is phrased as “Ensure all public service departments have their primary name in English, except for those specifically related to Māori.” s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) 2 Te Ao Māori News, (8 April 2024) How the government’s push for English-first names is tracking, https://www.teaonews.co.nz/2024/04/08/how-the-governments-push-for-english- first-names-is-tracking/ How this guidance will be implemented These changes will not be retrospective. We will not go back into previous external website or intranet content and change the Department’s name or the use of Aotearoa. The change will happen on future content. These changes will be actioned by the Marketing and Communications team in the communications they write/edit/curate and commission. The guidelines will also be added to the IR Writing and Style Guide. Hei konā Craig and Kim \[1\] Commitment is phrased as “Ensure all public service departments have their primary name in English, except for those specifically related to Māori.” \[2\] Te Ao Māori News, (8 April 2024) How the government’s push for English-first names is tracking, https://www.teaonews.co.nz/2024/04/08/how-the-governments-push-for-english-first-names-is- tracking/