Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Use of Facebook’s Custom Audience for advertising campaigns Brief Privacy Analysis Prepared by: Date: About this Document The purpose of this document is to demonstrate that privacy has been considered in a project or process that involves personal information. The Analysis pulls together relevant information to determine whether a full Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) should be completed and records IRs decision of why a PIA has not been done. It will answer the following questions: 1.Does this proposal involve a new way of managing personal information? 2.Does the proposal raise a significant privacy risk for IR? 3.Is a full privacy impact assessment required? 1.Project summary: Data matching for advertising campaigns 1.1 Brief description of the project This project is initially for advertising activity directed at Student Loans customers but would be used more widely in marketing campaigns. For instance, using this service to display banners to social policy customers without a myIR account Currently we provide our advertising agency (FCB) with personal information in the form of a list of email addresses and mobile numbers. This data is then ‘hashed’ (a way of encrypting the data so it cannot be identified to anyone) and matched against Facebook profiles and to be used in targeted advertising campaigns. Facebook has increased the data matching capabilities to include more than just email and mobile numbers. The new data types available for matching include: •First Name •Last Name •Postal Code •City •Date of birth •Gender By providing this information we could greatly improve the results of the marketing activities and direct more relevant messages to customers. In the case of Student Loan overseas-based borrowers we currently have contact details (email and mobile numbers) Appendix A Classified in Confidence – IR Protected \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] of approximately 55% of the population. If we were to use the full list of data types FCB estimates we would be able to match 87% of the population. This would greatly improve Inland Revenues ability to meet its objectives of increasing repayments and increasing the contact details we have for overseas-based student loan borrowers. The main stakeholders or entities involved in this project will be: •Corporate Legal and Corporate Integrity & Assurance teams to advise any changes required from a legal perspective •Marketing – to implement any changes required •Intel delivery – To provide the data •FCB – Receive the password protected data files and load the data to Facebook’s system. Facebook provide FCB with a Custom Audience for advertising purposes How Custom Audience works Inland Revenue sends its advertising agency (FCB) a list of the people we wish to present adverts to. FCB can create a customer list custom audience as they’re the owner of an ad account connected to Meta Business Manager or the owner has provided admin or advertiser permissions. To make a custom audience from a customer list, Meta is provided with information about existing customers and this is matched to Meta profiles. The information on a customer list is known as an “identifier” (such as email, phone number, address) and is use it to help find the audiences you want your ads to reach. Your customer list can either be a CSV or TXT file that includes these identifiers. A custom audience is created by adding a customer list into Meta Ad Manager and selecting the identifiers to be used (name, email etc). Information in the customer list is hashed and will be unidentifiable at an individual level. Hashing is a type of cryptographic security method that turns identifiers into randomized code and cannot be reversed. For example, for example, John.doe@ird.govt.nz may come out hashed as wLKziR/6RoXDv1MDaXLH1UNUC9nIVr97jrTnL4TcxsM=. It’s important to note that hashing is one way; you can take an email address and hash it, however you can’t take hashed data and turn it back into an email address. After information in the customer list is hashed, it is sent to Facebook. Facebook uses this hashed information by comparing it to its own hashed information and builds a custom audience by finding the Facebook profiles that match. After the Custom Audience is created, the matched and unmatched hashed information is deleted. About custom audiences | Meta Business Help Center (facebook.com) 1.2 Personal information that the project will involve In the table below, describe: •the personal information that will be collected, used and/or disclosed •the source of the information •the purpose of the information for your project. Note: “Personal information” is any information about an identifiable living person. However, a person doesn’t have to be named in the information to be identifiable. not up to the right standards. We did not continue with custom audiences through the rejected platforms. We also have a process for how custom audiences are uploaded. If we are running a campaign through an advertising agency, the lists are uploaded by the IR marketing team. That way the agency doesn’t have access to the customer data but can set up ads and budget to be allocated to the already hashed lists within the platform. See the paragraph on advertisements on social media here Privacy policy (ird.govt.nz) Here are links to OIA’s that have already been proactively released. https://www.ird.govt.nz/-/media/project/ir/home/documents/oia-responses/june-2024/2024- 06-18-details-on-ir-advertising-including-privacy-impact-assessments-and-meta.pdf? modified=20240729033724&modified=20240729033724 https://www.ird.govt.nz/-/media/project/ir/home/documents/oia-responses/july-2022/2022- 07-11-marketing-and-advertising-costs.pdf? modified=20220815004713&modified=20220815004713 Cheers, Gay. Gay Cavill | Media Principal | Inland Revenue M. E. mediaqueries@ird.govt.nz W.https://media.ird.govt.nz This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz s 9(2)(a) Briefing note Reference: BN 2024/369 Date: 09 September 2024 To: Private Secretary, Minister of Revenue – Angela Graham Private Secretary, Minister of Revenue – Helen Kuy Private Secretary, Minister of Finance – Emma Grigg Copy to: James Grayson, Acting Commissioner Lisa Barret, Deputy Commissioner Joanne Petrie, Executive Support Advisor to the Commissioner Denise Wright Management Support to Deputy Commissioner Carolyn Patchell Management Support to Deputy Commissioner Governance and Ministerial Services From: Pip Knight, Service Leader Marketing and Communications Subject: The use of Custom Audience list on social media platforms Purpose 1.To provide a briefing to the Minister of Revenue and Minister of Finance on Inland Revenue’s use of social media platforms, and the anonymised information we share with them, to target campaigns at taxpayers to increase compliance. Background and context 2.Inland Revenue recently received an OIA and Media enquiries in relation to its use of Custom Audience list on social media. 3.For advertising purposes, Inland Revenue uploads custom audience lists securely to Meta (Facebook and Instagram), LinkedIn and Google. Inland Revenue does not upload custom audience lists to X (formally known as Twitter) or TikTok. 4.A custom audience list is a list of specific customers who Inland Revenue wants to target. 5.The data is hashed when it is uploaded meaning that it is un-identifiable when it gets to the social media platform. 6.Hashing is a type of cryptographic security method that turns identifiers into randomised code and cannot be reversed so identities are protected. For example, John.doe@ird.govt.nz may come out hashed as wLKziR/6RoXDv1MDaXLH1UNUC9nIVr97jrTnL4TcxsM=. 7.Custom audience data is used only to match a customer using unidentifiable data, so the platform will not be able to access any personal information. 8.Inland Revenue uses custom audience lists on the social media platforms to reach relevant customers who are on these platforms. The purpose of using custom audience Appendix C BN2024/369 The use of Custom Audience lists 2 advertising is to increase the compliance of collecting tax revenue and dispersing payments by targeting only customers who need to see the advert. Examples of where we regularly use custom audience advertising are: a.Student loan customers who have debt owing. We separate these audiences into different segments for accuracy, such as those based overseas, those within New Zealand who are self-employed and those based in New Zealand earning salary and wages. b.GST customers who have returns and/or a debt due c.Income tax debt – customers who have tax debt and would benefit from setting up an instalment arrangement to manage this debt d.Working for Families customers who need to update their information with Inland Revenue. 9.Social media platforms offer a custom audience feature which allows businesses and government departments to upload information to an encrypted site for direct marketing purposes. 10. Each social media platform has its own privacy principles in place that it must adhere to. These privacy principles were reviewed by Inland Revenue to ensure that customer information is protected and only used for the intended purpose. 11. Inland Revenue is satisfied that this information is deleted when the hashing process has been completed. 12. Inland Revenue is authorised to manage its own privacy assessments and work undertakings. 13. Inland Revenue does not have the ability to identify customers who would like to opt out of advertising. However customers can opt-out of being shown specific ads by editing their advertising preferences in the social platforms they use. 14. Inland Revenue only has access to information that is publicly available on social media platforms. 15. Inland Revenue continuously reviews our processes to ensure we’re safe. Off the back of these enquiries and comments from the US Federal Trade Commission and European Data Protection Supervisor, our CISO team ha s begun looking further into the use of hashing to ensure it is still safe to use. NZ Information Security manual, which is maintained by the GCSB, has guidelines. Inland Revenue’s standards with relation to hashing operates within these guidelines. Pip Knight Service Leader Marketing and Communications s 9(2)(a)