24OIA2029 Page 1 of 2 24 April 2024 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 30 March 2024. You requested the following: Can I please request a copy of the following internal documents that were current as of your operational reporting year 2023; - Health, Safety and Wellbeing Strategy - Health, Safety and Wellbeing Policy - Annual Health, Safety and Wellbeing Performance Reporting to your board for 2023. Health, Safety and Wellbeing Strategy and Policy Inland Revenue’s Health, Safety and Wellbeing Strategy is detailed in the attached documents Health, Safety & Wellbeing Workplace Roadmap (item 1), and Achieving Mentally Healthy Work (Item 2). Inland Revenue’s Health, Safety and Wellbeing Policy is outlined in the attached commitment statement titled Inland Revenue’s commitment to workplace health and safety (Item 3). Please note COVID 19 is no longer a critical risk at IR, though it was at the time the documents were published. Health, Safety and Wellbeing Performance Reporting Inland Revenue’s performance reporting on Health, Safety and Wellbeing is outlined on page 49 of Inland Revenue’s annual report for 2023 which is publicly available here: Inland Revenue Annual Report, Te Tari Taake Pūrongo ā-Tau, 2022–23 (ird.govt.nz). Your request for Inland Revenue’s annual Health, Safety and Wellbeing Performance Reporting is therefore refused under section 18(d) of the OIA, as the information is publicly available. Right of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Health, Safety, & Wellbeing Workplace Roadmap 2023-2024 Item 1 Table of Contents Setting the scene p3-11Current & planned initiatives p17-25 Executive Summary Current actions Our vision Psychosocial safety design Why does IR need this roadmap Roadmap 2023-2024 Outcomes Health, safety, and p12-16Measuring our progress p26-32 wellbeing environment at IR Current and proposed metrics Feedback from our people Indicators for psychosocial safety & wellbeing Working environment Critical risks Data & insights Appendices p33-40 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 3 Setting the scene Executive Summary Inland Revenue (IR) must comply with legislative requirements under the Health and Safety at Work Act (HSWA) 2015, and provide a safe and healthy environment for employees, as much as is reasonably practicable. This involves managing risks to health (physical and mental) and safety. WorkSafe also encourages employers to support their employees in improving their overall wellbeing and in reducing lifestyle-related health conditions. The Health, Safety & Wellbeing (HSW) Roadmap outlines IR’s approach to measure and understand these risks, our approach to identify and implement appropriate and effective controls for such risks, as well as describing our plan to support employees in health promotion and wellbeing. IR is also committed to ensuring that a more holistic lens is applied to the suite of HSW controls and interventions. 4 Our Vision •As an employer it is recommended that IR influences improvements to the HSW of its employees. WorkSafe clearly describes an organisation’s obligation to mandatory health and safety protection, as well as areas of voluntary health promotion and wellbeing of employees (Appendix A). •IR places its organisational values and a holistic Māori model of health at the centre of this plan. This is to recognise how our HSW roadmap aligns with the wider IR strategic direction, as well as a te ao Māori view of the interconnected aspects of wellbeing and our whole selves. 5 Whanaungatanga At IR we work together as a whānau. We take the time to make connections. We listen in a way that makes people feel heard. We value the experiences of others. Manaakitanga At IR we seek to lift the mana of others. We’re generous with our knowledge and how we support people. We see true value in diversity. We care for those around us. Mahi Tika At IR we always seek to do the right thing. We’re open about the decisions we make and the actions we take. We do what we say we’re going to do. We’re flexible and learn as we go. Te ao Māori lens Developed by Sir Mason Durie in 1984, Te Whare Tapa Whā is a Māori model of health and wellbeing and is widely recognised and regarded in New Zealand (see Appendix B). The model is a metaphor based on four pillars of a wharenui/meeting house, with the foundation of whenua (land, roots) and has been a key resource in the development of this Health, Safety, & Wellbeing Roadmap. Te Whare Tapa Whā is well acknowledged as a guiding framework, both in Kaupapa Māori and generic New Zealand services such as The Mental Health Foundation and Ministry for Social Development. When we look after all four aspects, we look after our hauora/wellbeing. Our workplace and home environments are important to create a space for us to thrive. We recognise that the home environment is not within the control of IR however can be influenced by the work environment. Employees who are supported at work to check in on the four pillars helps them to balance their hauora and support others to balance theirs too (Mental Health Foundation). The key differences between a European and Te Ao Māori approach to health, safety, & wellbeing are particularly noticeable regarding the wellbeing focus placed on spirituality, ancestry, and the land/whenua. When the psychosocial wellbeing of our employees is prioritised and cared for, they are more empowered to do good work, be motivated and engaged, which results in increased productivity, and increased employee retention. It also correlates with decreased harm indicators such as sick leave, workplace injuries, and reports of bullying. 6 Our Vision Our vision is to: Protect the health and safety of our employees •Create a safe and supportive environment that allows employees to flourish rather than languish, protecting against psychosocial and physical harm. •Support organisational success through encouraging individual improvements in mental and physical health as defined by WorkSafe. Promote health and wellbeing •Provide services and support that are proven to reduce the risk of lifestyle-related health conditions and improve wellbeing. •Educate and support employees to build and maintain the resilience to cope with challenges, both at work and beyond. •Promoting psychosocial wellbeing in the workplace. 7 8 Senior Leadership actively leads in health, safety and wellbeing Leaders at all levels, especially senior, regularly seek assurance that risks are managed, especially psychosocial risk, as well as actively expanding their relevant knowledge in order to role model what good looks like. Support the improvement of IR employee’s overall health, safety and wellbeing Implement initiatives that aim to prevent harm (illness and injury) and provide strategies to build resilience of our employees (considering all aspects of Te Whare Tapa Whā model), enabling people to feel like IR cares. Identify critical risk areas at IR Identify critical risks through reviewing incident data and put appropriate controls in place to reduce harm as is reasonably practicable. Monitor controls regularly. Ensure we listen, engage and consult Continuously encourage worker participation and engagement, to have wider organisation representation on health, safety, and wellbeing matters. Health and Safety Representatives have a high positive profile in IR and are actively involved in decision making. To move toward our vision, we have identified four key objectives: Why does IR need this roadmap? •Assist IR with meeting the legislative obligations as outlined in the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015, as well as will as assist IR to manage the Enterprise Risk 4 - Insufficient people capability and capacity to deliver outcomes. It will also allow us to support and align ourselves with other Government Strategies: •New Zealand Health Strategy 2016 (Ministry of Health) •Inland Revenue’s six Corporate Strategies 2016 •Strategic Plan for Work-Related Heal th 2016-2026 (WorkSafe) •Health and Safety at Work Strategy 2018-2028 (MBI E and WorkSafe) As well as meeting the standards set out by The Business Leaders’ Health and Safety Forum (BLHSF) and Government Health and Safety Lead (GHSL). 9 Why does IR need this roadmap? From an organisational value perspective, IR believes in doing the right thing for its employees, regardless of legal obligations. For IR to uphold its values with respect to internal colleagues, customers, and external stakeholders, our people must feel safe, respected, supported and well. Research shows that prioritising physical and mental health in the workplace leads to reduced levels of absenteeism and presenteeism which correlates to higher organisational productivity. WorkSafe highlight the wider social effect of one’s health to be “The impact of work-related ill-health includes not only the societal costs of caring for those with poor health caused by their work, but also the impact on families, whānau and communities”. Commitment to a job is derived from multiple sources. In order to encourage employees to thrive and flourish in the workplace, they must be supported by their organisation, in the four cornerstones of wellbeing: family and social health, mental health, physical health and spiritual health. WorkSafe have also defined their position on Mentally Healthy Work and set out expectations of PCBU’s in this space. Mentally healthy work is work where risks to people’s mental health are eliminated or minimised, and their mental well-being is prioritised. In contrast, mental health harm or mental ill-health is the significant cognitive, emotional, or behavioural impact arising from, or exacerbated by, work-related risk factors. Mental health harm may be immediate or long-term and can come from single or repeated exposure. 10 Outcomes We will know the objectives of the plan are being met when the people of IR feel they are in an environment where: 11 They have a sense of belonging and inclusion They feel resilient to the challenges of day-to-day life Leaders have the tools to support their teams in health, safety & wellbeing, including resilience They have options for support when their health, safety, & wellbeing are challenged They feel safe in the workplace and able to have open conversations about health, safety & wellbeing with their leaders and colleagues Health, safety & wellbeing environment at IR 12 Working environment Employees at IR mostly undertake sedentary work tasks and are predominantly office-based. Following the COVID-19 response and to align with the New Zealand Government’s ‘flexible by default’ approach, IR now has a significant amount of people working from home on a regular (two or three days per week) basis which presents the risks associated with remote working. Workload, work pace, organisational justice, working relationships, communication and the physical working environment are all areas where our people have the potential to be harmed (psychosocial harm). Some of our people drive for part of their role which introduces the risks associated with driving. IR must also consider the risks to the physical security of our buildings and employees. A large proportion (approximately 73%) of staff are in customer facing roles (Customer & Compliance Services, CCS) which involve a significant level of interaction with disgruntled or frustrated customers, or those with complex needs. Certain roles within CCS also require face to face interaction with customers, which may occur on an IR site or out in the community, introducing the risks associated with isolated working. Those in customer facing roles are also sometimes exposed to: •Distressing information or scenes •People with uncontrolled mental health issues or addictions •Harassment •Abusive or offensive comments •Physical violence, intimidation, or threatening behaviour. 13 14 Critical risks For IR's critical health and safety risks, 'deep dives’ are scheduled to understand the profile of the risk, using bowtie risk analysis. The aim is to review existing controls and if required, establish new controls, in order to provide the level of assurance to the business. Organisational Resilience are currently entering all critical risks into Jira wewill then utilise the new H&S reporting tool and build a risk and control library which will be linked to incidents allowing us to identify controls that are not effective.This will enable us to monitor and target programmes to ensure continuous improvement in mitigating the riskswhich could impact on the safety of our people. RiskInherentCurrentTarget Physical securityExtremeVery HighVery High Overlapping duties due diligence (physical works contractors) HighMediumMedium COVID-19ExtremeVery HighHigh Isolated and remote work e.g. customer visits, working at home) Very HighVery HighVery High DrivingExtremeHighHigh Failure to manage psychosocial risksExtremeVery HighHigh Feedback from our people We have considered the wider health, safety & wellbeing environment in New Zealand as well as reviewing IR specific information such as employee feedback. IR regularly seeks feedback from its employees on inclusion, development and opportunities, wellbeing, and advocacy via the People Experience Pulse (PXP) survey (Appendix C). We also consult with our people and seek feedback on certain business decisions such as change processes and new and updated policies. Recent examples of these are the Vaccination Policy, Driving Policy and our Worker Engagement, Participation and Representation Policy. We will continue to seek feedback from HS representatives and the wider workforce to inform our thinking and decisions on new initiatives. 15 Data & insights •Due to known limitations with our previous health & safety reporting tool, our ability to accurately understand the prevalence of health, safety, and wellbeing incidents at IR is restricted (Appendix D). With the implementation of a new, fit- for-purpose reporting tool in November 2022, we expect to see an improvement in the quality and availability of incident and injury data moving forward, which will assist in our critical risk register review process. •The Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) provides IR with work-injury claims data including the number of claims, cost of claims and weekly compensation days (Appendix D), which assists us in understanding lost-time workplace injuries however does not provide the whole picture due to differences in reporting approaches and metrics used. We expect the recent introduction of our new health and safety reporting tool to give IR a greater understanding of workplace injuries and the financial and social cost of these. •We currently have the ability to report on customer interactions that have the potential to impact psychosocial wellbeing for our front-l ine staff (CCS). This is managed in two ways. These incidents are first reported against the customer in our Security Incident Database (SID/START), with a staff health and safety task being automatically generated to prompt a leader-staff member wellbeing conversation. Until recently, before the introduction of the new reporting tool, we only had the ability to measure leader compliance with the wellbeing follow up task, within START however this control is limited in understanding both the quality of the follow up, and the degree of psychosocial impact experienced by the staff member (Appendix D). With the introduction of our new health and safety reporting tool, we have the second way of reporting the impact on employee psychosocial wellbeing as staff have the ability to report a wellbeing impact against themselves, including the severity and impact level of the event. 16 Data & insights We do not collect specific health data of those working at IR, other than a pre-employment question pertaining to conditions and disabilities that would affect one’s ability to perform their role. As such we do not know the number of our employees who face issues highlighted nationally (for example through the New Zealand Census) such as obesity, depression, anxiety, smoking and harmful alcohol consumption. We do have data on gender and identified ethnicity which we can use, with limitations, to target initiatives if supported by wider national data. There are two broad circumstances where health data must be collected: •Employees have a responsibility to inform their employer of any health conditions or disabilities that would interfere with their ability to perform their specified job tasks, or if these health conditions could put them or others at risk. •Health monitoring must be undertaken in accordance with Health and Safety at Work Regulations 2016, for example audiometry to detect work related, noise induced hearing loss. This is only required in there is known or likely exposure due to work tasks. In all other circumstances, disclosure of health data is not required by an employee to their employer. Voluntary disclosures can always be made by an employee however information must be kept in accordance with The Privacy Act 2020. Health data disclosed at pre-employment stage is not currently analysed at an organisational level to understand the health challenges faced by our employees. 17 18 Current & planned initiatives Current initiatives To ensure this roadmap is focused appropriately, we first need to identify current actions taken as an organisation to then determine what additional actions we could look to take to fill the gaps. Currently IR provides a range of initiatives that correspond with both the mandatory and voluntary aspects of health and safety protection, health promotion, and general wellbeing support. Note: ‘health’ refers to mental and physical health 19 With the introduction of the new HSW reporting tool Te Aka Oranga, People Leaders and members of the Executive Team have access to a dashboard showing real-time information including analytics to provide assurance that risks to HSW are being managed. 20 Current initiatives Business group and regional initiatives are also carried out on a frequent but ad-hoc basis, such as external speaker seminars for staff and campaigns to support NZ-wide campaigns including Mental Health Awareness Week and Pink Shirt Day. Staff Networks and our Health, Safety and Wellbeing Committees also engage in activities that promote overall health and wellbeing. 21 This diagram shows how our initiatives are holistic (whole person focused) and align with Te Whare Tapa Whā. It also represents the interconnectedness of all aspects of our Hauora/wellbeing. Some things we promote or offer target the hauora holistically, touching on all aspects of our experience. Leadership Mental Health Training Open minds e-learning Inclusive Leadership Framework External speaker webinars Hauora Hub (wellness platform) Leave entitlements Wellness rooms onsite HSW reporting tool Wellbeing & Resilience coaching Bullying/harassment/discrimination policy Planned initiatives We have based our planned initiatives on a review of national and international best practices along with an assessment of what is fit for IR in our current state. Investment in health, safety, and wellbeing requires a long-term commitment from Senior Leadership and People Leaders in order to support and promote these actions. Our immediate priority is to focus initial efforts on mental health protection initiatives, including support options. 22 To meet the goals detailed in this plan we will: •Undertake assessment of critical health and safety risk levels to maintain updated critical risk register •Conduct an annual Psychosocial Safety Climate survey across the organisation •Manage health, safety wellbeing incidents using Te Aka Oranga (IR’s reporting tool) •Analyse data collected from various other sources such as the People Experience Pulse (PXP) and Psychosocial Safety Climate survey to obtain a baseline of the psychosocial safety culture of our organisation in quarter one 2023. •Design and implement an anonymous survey to all staff quarterly, to determine the high-level effectiveness of Whanake conversations and perception of psychosocial safety •Assess the feasibility and options available for more comprehensive employee data •Assess with the help of HR Advisory, the benefit of reviewing and streamlining our Return-to-Work process to achieve better measurable outcomes for our people •Work closely with People Operations and Policy, and People Strategy and Capability teams to enhance leadership knowledge and support •Increase promotion of EAP by Vitae, particularly early intervention •Be involved in All of Government Mental Health Awareness Week initiatives •Continue to review and develop additional mental health support options in the future Roadmap: 2023-2024 23 Leadership MH trainingTrial a new approach to leadership MH training starting in Quarter 1 2023, focusing on new starters in leadership roles who did not complete STRIDE training. Recordings and resources available for all. Promote Open Minds e-learning for leaders (Mental Health Foundation) as a refresher opportunity. Mental health network Support the creation of a Mental Health Network as part of the suite of employee-led networks at IR. Primary purpose is to raise awareness, sign post information and destigmatise mental illness at IR. Risk and reportingNew fit for purpose H&S reporting tool to allow better risk register creating, risk and control monitoring and review, and incident data reporting and trend analysis. Senior leadership competency and sponsorshipSenior leadership (ELT) members to complete the GHSL officer training to better understand HSW risks and mitigation. Officer Development Programme, designed for public service agency senior leaders with officer responsibilities under the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 (HSWA) Business Leaders HS Forum benchmarkingThe use of the Business Leaders HS Forum benchmarking survey and initiative as a way of comparing IR to other agencies. Return to WorkReview and streamline our process for Return to Work to achieve better, more measurable outcomes with the employee’s holistic wellbeing at the centre. EAP promotionEnhance promotion of EAP by Vitae through internal advertising. Encourage early, proactive (preventative) usage, identify any barriers to access and solutions to decrease stigma Exit surveyReview exit survey process and available data in relation to health, safety, and wellbeing. Review questions included, specifically health, safety, wellbeing, and inclusion questions. Pre-employment info, induction, and onboardingWork alongside Talent to: Analyse recruitment criteria in relation to assessment of psychological suitability to ensure good fit. Review suitability for resilience criteria to be applied in certain roles. Contribute to an organisation wide review and update of induction and onboarding to ensure new starters are made aware of HSW risks, what IR does to prevent harm and all available support. HS Representatives (HSRs) - worker engagement Promote role, function, and engagement of HSRs in relation to health and wellbeing, not just safety. Acknowledge significance of their role. Offer appropriate training for the IR environment, including wellbeing, fatigue, discomfort, injury. Improve resources available to reps included updating the SharePoint page to create a ‘Rep Hub’. Mentally Healthy Work by Design/Protecting Mental Health and Wellbeing at Work – framework NZ BLHSF Carry out a risk review of psychosocial harm using the Mentally Healthy Work by Design framework and process with key stakeholder groups within the business. Identify harm and risk assess roles within different areas of the business to identify trends, gaps, or high-risk areas. Findings will be used to help shape future actions. Training and support - Customer service spaceParticipate in the review of the current customer service-specific training/support and contribute to the content and design of the new modules where they relate to resilience, wellbeing, health, and safety, and dealing with difficult customers. Training and support - Customer service spaceWork with the People, Strategy & Capability team to review current customer service-specific training/support and determine new approach to meet the business/specific roles’ needs Wellbeing rhythm resourcesAwareness drive/campaign to promote Wellbeing Rhythm resources to be used by teams Wellbeing communications plan for yearCampaigns for key wellbeing events throughout the year including Pink Shirt Day and Mental Health Awareness Week, with a holistic focus considering all Te Whare Tapa Whā dimensions of health. Psychosocial safety moment (team meetings)Campaign driving the awareness and action of psychosocial safety as an agenda item organisation wide. Roadmap: psychosocial safety 24 All work is not equal. There is ‘good work’, which is well designed, organised, and managed and protective of mental wellbeing. On the other hand, there is work that is toxic, containing one or more factors that significantly harm wellbeing. Aspects of work that harm or impair mental wellbeing are commonly referred to as psychosocial risks. These risks can cause mental harm which is costly to both individuals and organisations. The harm can be acute or chronic, result from a single or repeated exposure to risk(s) factors and range from mild psychological difficulties to severe psychological disorders e.g., depression, anxiety. It is estimated that mental health problems cost New Zealand business at least $1.65bn per annum. The WorkSafe Segmentation and Insights Programme Research (2019) found that in the last 12 months, 20% of respondents experienced depression, 31% anxiety, and 60% stress. The New Zealand Workplace Barometer (2020) reported that 70% of respondents reported an absence from work during the last 12 months due to ‘physical or mental health’. Protecting Mental Wellbeing at Work. Leading Safety / The Business Leaders’ Health and Safety Forum. 2021 The Psychological Health and Safety at Work Managing Psychosocial Risk Guidelines. (ISO/DIS 45003):2020 There are four approaches organisations can take to address mental wellbeing at work Each of the four approaches serves an important purpose. Using all four approaches enables organisations to meet their legal obligations and also to harness opportunities to help people to thrive at work, not simply survive 26 Measuring our progress Current & proposed metrics The following table explains how we will use available data to measure how well we are achieving our strategic objectives and outcomes: Objective (related outcome)Proposed metricsCurrent dataWhat does good look like? CommentaryLead Employees have a sense of belonging and inclusion PX Pulse Inclusion and Work Experience metric PX Pulse qualitative responses related to belonging and inclusion as well as work experience Public Service Census Glassdoor See slide 37Trending upwardsOur PX Pulse, Public Service Census, and Glassdoor suggest that inclusion and belonging are IR strengths. However, our Māori-Crown relationship can be improved as highlighted in the Public Census results. Analytics Retention rates for IR vs Government benchmark or average TBDComparable or better than other similar Govt organisations TBD Rates of wrongdoing (bullying/harassment/ discrimination) TBDTrending down. Comparable or better than other agency’s stats where available. Integrity EAP usage – reasons for appointment relating to bullying See slides 40, 41Comparable or better than EAP average. Org Resilience They have options for support when their health, safety, & wellbeing are challenged (cont.) % RTW support or plan completion TBDTBDAdvisory WSA completedTBDTBDOrg Resilience Uptake annual influenza vaccination 34% in 2021>40%Org Resilience Current & proposed metrics Objective (related outcome)Proposed metricsCurrent dataWhat does good look like? CommentaryLead They feel safe in the workplace and able to have open conversations about health, safety, and wellbeing with their leaders and colleagues Percentage of respondents sharing dashboard with people leader 70%>85%Analytics Induction completionTBD100% within timeframeOrg Resilience Whanake conversations - % taking place TBDTBDUnsure if this will be a viable metricTBD All outcomesPsychosocial safety climate survey TBDHighest % of the org in green, lowest % is in red. Org Resilience 33 Appendices 34 Appendix A Definitions This roadmap is aimed our employee’s whole selves and is not limited to work-related risks. We acknowledge the limited influence IR has over non-work activities however understand the effect these have on work activities. This roadmap supports the wider WorkSafe Strategy and IR’s Positive Workplace Cultures Programme. The figure on the right from WorkSafe shows both mandatory areas of compliance as well as voluntary opportunities to promote better health and wellbeing. Legislative Requirements The Health and Safety at Work Act (HSWA, 2015) requires IR as the Person Conducting a Business or Undertaking (PCBU) firstly to eliminate all risks to personal health and safety as far as is reasonably practicable and if elimination is not possible, to minimize the risks as much as possible. Health and safety ri sks not only include physical injuries, but also work-related illnesses including physical and mental wellbeing. IR has a “duty of care” towards its employees. This legislation also requires that workers are given not only the correct and adequate equipment required to correctly perform their duties, but also the training needed to operate such equipment (HSWA, 2015). WorkSafe expects IR to not only protect their employees’ worker health, but also to promote general health and wellbeing, including positive mental health (WorkSafe New Zealand, 2017). Health The Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 states that health refers to both physical and mental health. The World Health Organisation (WHO) defines health as “a state of complete physical, mental and social wellbeing, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.” (WHO, 2021) Health and Safety Protection Initiatives Initiatives relating to our mandatory duty as a PCBU to prevent work related harm to workers. Health Promotion and Wellbeing Initiatives Initiatives not related to mandatory duty and are targeted to lifestyle-related health conditions such as obesity, cardiovascular disease and diabetes, as well as general resilience and wellbeing. Psychosocial Hazards Refers to the aspects of the design and management of work and its social and organisational contexts that may have the potential for causing psychological or physical harm. Psychosocial work environment The content of work and work demands, the social relationships at work, the organisation of work and the work culture, which each can affect the mental and physical well-being of workers including management. Health-Related Safety Risks WorkSafe define health-related safety risks as “an impairment or health condition that may adversely affect the safety of a worker or other person in the workplace.” “Health-related safety risks have the potential to lead to safety incidents and acute harm. In general, they fall into one of four risk categories: •Sensory risks: for example, changes in a worker’s hearing or eyesight may prevent them from correctly or quickly identifying and reacting to a workplace risk •Impairment risks: for example, fatigue may lead to reduced concentration •Mobility risks: for example, physical frailty may prevent a worker from moving out of the way of an oncoming vehicle •Incapacity risks: for example, an unknown or poorly controlled heart condition may lead to a worker suddenly losing consciousness while involved in a safety-critical task.” Spiritual Health Spiritual health includes who you are, what you believe in and where you have come from. “Spirituality means different things to different people. Spirituality speaks of the feelings we carry, our belief in or connectedness we feel, to that which is beyond the seen or tangible world. It can describe the meaning we attach to social groups, places, our religion or faith.” 35 Appendix B Te Whare Tapa Whā Te Whare Tapa Whā was first presented at a Māori Women’s Welfare League hui in 1982. In 1985, Mason Durie published a paper called A Māori perspective of health, which outlined differences in perspectives towards health by Western society and Māori. Durie presented a ‘traditional perspective’ of Māori health as being a ‘four-sided concept representing four basic tenets of life’ (Durie, 1985, p. 483). The balance and symmetry with each of these tenets were essential for wellbeing. The four components of wellbeing (on a foundation of whenua – land/roots) are: •Te taha wairua (spiritual wellbeing) •Te taha hinengaro (mental wellbeing) •Te taha tinana (physical wellbeing) •Te taha whānau (family wellbeing) The essential feature of Te Whare Tapa Whā is that it takes a holistic perspective to wellbeing, and that to achieve wellbeing, or health, each component needs to be in balance. 37 Appendix C PXP data & insights (Nov 22) 79% have completed at least 1 out of the last 3 PX Pulses (including this PX Pulse). Of those invited,20.2% have completed 1 out of last 3, 25.4% have completed 2 out of last 3, and 33.0% have completedthe last three. 74% of participants chose to share their dashboard with their people leader in Nov 22, which is comparable to other survey waves. 41 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 JulAugSepOctNovDecJanFebMarAprMayJun EAP Work-Related Topics 2021-22 FY Restructure/changePerformanceBullying/stress/discriminationCovid19Environment/conditionsWork relationshipsCareer Appendix E EAP data Usage of the EAP at IR is comparable to other organisations for the 2021-22 FY. Achieving Mentally Healthy Work (MHW) Roadmap for managing risks associated with psychosocial hazards 2024-2025 Our Vision That work at Inland Revenue is mentally healthy for all. Our people are less likely to experience mental harm at work and are supported to be healthy, well, engaged, and productive, to help us achieve our organisational objectives. Our Objectives and Measures 1 1.Prevent harm: Eliminate or minimise work-related risks to the mental health of our people. Measures: •Incidence of mental harm: trend data on frequency and severity of harm. •Survey data on leader competency and comfortability to manage relevant psychosocial hazards and risks. •Participation rates and satisfaction for resilience training and/or other mental health training we offer. •Patterns of use of overtime and flexi time. •Trends in annual leave usage. •Trends in Integrity and HR cases related to work-related mental harm. 2.Promote positive health and wellbeing: Maximise the opportunities to enhance the wellbeing of our people. Measures: •Satisfaction with outcomes/experience following requests for reasonable accommodation. •Usage rates for MHW material – SharePoint and external platform (e.g. Hauora Hub). •Satisfaction with range of information and support for mental wellbeing: e.g. as rated by Health & Safety Reps. •Work and Wellbeing PXP results/insights. 3.Support recovery when needed: Provide effective mental health support when our people need it. Measures: •# of Return to Work (RTW) programmes/support provided for illness including stress and poor mental health. •Satisfaction of person with RTW programmes, integrity/HR cases. •EAP usage and impact level data. Key Enablers •Leadership: Risk management of psychosocial hazards will have executive level ownership and oversight •Resourcing: The teams, systems, and initiatives for mentally healthy work will be appropriately resourced •Engagement: Solutions will be codesigned with our people 1 Measures noted are in addition to People Experience Pulse (PXP) and Moments that Matter survey insights. Item 2 Our Focus Areas and Immediate Actions We will: 1. Prevent Harm: Eliminate or minimise psychosocial risks through the design of work by: • Mentally Healthy Work by Design process: focus groups of the people doing the work conducting hazard identification and exposure process, protective factors, suggested improvements or changes to work design. For example, we may trial professional supervision for some teams, if the focus groups identify there being a need. – IN PROGRESS Develop the capability of leaders to identify, assess, and manage psychosocial risks by: • Leader Mental Health training, mentally healthy work leadership capability video and links, SharePoint site for leaders. – IN PROGRESS • Develop an updated leader capability programme for managing psychosocial risk. – NOT STARTED Develop effective systems to monitor and measure exposure to psychosocial risks and the effectiveness of our controls through: • Maximising the functions within Te Aka Oranga (reporting tool) for both reporting of hazards and incidents, as well as to monitor our controls in place and identify new opportunities. – IN PROGRESS • Exploring other methods of data including START and PXP to provide more oversight around exposure to psychosocial hazards and the effectiveness of existing controls. – IN PROGRESS 2. Promote Positive Health & Wellbeing: Motivate, encourage, and provide opportunities for our people to take control of their own physical and mental wellbeing by: • Procuring/embedding and promoting a new wellbeing platform/portal/tool with a wide range of resources, learning, tools for improving employee health literacy and health outcomes. – RFP IN PROGRESS Invest in increasing our people's health and wellbeing literacy by: • Developing more guidance for employees on mental wellbeing and managing psychosocial hazards. – IN PROGRESS 3. Support Recovery When Needed Provide support for our people where they are experiencing reduced mental health and wellbeing and/or where they may have been exposed to potentially distressing events by: • Reviewing our approach and process to access EAP entitlements. - NOT STARTED • Reviewing our RTW processes and support offered. – NOT STARTED • Reviewing our approach and processes with HR in regard to work-related stress/mental ill health, as well as our communication between People & Workplace Services functions to ensure seamless delivery of support to leaders and staff for both work-related and non-work-related mental ill health. – IN PROGRESS • Reviewing and updating our Reasonable Accommodations policy and guidelines to reference support in relation to mental illness. – COMPLETED