1 Jamie Robinson From:Samuel Stephens Sent: Friday, 21 February 2020 2:17 pm To:Kieran Burlace Subject: RE: Student loans - public notice ad \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Hey Kieran, Yes, can you include them please. Thanks, Sam From: Kieran Burlace <Kieran.Burlace@ird.govt.nz> Sent: Friday, 21 February 2020 1:28 PM To: Samuel Stephens <Samuel.Stephens@ird.govt.nz> Subject: FW: Student loans - public notice ad \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Hi Sam, The estimated cost is $540. Would you like to include Bay of Plenty Times for an additional $221.60? I’ll work with our in-house designer so there won’t be any additional costs for updating the copy. Cheers Kieran From: Sent: Wednesday, 19 February 2020 2:19 PM To: Kieran Burlace <Kieran.Burlace@ird.govt.nz> Subject: RE: Student loans - public notice ad Hi Kieran, Thanks for confirming! Will you need me to send you a new spec sheet for this? To help when your team is updating the copy. Monday generally has a higher readership – so I will work towards that. Would you also like to include the Bay of Plenty Times? Just a thought considering the industries booming in the area (incl. Tourism, Agri, Logistics) and an increase in university graduates moving to the area and/or studying. This would be an additional $221.60 media cost to the overall schedule. Note, I am still working through the schedule  Please find the media Head Hours Estimate attached. Let me know if you are happy to approve:  Estimate Number: IRL0008  Total Estimate: $540 Thanks, Digital Account Manager s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) 2 T M 2019 Creative Agency of the Year 2019 Most Effective Agency of the Year 2019 Most Awarded Media Agency Media news & views @ 57TheStreet Web www.fcbmedia.co.nz 57 Wellington St, Freemans Bay, Auckland, New Zealand. Box 3898 Auckland 1140 Please consider your environmental responsibility before printing this e-mail From: Kieran Burlace <Kieran.Burlace@ird.govt.nz> Sent: Wednesday, 19 February 2020 9:23 AM To: (AKL-FCB) <@fcb.com> Subject: \[EXTERNAL\] RE: Student loans - public notice ad \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi , Great thanks! Yes it will be the same creative spec 9x2, vertical. A week day would work best and it has to be before 31 March so either Monday 30 th or Friday 27 th And yes media schedule and post campaign proof would be great. Cheers Kieran From: (AKL-FCB) <@fcb.com> Sent: Wednesday, 19 February 2020 8:44 AM To: Kieran Burlace <Kieran.Burlace@ird.govt.nz> Subject: RE: Student loans - public notice ad Hi Kieran, Hope you are well . No worries at all re: Student Loans. I can definitely organise this for you. Confirming this is to run the same size creative spec as FY 17/18? This was a 9x2, vertical rectangle. Also, is there a specific date at the end of March you would like to lock in? Or preference of Weekend / Weekday. Will work ono getting the estimate to you by tomorrow. Are you able to confirm you would like the below:  Media schedule  Post Campaign Proof of Postings in Doc Chat soon, Digital Account Manager T + M + s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) 3 2019 Creative Agency of the Year 2019 Most Effective Agency of the Year 2019 Most Awarded Media Agency Media news & views @ 57TheStreet Web www.fcbmedia.co.nz 57 Wellington St, Freemans Bay, Auckland, New Zealand. Box 3898 Auckland 1140 Please consider your environmental responsibility before printing this e-mail From: Kieran Burlace <Kieran.Burlace@ird.govt.nz> Sent: Wednesday, 19 February 2020 7:58 AM To: (AKL-FCB) <@fcb.com> Subject: \[EXTERNAL\] Student loans - public notice ad \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Hi , Just when you thought you’d finished with student loan stuff... সহ঺঻ We’ve been asked to run the student loan public notice again across the following newspapers at the end of March:  NZ Herald  Dominion Post  The Press  Otago Daily Times  Waikato Times Are you able to set this up for us again? I’ll need to get the copy updated and it would be good to get a cost estimate so I can sort a PO number. Cheers, Kieran Kieran Burlace Senior Marketing Specialist | Marketing & Communications Inland Revenue | PO Box 2198 | Wellington 6014 T. + | E. This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz This message contains information which may be confidential and privileged. Unless you are the intended recipient (or authorized to receive this message for the intended recipient), you may not use, copy, disseminate or disclose to anyone the message or any information contained in the message. If you have received the message in error, please advise the sender by reply e-mail, and delete the message. Thank you very much. This email and any attachment may contain confidential information. If you have received this email or any attachment in error, please delete the email / attachment, and notify the sender. Please do not copy, disclose s 9(2)(a)s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) s 9(2)(a) 4 or use the email, any attachment, or any information contained in them. Consider the environment before deciding to print: avoid printing if you can, or consider printing double-sided. Visit us online at ird.govt.nz