www.ird.govt.nz 1 Ref: 22OIA1729 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 22April 2022 Dear Thank you for your Official Information Act 1982 request, received on 29 March 2022. Your request is in relation to the recruitment of middle to senior management staff at Inland Revenue. Your questions are listed throughout the response. Question 1: Would a candidate applying for a leadership/management type position in your organisation be required to do a task before the interview? (i.e. a phone screen, pre-test, etc) Or would the candidate have to complete a task after the interview such as - an aptitude test, numeracy/literacy or psychological profiling? Or are the interview and reference checking essentially the total recruitment process? Recruitment processes are tailored to each individual role, agreed in discussion between the Hiri ng Leader and the member of the Talent Team assigned to support the recruitment (the Recruiter). The Recruiter would usually screen candidates to confirm their understanding of the role, salary expectations and any additional questions as decided by the Recruiter and Hiring Leader before the interview. All candidates would complete an interview and be asked to provide at least one referee as a minimum. Depending on the nature of the role and the candidate pool (for example, senior and external candidates) candidates may also be asked to complete an additional task, exercise, presentation, or psychometric testing. The task would usually be part of the interview or post-interview. The Recruiter would then complete two reference checks for the preferred candidate. Question 2: How are applicants chosen to be interviewed? (See the options below from a to c) (a) A representative from Human Resources goes through the candidate pool of CV’s received? (b) A representative from HR and the hiring manager go through the candidates? (c) The hiring manager acting alone selects who is to be interviewed? Mostly B - The Hi ring Leader and the Recruiter agree on a shortlisting criteria and strategy in a briefing call. Depending on the nature of the role and the number of applicants, a Recruiter might create an initial longlist for the Hiring Panel to review and confirm a shortlist to interview. For some roles, the Hiring Panel would review all applications. Question 3: Does your organisation use ‘BEI’ type interviews for middle/senior leadership/management interviews? Question 4: If the answer to the above is ‘no’ how would you describe the type of interviews that are carried out? Inland Revenue’s interview s are based on its 12 People Capabilities and behaviour-based questions which relate to key requirements and capabilities of the role. C andidates are asked to provide specific examples of times when they have demonstrated a behaviour in 2 Ref: 22OIA1729 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] the past. Candidates are advised they are free to draw on examples from a wide range of previous experiences. Question 5: Is a representative from HR on the interview panel? (Never/Always/Some times?) Sometimes, this is role dependent. Question 6: For ‘BEI’ style interviews does each panel member score the candidate and then these scores are combined to tally up to a grand total score? Panel members agree on scores for each question together at the end of the interview, th e y do not tally up individual panel member scores. Question 7: Could a candidate who scores lower than the top scorer (e.g. came in second) still be considered the preferred candidate? In some instances, a candidate that scores lower than the top scorer can be the preferred ca n didate. Question 8: What are some of the factors or conditions that might give rise to the above in question #8 above? (I.e. – team fit, personality, how panel felt about them?) Other factors? • Motivation – I nland Revenue would like candidates to have a genuine motivation towards the role, the work for the department and the public sector. • Background checks – if a candidate’s background checks are not satisfactory post interview, then the second highest scoring candidate may be the preferred candidate for the role. • Complimentary skills and experience – Inland Revenue would like candidate’s skills and experience to compliment the team that they will be a part of. Question 9: Are those in your organisation who do the interviewing trained in the BEI interview method? The Talent or Recruitment team at Inland Revenue are able to offer guidance to panel mem bers who are less experienced in our interviewing process. There are also interview guides on rating scale information and guides for what to look for in quality responses available to the interview panel. Question 10: Once a candidate has been selected and employed by your organisation do you keep a record of how long he/she stays with the organisation? (length of tenure) Yes, Inland Revenue records the start date of each employee and keep a record of the length of tenure. Question 11: Or do you keep records of how that candidate is tracking regards their role? (good performance appraisals, improvements plans? Unsatisfactory performance?) Inland Revenue’s operates a performance approach which centres around regular coaching an d performance conversations between our people and their leaders. During these conversations, our people and their leaders discuss things that enable our people to perform now and into the future. This includes matters such as good performance, performance goals and incidences of unsatisfactory performance. Our people and their leaders are encouraged to take notes at these meetings to refer back to between and at subsequent meetings as a way to build on and develop the conversations. The outcomes and insights shared and gained at these meetings are used to inform organisational talent conversations and development planning. Essentially the insights are used and considered when considering capability needs, gaps and development opportunities. 3 Ref: 22OIA1729 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] In terms of unsatisfactory performance, leaders would discuss any instances of this with their leader. Continued unsatisfactory performance and performance improvement plans are recorded and formally agreed between the individual and the leader, with regular check-in and review meetings scheduled through-out the plan. Question 12: Have you ever surveyed applicants who have been interviewed as to how they feel about the BEI interview process? If so, please share these results. We have not surveyed applicants on t he BEI interview process. We are in the process of creating a candidate survey to obtain feedback on the overall recruitment process from applicants in the future. Question 13: Does your organisation ever use recruitment firms to source candidates? (I.e. this approach is sometimes use for specialist positions or senior management type roles) Yes, for some roles we reach out to recruitment agen cies to assist with sourcing for high volume, hard to fill or specialist positions. Question 14: The candidate pool since COVID-19 – March, 2020. In your view has the pool of candidates changed or got smaller since March, 2020. Has it taken longer to recruit for roles or have some roles remained vacant? Have there been other flow on effects since COVID-19 impacted in March 2020? The candidate pool in New Zealand has decreased with COVI D-19 due to the borders being closed and the vaccine mandates. Hiring Leaders have also become more open to candidates in different locations within New Zealand as well as part time, more remote working and different worker types e.g. Contingent Workers. Being more efficient in the recruitment process has been necessary for Inland Revenue to secure good candidates as they often have more than one offer. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes, on its website, responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you again for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Yours sincerely Eri na Clayton Enterprise Services, People & Workplace Services