www.ird.govt.nz Ref: 23OIA1673 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 7 February 2023 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 19 December 2023. You requested the following: ... for early childhood education providers, with data organised by financial year for the last 7 financial years where you have data available: Income data (average, range, median, etc) Company tax paid Unpaid tax debt With your request you provided some context, noting that your objective was to understand financial data for the early childhood education (ECE) sector and whether there was a declining or improving trend. You also supplied a list of ECE centres from a publicly available register but noted that these entities are not all necessarily taxpaying entities, as some will be structured into corporate groups and/or be tax exempt. Information being released Company tax For incomes and company tax we are releasing summary statistics from IR4 company tax returns where the customer has used a pre-school education industry code. The register, which you supplied, does not hold IRD numbers and could not easily be matched to Inland Revenue data without significant analytical effort. However, we do already hold industry codes (also known as business industry classification, or BIC codes) for our business customers. Codes with the first four characters “P801” cover the pre- school education sector. The information provided in tables 1 and 2 in the Appendix is filtered by taxpayers using this code, who are also structured as a company, and who filed an IR4 company tax return. Because your request is focussed on company tax, the information supplied does not include other entities such as partnerships, trusts, or unincorporated businesses which may be operating in this sector. We have interpreted your request to be for the last seven complete financial years. The seven-year period you have requested covers 2014/15 to 2020/21 as the most recent year for which complete information is available. Tax returns for 2021/22 are still being filed. This period incorporates a major systems change for Inland Revenue as part of our business transformation programme. Income tax returns for 2018/19 onwards were filed under the new system, and there is a structural break in the series volumes because customer accounts (i.e. branches) are now handled slightly differently. One consequence of this change is that there are now a greater volume of customer returns identified with nil taxable income. A structural change in overall volumes will affect statistics, such as means and medians, and will make any trends difficult to interpret. Because of this, we have provided the requested income and company tax data tables twice. Table 1 includes nil returns, and Table 2 excludes them. Table 2 may be more useful for your stated intent as it provides a more consistent time series, without being heavily impacted by the structural break from our systems migration. Ref: 23OIA1673 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The income variable provided is taxable income. This is calculated after any brought forward losses have been claimed which may have reduced taxable income to nil. Any current-year net loss is also treated as nil taxable income in these tables. The company tax variable is residual income tax. This is tax payable by the company directly and is net of any withholding tax credits from any income streams on which the tax has already been paid. Debt Aligning what we are providing for company tax, we are releasing debt information for companies that have used a pre-school education industry code. This information is provided in table 3 in the Appendix. To align with our standard debt reporting methodology, the debt information provided is the total value of debt as at the last day of each respective tax year, rather than the debt attributed to that tax year. The debt information has been separated by tax product including Income Tax, Employer (PAYE), GST. The remainder of smaller tax products have been grouped into the “Other” category. The average, median and quartile information provided applies to the total debt value. Information being refused Data related to income ranges (maximum amounts) is considered sensitive revenue and therefore refused under section 18(c)(i) of the OIA as making the requested information available would be contrary to the provisions of a specified enactment, namely Inland Revenue’s confidentiality obligation in section 18 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Disclosure of this information does not fall within any of the exceptions to the confidentiality obligation listed in sections 18D to 18J of the TAA. Right of Review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman by email at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz. If you choose to have an internal review, you can still ask the Ombudsman for a review. Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you again for your request. Yours sincerely Sandra Watson Policy Lead, Forecasting and Analysis