Policy and Regulatory Stewardship Kaupapa me te Tiaki i ngā Ture 55 Featherston Street PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 New Zealand T.04-890 1500 23 May 2022 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA) received 21 April 2022. You requested the following: Whether the Commissioner of Inland Revenue or Inland Revenue has received requests from individuals for tax relief in relation to lump sum back payments of weekly compensation under the Accident Compensation Act 2022 (either under section 176 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 or other relevant legislation) and, if so: 1.How many such requests the Commissioner of Inland Revenue or Inland Revenue have received in the last ten years 2.The outcomes of those applications (if any) from the past ten years, including whether tax relief was granted and the reasoning for the decision to grant or not grant tax relief 3.Copies of Inland Revenue's internal policies, guidelines, etc in relation to how back paid weekly compensation under the Accident Compensation Act that is paid in a lump sum should be taxed 4.Any correspondence between Inland Revenue and the Accident Compensation Corporation on the taxation of lump sum back paid weekly compensation under the Accident Compensation Act (this can be narrowed to correspondence in relation to the policy approach of taxing such payments, and can exclude correspondence relating to particular individual's payments/taxation) 5.Any advice, briefings, etc given to Inland Revenue or the Accident Compensation Corporation's relevant Minister(s) in relation to the taxation of lump sum back paid weekly compensation under the Accident Compensation Act On 22 April 2022, we asked you to clarify your request regarding the type of tax relief, the tax records you are seeking, and the type of correspondence you would be happy to receive, to which you replied: Question 1 - Yes, that is the tax relief I was meaning. I understand that to be under section 176 of the TAA as per my initial request, but there may be other relevant legislation I’m not aware of. Question 2 - I am after incidents where individuals have applied to the CIR for tax relief (ie, in the event of financial hardship) in relation to an ACC lump sum. Would the IRD have any record of such applications (even at a high level) without needing www.ird.govt.nz to go into individuals tax records? I do not really need information about the complaints. If this information cannot be gathered, even a summary or high level overview of how many people have applied for tax relief in relation to ACC lump sum payments and have not been successful will be fine. Question 3 - Yes, the internal file notes and reports you have referred to will be sufficient. Questions One & Two– Taxpayers who had received ACC lump sum payments and financial hardship relief As previously discussed in our email dated 27 April 2022, we endervoured to locate the specific information you requested on the number and outcome of any requests for tax relief for taxpayers who had received lump sum payments from ACC. We had previously noted that it was unlikel y someone who had received a lump sum payment would be given tax relief on the basis of hardship as they had just received funds to settle any tax liabilities that may be outstanding. We also noted that it would also be unlikely that a person was granted a hardship or other relief from tax payable on a lump sum payment from ACC as the way in which the law applies to such payments is clear and settled (i.e., that the lump sum amount is taxed in the year of receipt). If there were cases that intersected with these two features any hardship relief received would more likely be for other reasons. However, we did attempt to identify any cases that may fit within your request and, as expected, were unable to produce this information specifically. T o attempt to idenity those isolated cases would require us to go through individual tax records, which would require substantial efforts. Therefore, we have refused your request under section 18(f) of the OIA, as the information requested cannot be made available without substantial collation or research. Question Three – Internal guidelines on the taxation of ACC lump sum payments The following paragraphs are from our internal knowledge base for staff: If the taxpayer is entitled to a backdated payment, ACC will provide them with an information sheet explaining when a backdated compensation applies and how the amount is calculated. Taxpayers who were entitled to ACC weekly compensation but did not receive it, may be entitled to a backdated payment. Any backdated payment received from ACC is considered to be taxable income in the year in which the customer receives it. This can increase the taxpayer’s tax liability for the year and also impact their Working for Families entitlement, Child Support obligations, or student loan repayments. The lump sum is is taxed by ACC as normal under PAYE rules (being a current year receipt and taxable in the year of receipt as an extra pay). This amount is reflected in the employment information provided to Inland Revenue by ACC. Lump sum payments Lump sum payments (also called extra pays) include: •annual or special bonuses (regular bonuses aren't included and should be taxed as per normal) •cashed up holiday pay •retiring or redundancy payments •payments for accepting restrictive covenants •exit inducement payments •gratuities •remedial payments •lump sum holiday pay •employee share scheme benefits If a customer believes they will be overtaxed on their lump sum payment (usually if they have more than one job) they can apply for a special tax code. The employee can also elect to have their lump sum/bonus/allowance taxed at a higher rate, for example if they have another job or other untaxed income. The employee needs to advise the employer if they want a higher rate to apply and this rate is used in the calculation. Details required for calculation •Tax code •Payment frequency •Date of calculation •Lump sum figure (gross or net) •Last four weeks income from this employer More information on this can be found on Inland Revenue’s website (ird .govt.nz ) by searching for “Calculate PAYE for a lump sum payment.” The taxing of lump sums has been tested in the Courts. In Hollis v Commissioner of Inland Revenue (https://www.taxtechnical.ird.govt.nz/case-summaries/2021/csum-21-09), it was found that in cases involving backdated ACC payments, the taxpayer derives the income when it is received and that it cannot be spread back to earlier years to which the computation of income relates. The High Court case (Hollis v CIR (2010) 24NZTC 23,967 (HC) has become the leading authority in this area of law; a lump sum payment is taxed on a cash basis (i.e., in the year of receipt) in accordance with BD 3(2) of the Income tax Act 2007. Questions Four & Five – reports and correspondence relating to advice on ACC lump sum payments provided to Ministers The documents in scope are attached and in the table below. Some information is witheld under seciont 9(2)(a) of the OIA, to protect the privacy of natural persons. Item Date Document title Decision 1. 8 February 2018 Income tax treatment of lump sum payments of weekly accident compensation (IR2018/075) Released with redactions under section 9(2)(a) 2. 17 July 2018 File note - Individuals Income Tax – Meeting Released in part. 3. 17 October 2019 Proposed consultation approach for back-dated lump sum payments (IR2019/530) Released with redactions under section 9(2)(a) 4. Undated Policy Commissioning paper – taxation of lump sum payments Released in full. No pu blic interest in releasing the withheld information has been identified that would be sufficient to outweigh the reasons for withholding. The information you have requested also included some content outside the scope of your request. Where this is the case, the relevant sections have been marked as ‘not in scope’. Should you have any queries regarding the above, please don’t hesitate to don’t hesitate to contact Bary Hollow (Bary.Hollow@ird.govt.nz). Right of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz. Page | 1 Policy Commissioning Paper –taxation of lump sum payments Description of policy issue(s) This document summarises the following potential issues for consideration on the taxation of lump sum payments: • How fairness concerns arising from the current tax treatment of lump sum payments that span a number of tax years can be addressed; and • The more technical issue of back-dated lump-sums and how they should be treated for PAYE purposes (e.g., whether they should be treated as an extra pay) The tax treatment of lump sum payments is currently listed on the current tax work programme under business transformation. This paper recommends that this issues’ inclusion is re-affirmed on the tax policy work programme and that the project is allocated and progressed with a medium priority. This paper also recommends that the technical issue of whether back-dated payments should be treated as extra pay be included on the tax policy work programme with a low priority. Fairness concerns with the taxation of lump sum payments Under current tax law a lump sum employment income payment is subject to income tax (including PAYE) when the payment is made/received. Lump sum payments may include employment income that covers a number of income years, f or example, a lump sum payment of ACC weekly compensation which covers a number of tax years due to a dispute over entitlement. This gives rise to fairness concerns due to possible over-taxation in the year received compared to if the payment had been received in the relevant years that it relates to. One example of backdated lump sum payment which is commonly raised is ACC back-payments; these payments have been the subject of multiple ministerials over the past 2 years, and have been raised in submissions on tax bills. However, other payments with similar characteristics should also be considered, for example payments made by MSD. Whether back-dated payments should be treated as extra pay A recent IR interpretation of the law about the tax treatment of payments of back-dated holiday pay potentially raises policy issues about the tax treatment of a broader range of back-dated lump payments 1 , such as: • Whether back-dated lump sum remedial payments of entitlement under other enactments (such as minimum wage legislation) should also always be taxed as an extra pay; or • Whether all back-dated lump sum payments of salary or wages should be taxed as an extra pay. Recent changes to tax legislation clarified that back-dated remedial payments of entitlements under the Holidays Act 2003 and/or an employment agreement should be treated as extra pay for the purpose of the PAYE rules. This technical issue would consider whether this treatment should be extended to clarify this treatment for any other types of back-dated payments. 1 ht tps://www.ird.govt.nz/technical-tax/op-positions/op-position-calculating-paye-holiday.html Not in scope Page | 2 Policy context and purpose Ministerial engagement We have discussed the fairness concerns relating to lump sum payments with Ministers on several occasions. July 2017 This matter was discussed with Ministers in the context of the holiday pay entitlements being miscalculated by numerous employers in both the private and public sector and the need for employers to make remediation lump sum payments. The Cabinet paper Withholding tax treatment of backdated remedial payments of employment related entitlements (EGI-17-MIN-0228) noted that policy officials will consider the how potential fairness concerns arising from the timing of lump sum payments could be addressed as part of IR’s business transformation and officials would report back to Ministers in due course. February 2018: Officials reported to the Minister of Revenue in February 2018 seeking consideration for whether the matter should be included in the refreshed tax policy work programme. January 2019 CA ANZ raised the issue over-taxation of lump payments in their submission on the PAYE error correction and adjustment issues paper and suggested in relation ACC weekly compensation that recipients should have the option of having it taxed in the year it relates to or taxed when it is paid. Officials responded to the submission as follows: Officials consider that the issues need to be looked at in a wider framework to ensure other payments of a similar nature are also considered as part of potential options to create an ability to spread payments over years to which they relate for the purposes of tax. Officials note that this submission raises issues that would require prioritising and resourcing as part of the Government’s tax policy work programme. Private sector comments/views Fairness issue As noted above, the issue was raised by CAANZ in their submission on the Taxation (Annual Rates Modernising Tax Administration and Remedial Matters) Bill. OliverShaw in their submission on the BT individuals’ discussion document discussed the issue of the taxation of ACC lump sum payments spanning a number of tax years. This was in the context of personal service rehabilitation payments. This point was also raised in their submission on the Taxation (Annual Rates Modernising Tax Administration and Remedial Matters) Bill. Back-dated payments treated as an extra pay Business NZ, in relation to the back-payment of holiday pay issue, emphasised the need for consistency of approach and indicated that they thought all back-dated payments of the types of payments included in the tax definition of salary or wages should be treated as an extra pay. Not in scope Page | 3 Public sector comments/views Both ACC and MSD have raised concerns with the tax treatment of back-payments of weekly compensation, benefits and NZ superannuation. MSD considers that they are required to apply to the tax rates that applied during the benefit and NZ superannuation entitlement period to any adjustment to benefits and NZ superannuation and are looking at changes their systems to reflect this. Framework and assumptions A well-established tax principle is that employment income is earned on a cash basis – that is when the payment is received / paid. This means that PAYE is withheld when the payment is made by an employer and is derived by the employee when the payment is received. The officials’ issues paper PAYE error correction and adjustment discussed the tax treatment of underpayments of PAYE income and noted the officials were not proposing to change the above principle 2 . The two issues arose in the context of the miscalculation of holiday pay. They are distinct issues and can be progressed separately. The fairness issue can be viewed a significant policy issue as it may impact on employers and employees and may require changes to a fundamental tax principle – this will depend on possible solutions. Fairness issue from lump sum payments which relate to multiple tax years A key trade-off in relation to the over-taxation and fairness issue will be where the compliance costs fall in terms of possible solutions – on the employer or the employee and what role can IR play. In addition, there is revenue / fairness trade-off as allowing this income to be spread over multiple years is likely to have revenue implications. It is important to provide a consistent framework which may be applied for all relevant lump sum payments, rather than addressing one type (e.g., ACC payments) in isolation. Clarification of back-dated payments as extra pay Tax rules should be simple to understand and provide certainty – treating all back-payments as an extra pay could reduce compliance costs and increase certainty. It is less likely that PAYE will be over-withheld if a lump sum payment is treated as an extra pay compared with salary or wages. If a lump sum payment is treated as salary or wages the calculation of the amount of tax to be withheld from the payment would be based on the assumption that the back-payment represented a permanent increase in salary or wages, rather than an additional one-off payment. The back-dated payments issue is more of technical issue clarifying the law to provide certainty and reduce compliance costs. 2 http://taxpolicy ird.govt.nz/publications/2017-ip-paye-error-correction/chapter-3 - Paragraphs 3.17 to 3 19. Not in scope Page | 4 Policy impact and quality Materiality Without undertaking evidential surveys of employers including ACC and MSD on the number and size of lump sum payments that span tax years we have limited information to assess the materiality of the issues. Scope Fairness issue There is the question of whether this issue should just focus on income tax or should it include social policy programmes administered by Inland Revenue. The inclusion of social policy programmes such as WfFTCs would broaden the scope of the project and depending on solutions could have a negative (fiscal impact on customers) in terms of back years. Types of lump sum payments which relate to back-years include: • accident compensation payments (ACC) • payments made by MSD • back-dated salary or wages ordered by the Employment Relations Authority or Employment Court There may also be other types of lump sum payments relating to back-years, including under pay equity legislation. The February report to the Minister discussed several options for an alternative tax treatment for lump sum payments. Two of the key issues are whether • Back-dated lump sum payments should be spread back over relevant income years. • If tax and social assistance (both IR and MSD administered) impacts should be separated If alternate treatments are warranted, an additional issue is who should have to obtain the alternative treatment: whether that is the payer, payee or if Inland Revenue is able to recognise these types of payments and intervene. If the payer (e.g., MSD or ACC) has to apply a different treatment for calculating the tax, it would incur administrative costs for these other agencies. PAYE treatment of Back-dated payments The scope should be limited to backdated-payments of PAYE income that could be treated as salary or wages. Interdependencies The BT individuals’ project is focusing on ensuring that withholding tax deducted during the year is more accurate. These two issues therefore have some interrelationship with this BT project. Policy approach and collaboration Timeframes and key milestones A decision is sought as to whether these matters should be included on the tax policy work programme. In terms of priority and the Government’s focus that everyone pay their fair share, according to their means, the fairness issue should have a higher priority than the back-dated Not in scope Page | 5 payment issue. If tax is over-withheld on back-dated payments the customer will receive a tax refund at the end of the year. Based on the above analysis, the following priority should be afforded to these issues: • Over-taxation /fairness – medium to high • Back-dated payments - low Collaboration Fairness - Some early collaboration with key stakeholder to better understand the problem definition and the options to address the potential over-taxation. This early collaboration would focus on the trade-off of where the compliance costs fall – the employer, the employee and Inland Revenue. Key stakeholders include CA ANZ, Business NZ, NZLS, CTG, ACC and MSD. There will be some merit in understanding the scope of START as to whether solutions that focus on the employee rather than the employer can be delivered. We have had initial conversations with SD&I around the potential impact of this project. It is important to keep SD&I involved in order to understand the opportunities or impacts from any potential solutions. A PIA may be required. Back-dated payments – Some early collaboration with key stakeholders to better understand the priority of issue would be beneficial. We are engaging with MSD currently on adjustments to benefit and NZ superannuation entitlements. There may be some merit in seeking some technical/legal advice on the scope of the current law in whether a back-payment of salary or wages is an extra pay or a payment of salary or wages. Recommendations It recommended that: (a) The fairness issue be included in the refreshed tax policy work programme with a medium priority (b) The lump sums being treated as an extra pay issue be included on the tax policy work programme as an unallocated issue with a low priority or be considered as a remedial item. Not in scope