Ref: 22OIA1572 1 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 28 February 2022 Public Sector Carbon Neutrality Accountability Project Dear Ri Comer Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 29 January 2022. You requested: 1. Do you have a carbon neutral plan by 2025, and if so, what is the official wording of it? 2. Do you have a carbon neutral team or committee? If so, how many are in this team, and are they trained/experts? 3. How much carbon do you emit/how are your carbon emissions measured? 4. When do you plan to phase out coal? 5. Have you transitioned to EVs and or/hybrids? Have you begun to downsize your fleet size? 6. How far along are you in meeting the NABERSNZ rating requirement for large buildings? Inland Revenue has an Annual Review by Parliament’s Finance and Expenditure Committee (FEC). Information about our emissions and initiatives is in our responses to questions 110 and 113-119 inclusive (on pages 208 to 218) to FEC’s Annual Review 2020/21. You can read our responses on Parliament’s website by going to the link below and choosing View submissions and advice. 2020/21 Annual review of the Inland Revenue Department - New Zealand Parliament (www.parliament.nz) Question 1: If Inland Revenue has a plan to be carbon neutral by 2025, and the plan’s official wording Inland Revenue has a target to achieve carbon neutrality by December 2025, in line with the requirements of the Carbon Neutral Government Programme (CNGP). We do not yet have a formal plan. This part of your request is refused under section 18(e) of the OIA, as the document you requested does not exist. However, we are currently gathering emissions information and developing our reduction plan, and will next determine our reduction target. This information will be used to form our plan to achieve carbon neutrality by 2025. Ref: 22OIA1572 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Question 2: If Inland Revenue has a carbon-neutral team or committee; how many are in this team; and if they are trained/experts Inland Revenue is setting up a small team to deliver the requirements of the CNGP. The work falls under the leadership of the Service Leader, Commercial Services and Strategic Property. The team comprises one person permanently on a part-time basis, and two people full-time for a year and six months (at this stage) respectively. Other contributors come from Workplace Services, Finance Services, Commercial Services, Strategic Property and our Communications team. These team members and contributors are not trained experts in environmental sustainability. Our work is supported by external consultants who have expertise in measuring and verifying emissions, and completing energy efficiency assessments. Their input will help us to establish our emission reduction targets and our plan to achieve those targets. Although Inland Revenue does not have a carbon-neutral committee, the team reports on our strategy and progress to our governance groups. Question 3: How much carbon Inland Revenue emits, and how our carbon emissions are measured Inland Revenue’s largest emission sources are from using energy for our premises, air travel and vehicle fleet. In the 2020/ 21 financial year (1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021), the total emissions from these sources were 1,261 tonnes. The following table shows the breakdown of our carbon emissions. Our carbon emissions in 2020/21 have reduced from previous years. This is largely the result of reduced travel due to COVID-19 restrictions and lockdowns, as well as reducing our property footprint (by consolidating office accommodation in some locations and releasing some floors in other sites, as leases allow). All values in the table have been rounded. We are in the process of identifying further emissions sources to measure, and are using the CNGP’s target-setting tool to record emissions, assess the emission reductions required and determine a reduction target. We source our energy and air travel emissions from external providers. We calculate emissions for our vehicle fleet using data from our fleet booking system and carbon conversion factors sourced online. Question 4: When does Inland Revenue plan to phase out coal? Inland Revenue does not use coal. Ref: 22OIA1572 3 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Question 5: If Inland Revenue has transitioned to EVs and/or hybrids, and if we have begun downsizing our fleet Inland Revenue purchased 28 electric vehicles (EVs) in March 2021, and t he electrical infrastructure and chargers necessary for those EVs has been installed in the relevant sites. We aim to phase out all our petrol-powered vehicles over the next two-to-three years. We regularly review the size of our fleet. We have reduced our fleet by 61 vehicles so far: by five vehicles in 2018, by 28 vehicles in 2019, and by 28 vehicles in 2021. We are also exploring other avenues for optimising our fleet, including sharing vehicles with other government agencies and using ride-share vehicles. This work will help us to determine how many vehicles we need for our organisation and how many vehicles need to be transitioned to EVs. Question 6: How far along I nland Revenue is in meeting the NABERSNZ rating requirement for large buildings We are required to commission annual National Australian Building Environmental Rating System New Zealand (NABERSNZ) building energy efficiency assessments for 11 of our 21 sites, as they are over 2,000 square metres. So far, we have rating outcomes for six buildings and are progressing three others. Assessments for the last two of the 11 sites, our two Auckland buildings, were affected by COVID-19 restrictions but are now being scheduled. Rights of review If you disagree with my decision on your OIA request, you can ask an Inland Revenue review officer to review my decision. To ask for an internal review, please email the Commissioner of Inland Revenue at: CommissionersCorrespondence@ird.govt.nz . Alternatively, under section 28(3) of the OIA, you have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review my decision. You can contact the office of the Ombudsman at: info@ombudsman.parliament.nz . Responses to OIA requests on our website Finally, please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to OIA requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed before the response is published. Thank you for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Yours sincerely Juliet Glass Service Leader, Commercial Services and Strategic Property