www.ird.govt.nz Ref: 22OIA1333 9 November 2021 Dear Thank you for your request made under the Official Information Act 1982 (OIA), received on 11 October 2021. You requested the following information: 1) The total number of formal complaints made by employees to your HR department in the past five years, broken down by year (2016 to 2021 to-date). 2) An explanation of how you code complaints (i.e. is it broken down by ‘bullying’, ‘sexual harassment’). 3)The number of bullying-related complaints made to your HR department in the past five years, broken down by year (2016 to 2021 to-date). 4)The number of sexual harassment-related complaints made to your HR department in the past five years, broken down by year (2016 to 2021 to-date). 5) The number of investigations undertaken into complaints made to your HR department in the past five years, broken down by year (2016 to 2021 to-date). 6) The number of settlements your organisation has paid to past or current employees for personal grievance complaints in the past five years, broken down by year (2016 to 2021 to-date). 7) The number of settlements your organisation has paid to past or current employees for unjustified dismissal complaints in the past five years, broken down by year (2016 to 2021 to-date). 8) The value of all settlements paid by your organisation for personal grievance or unjustified dismissal claims in the past five years, broken down by year (2016 to 2021 to-date). 9) The number of employee resignations from your organisation in the past five years, broken down by year (2016 to 2021 to-date). 10) A copy of your organisation’s most recent staff satisfaction/experience survey. People and Culture at Inland Revenue Inland Revenue is committed to maintaining a positive working environment and culture, where diversity is appreciated, and all people are respected and valued. Inland Revenue regards discrimination, bullying or harassment of any kind as unacceptable. This applies whether this behaviour comes from, or is directed at, an employee, contractor, consultant, customer or a visitor to Inland Revenue. Ref: 22OIA1333 We put prevention at the centre of our approach and expect all our people to model appropriate standards of conduct and report any breaches. Inland Revenue has a long-term commitment to enhancing diversity and inclusion in our workplace. Our aspiration is to have an inclusive culture where people from all walks of life can achieve their full potential. Inland Revenue has a range of diversity and inclusion initiatives, and is committed to supporting its people networks. Networks established within Inland Revenue include groups for Māori , Pasifika, Multi-cultural, Disability, Rainbow and Women. Our people networks play an important role in supporting and developing members and helping create a more inclusive organisation. Inland Revenue was awarded the Rainbow Tick in April 2021. Complaints at Inland Revenue Inland Revenue has procedures in place for making and managing complaints to ensure any complaint or query is treated confidentially, taken seriously and acted on promptly. Inland Revenue investigates all complaints related to bullying/harassment/sexual harassment. There is a preference for appropriately tailored responses to the circumstance and, where possible, how people want their complaint to be treated. Inland Revenue may explore informal options before formal actions are taken if this is appropriate. If appropriate, Inland Revenue may also proceed straight to formal investigation action. A formal investigation is one where there is the potential for an employee to receive a disciplinary outcome up to and including dismissal. Inland Revenue will ensure the principles of natural justice are applied and both parties are treated fairly, and respected and supported through the process. When complaints are recorded, they are noted as bullying & harassment within a single category, with a subcategory where the allegation is of a sexual nature. Question 1 & 5 The table below shows all complaints made by Inland Revenue employees to the HR department for the period 2016 to 2021. As mentioned above, these may be investigated formally or informally, tailored to the circumstances. The table below shows the total number of complaints formally and informally investigated relating to allegations of bullying and/or harassment, including sexual harassment. Please note, after investigation not all complaints were substantiated. Year closed Formal investigation/complaint Informal investigation/complaint Total 2016 10 14 24 2017 2 0 2 2018 24 4 28 2019 13 0 13 2020 3 0 3 2021\* 4 1 5 Total 56 19 75 \*provided at 3 November 2021 Ref: 22OIA1333 Question 2 As mentioned above, when complaints are recorded they are noted as bullying & harassment within a single category, with a subcategory where the allegation is of a sexual nature. All allegations of a sexual nature are formally investigated. Questions 3 & 4 The table below shows all bullying and harassment complaints made by Inland Revenue employees to the HR department for the period 2016 to 2021. Year closed Sexual harassment Bullying and harassment Total 2016 3 21 24 2017 0 2 2 2018 5 23 28 2019 5 8 13 2020 2 1 3 2021\* 1 4 5 Total 16 59 75 \*Provided as of 3 November 2021 Questions 6, 7 & 8 Both a claim for unjustified dismissal and a claim for unjustified disadvantage would be raised as a Personal Grievance and may include one or more specific issues as part of that claim. Inland Revenue does not break down information on Personal Grievances into specific topics of types of claims made. We have therefore provided the table below which sets out the total number of Personal Grievances settled and the total cost to Inland Revenue. These will include both unjustified disadvantage and unjustified dismissal claims and will also include Personal Grievances that refer to bullying and/or harassment and/or HR complaints, if any, for each given year. Financial year Number of personal grievances settled Cost to Inland Revenue ($) 2015/16 10 54,444.81 2016/17 4 16,656.05 2017/18 12 127,040.55 2018/19 21 605,752.70 2019/20 7 205,377.72 2020/21 14 83,000.00 2021/22\* 2 7,000.00 \*Provided at 13 October 2021 Please note: -The table above includes information about all personal grievances in a particular financial year whether they were filed in the Employment Relations Authority (ERA) or not. Most grievances were settled at the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment mediation service. -The increase in the 2018/19 and 2019/20 cost compared to other years is due to a large number of the personal grievances relating to organisational change processes (restructures). For further information on Inland Revenue’s recent Ref: 22OIA1333 organisational change processes, please refer to “Vote Revenue Standard Estimates Questionnaire 2021/22” available on www.parliament.nz (question 11). -Personal grievances are not always settled in the same year they are raised. Question 9 Inland Revenue is in the final stage of a large, complex transformation programme. To minimise the impact of transformation for Inland Revenue’s people, gradual reductions in Inland Revenue’s workforce have been achieved as the nature of the work has changed. Since mid-2016, workforce principles in place meant the majority of vacancies have been filled with fixed-term employees. As much as possible, reductions have been managed through attrition, fixed term arrangements coming to an end, and flexible workforce arrangements. The table below shows Inland Revenue employee resignations for the period 2016 to 2021. Year Fixed Term Permanent Total 2016 21 488 509 2017 76 487 563 2018 181 402 583 2019 220 303 523 2020 166 207 373 2021\* 109 232 341 \*as at 30 September 2021 Question 10 In April 2020, as part of Inland Revenue’s Active Listening programme, a pulse survey was launched which focused on employee wellbeing and work experience. During 2020/21, eight waves of the survey were run, with participation rates between 60 to 70%. Pulse surveys are run monthly or bi-monthly and give our people an opportunity to reflect on their experience and talk about the things that are of most value to them at work. While selected content of the pulses vary from pulse to pulse, well-being is a standing item in each of them. Staff who participate in the pulse survey can opt to share their comments with their leader, which support and enrich one-on-one conversations. Uptake of this has been high with 80 to 85% of participants opting to share their responses. Results are available within a week after the surveys close. A copy of Inland Revenue’s most recent people and well-being survey (September 2021) is attached as an Appendix. Ref: 22OIA1333 Publishing of OIA response Please note that Inland Revenue regularly publishes responses to requests that may be of interest to the wider public on its website. We consider this response is of public interest so will publish this response in due course. Your personal details or any information that would identify you will be removed prior to it being published. Thank you for your request. I trust that the information provided is of assistance to you. Yours sincerely, Erina Clayton Enterprise Leader, People & Workplace Services Inland Revenue Ref: 22OIA1333 Appendix Start of Block: Wellbeing Q1. How are you feeling about your overall wellbeing recently? With wellbeing, please think holistically, about your whole self, including your physical, mental, cultural, whānau, and spiritual wellbeing. o Very Good o Good o OK. Neither Good nor Bad o Not Very Good o Not at all Good Q2. For what reasons do you feel that way about your overall wellbeing? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Start of Block: Work Experience 1 Q3. How do you feel about your day-to-day experience of 'doing your work’ recently? o Very Good o Good o OK. Neither Good nor Bad o Not Very Good o Not at all Good Ref: 22OIA1333 Start of Block: Work Experience 2 Q4. Please share any ideas you have about the best ways to help or support you, either with your wellbeing and/or your work, at this time \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Start of Block: Inclusion Our culture and the way we work is important for our wellbeing, so this month we are asking you to think about feeling included, and being inclusive of others. Feeling included is where irrespective of your background you feel you are valued, respected, able to be yourself, contribute and progress at work. Q5. Overall, how included do you feel in your day to day experience at work? o Really Included o Mostly Included o Neither Included or Not Included o Not very Included o Not at all Included Start of Block: Block 8 Q6. For what reasons do you say that? Feel free to share your thoughts about any of your previous answers \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Ref: 22OIA1333 \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Start of Block: Block 7 Q7. Please share any ideas (no matter how small) of things you/your team/IR could try doing to help be more inclusive of all people in future \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Start of Block: Permissions By submitting your survey you are consenting to your responses being used anonymously in organisational reporting. Your responses will not be identifiable in any way. In order to best support you, your responses can be made visible to your people leader: {MANAGER\_NAME}. It would be helpful if your people leader could view your responses. Please select your preference: o Yes - I'm fine with my People Leader viewing my responses o No - I do not want my People Leader to view my responses Display This Question: If In order to best support you, your responses can be made visible to your people leader: ... = No - I do not want my People Leader to view my responses Ref: 22OIA1333 By selecting no, your responses will not be included in your people leader's dashboard, but we will still send you your own personal dashboard, which you can share with whomever you choose. Start of Block: Block 12 Display This Question: If If Participants's Metadata PEOPLE\_LEADER Is Equal to Yes Actions for People Leaders: Please encourage your people to complete the survey if they haven't already. It provides a good opportunity for them to take a moment to reflect on their experiences. Your People Experience dashboard will be available from Monday, please take a moment to review your people's individual survey responses and use these to enrich your team and 1-1 catch-ups and conversations. Thank you for taking the time to reflect on your experiences and sharing your thoughts. Your personal dashboard will be available to view early next week so you can continue the conversation with your leader or mentor. Ngā mihi ki a koe mō tō whai wāhi mai ki te whakaputa whakaaro. Ka wātea tō papatohu hei tirohanga māu ā te wiki e tū mai nei kia taea ai te kōrero me tō kaihautū. Please click the finish button below to submit your survey.