PROTOCOL Access to Audit Working Papers BElWEEN NEW ZEALAND INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS AND INLAND REVENUE 29 Apr!! 2006 Access to Audit Working Papers 8el:ween NZICA and lRD Introduction 2 This document records Inland Revenue's policy in respect of Inland Revenue's access to audit working papers maintained by an external auditor in relation to an audit assignment In draf1ing this statement the Inland Revenue has taken into account the views of the New Zealand Institute of Chartered Accountants (the Institute). The policy statement is necessary because the provisions of the Tax Administration Act i 994 give the Department powers of access to audit working papers. In particular. these statutory powers override the important confidentiality aspect of an aiJditor's operating method, as set out in the lnstitute's Code of Ethics, formulated and published by the Institute and updated from lime to Hme. This policy statement also has regard to the provisions of sections 6 and 6A of the Tax Administration Act i994 and the need to have regard to the role of !he auditor, as set out below. This statement does not address matters relating to working papers other than an auditor's working papers relating to the external audit of an entity. The distinction between audit working papers and other workpapers held by an external auditor in relation to any cfient is outlined below. Audit Working Papers 'Audit 1i-vorking papers' are materials that document matters which are importanl in providing evidence that the audit was carried out in accordance with the "Codified Auditing Standardsm promulgated by the Institute. The extent of this documentation is decided by the auditor, but they wi!! not include every observation. consideration or conclusion made. Audit working papers include management letters arising from the audit These letters may be in the possession of lhe taxpayer. Working papers may be in the form of data stored on paper, film, electronic media or other media. The audit working papers are the property of the auditor and not of the client. The external auditor of an entity may wen maintain working papers in relation to other work undertaken in relation to that entily. In this statement these are referred to as 'other working papers'. 'Other working papers' may include lax wolkpapers, such as papers compiled in order to complete the tax return or to provide tax advice. Any such 'other working papers' form part of !he taxpayer's records, whether they are held by the audrtor, the taxpayer or a third party. Audi! working papers in relation to a client's tax positions and exposures which are prepared solely for audit purposes constitute 'audit working papers' and not ·other working papers'. The Law The general information gathering powers of the Commissioner are set out in the Tax Administration Act 1994. Section references quoted in this document are to sections of that Act 29 April 2008 Access to Audit Working Papers Between NZICA and IRD Broadly slated, relevant sections are: 3 • Section 16 -Commissioner has the power to inspect books and documents, and has the right of access to them. • Section 16B-Power to Remove and Copy Documents. • Section 16C -Power to Remove and Retain Documents for Inspection. • Section 17 -Information required to be furnished to the Commissioner upon the request being made. • Section 17A -Court orders for production of information or return. • Section 18 -Inquiry before District Court Judge. • Section 19 -Inquiry by the Commissioner. • Section 20 • Privilege for certain types of legal communications. • Section 20B-G • No requirement lo disclose tax advice document. Under section 6A of the Tax Administration Act, the Commissioner is charged with the care and management of the Inland Revenue Acls and certain other functions. If that statutory duty is to be properly discharged, the Commissioner must be able to obtain information from a wide variety of sources so as to enable the correct tax position of a taxpayer, or other persons, to be ascertained. However 1he Commissioner must exercise the powers in a manner that promotes voluntary compliance. The sections of the Tax Administration Act 1994 which are customarily used for the purposes of gathering information are seclions 16 and 17. In particular, section 17 is used to require information to be furnished from audit working papers. Every person to whom a request is made in terms of section 17(1} is required to fumish in writing and produce tor inspection such information as the Commissioner consfclers necessary or relevant for the performance of the Commissioner's duties under the Inland Revenue Department Acts. Section 17 of the Act overrides any contractual, professional or other obligation not to produce the documents. The Department noles that this position is supported under the lnstitute's Code of Ethics which slates that the auditor must give access when there is a legal requirement to do so. In short, audit working papers must be made avarlable to the Commissioner upon the recipient of that request being satisfied that a valid request has been made in accordance with section 17. Tue other information gathering powers contained in sections 16, 17A, 18 or i9 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 are very broad. Instances when these other powers are used for requesting information held by auditors would be very rare. Generally audit working papers do not include tax advice documents. However where tax advice documents exist in the audit working papers the procedures set out in Standard Practice Statement SPS 05/07 -Non- disclosure right for tax advice documents are to be followed. 29 April2003 Access to Audit Working Papers Between NZICA and !RD The Role of the Auditor 4 Tire objective of an audit of financial statements is to enable the auditor to express an opinion on, in the case of a reporting entity {an issuer and a company other than an exempt company), whether those financial statements comply with generally accepted accounting practice and give a true and fair view of the matters to which they relate. The overall objective of the auditor in conducting the audrt is to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statemenls as a whole are free from material misstatement. Financial information contained in ihe audit rne is extracted from the client's records. The remainder of the audit rne is the thought process in arriving at !he audit opinion. The extracts and thought process may be misfeading if applied for any other purpose. In performing the audit and recording their cunclus1ons, auditors are not acting as tax experts. The audit opinion is expressed about the financial statements as a whole, and not about any one part of those statements. This opinion is not expressed about the lax return or tax liability. Even if statements recorded by the auditor are made a.bout items that affect a client's tax provision, !he correctness or otherwise of data reflected in the tax return cannot be inferred from stalements recorded in the audit working papers. The question of correctness is one of fact and not one of inference or belief. ihe Policy For the external auditors to be effective in performing their responsibilities to their clients and users of financial statements they must develop a relationship of candour with their clients. This policy is designad to be a practical guide to both external auditors and Inland Revenue staff that takes that relationship into account. Requests tor access to audit working papers will arise only in !he course of enquiries conducted by Investigators of the Inland Revenue Department or in Hmi!ed other special cases. The circumstances will vary but a request for audit working papers will not be a routine part of Inland Revenue's investigations. In the first instance the informalion will be requested from the taxpayer. Requests to a taxpayer's auditor for access lo audit working papers will only be made in exceptional circumstances. This approach does not imply that audit working papers enjoy any privilege lrom disclosure unless they are tax advice documents. A request for access to audit working papers will be made only after careful consideration, and on~/ after obtaining the authorisation of !he appropriate Area Manager-Assurance. The authorising officer win have to consider if the informatlon requested is ·necessary or relevant" for the administration of the Tax Acts. !n particular, they must be satisfied as to the adequacy of the investigator's actions in attempting to get the information required from the taxpayer, remembering that requesting the information from the auditor is the last resort. Requests for audit working papers made pursuant !o section 17 will be 'formal requests'. They will incrude details such as when and where the records are to be made available. They will state the penalties for non• compliance. They will comply with the Department's standard practices, currenti 1 · represented by SPS 05/08. The Department will always issue a section 17 request prior to resorting to the other information gathering powers contained in the Tax Administration Act 1994. 29 April 2008 Aef:eSs to Audit Working Papers Between NZICA and fRD .s The auditor is expected to act with proper professional propriety in responding to the Department's request for information. Where fom,al requests are made in accordance with this policy, the Department asks that the recipient auditor endeavour to reciprocate the Department's co-operation, and deal expeditiously with the request after taking into account therr workload. In appropriate cases, the auditor may find it necessary to seek professional advice before complying with requests. In this regard, the Department accepts particular documents on an audit file may properly be subject to legal professional privHege or subject to non-disclosure as tax advice documents. Any request for information that is not made wilh the authorisation of the appropriate person should not be accepted. This complaint should be raised with the National Manager, Technical Standards Inland Revenue. The removal and retention of audit working papers wm be confined to photocopies or copies o! eieclron1c mes. This is because audit working papers are an auditor's 'evidence files' shOuld the auditor be involved in litigation. In practice, it is unlikely that audit files wilf be removed from the auditor's premises. In most cases, providing facilities are available, the investigalor will analyse and, if necessary, photocopy or copy records at the auditor's premises. Further, investigators will examine the audit working papers as quickly as possible. Because of the secrecy provisions of the Tax Administration Act 1994, it is not possible for an investigator to rev ea! the reasons for an access request to an auditor. The procedures outlined in this policy will apply to audit working papers held by (or on behalf of) the external auditor, and to correspondence between !he auditor and the taxpayer concerning matters arising in the course of the audit. Opinions expressed by the auditor in either the audit working papers or communications between the audrlor and their client will not be quoted back to the client (or representatives of that client). As noted previously, the auditor is not acting as a tax expert. The accounting conventions of consistency and materiality may mean audit advice is incompatible w1th tax requirements. When an auditor holds both audit working papers and other working papers on a common file, on a valid request being made for files, the auditor is not expected to make ava!lable the audit working papers content of the file unless the procedures laid down in this statement have been followed. In appropriate cases, legal professional privilege or non-disclosure of tax advice documents may apply to some documents or information. Nothing in this policy statement precludes an auditor or the audit client voluntarily providing to the investigator any audit working papers or copies thereof, shouid they wish to do this. It is intended that this policy will be monitored regularly. 29 April 2008 Accoss to Audit Working Papers Betwsen NZICA and !RO Review 6 The Group Manager, Assurance, (or equivalent officer} and the Chief Executive of the New Zealand Institute of Chartered Accountants shalt review this document periodically. Signed on behalf of the New Zealand Institute of Chartered Accountants: Signature: Name: Position: Date: 1¼-4\\. .JJ~v ~- 1\\.:\_ \\,, C \\..,~\\.,~ -:,q} II }a& Signed on behalf of Inland Revenue by: Signature: Name: Position: Date: ~~-Cv/!6." ~U?'-1l ~k<iEt'L