PUBLIC RULING | WHAKATAUNGA TŪMATANUI Investing into a US limited liability company – New Zealand tax consequences Issued | Tukuna: 24 July 2023 BR Pub 23/09 – 23/13 T hese five Public Rulings and the accompanying commentary set out the income tax treatment and availability of foreign tax credits or other forms of double taxation relief for New Zealand investors in a United States limited liability company (US LLC) that is taxed on a fiscally transparent basis as a partnership in the US, but as a foreign company in New Zealand. The Rulings demonstrate the respective tax treatments where the interest in the US LLC is classified as under the foreign investment fund (FIF) threshold, a FIF or a controlled foreign company (CFC); where different FIF methods are used and where there is a non- attributing active FIF or CFC. All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 unless otherwise stated. START DATE – END DATE | RĀ TĪMATA – RĀ MUTUNGA 26/06/2023 – 25/06/2028 REPLACES | WHAKAKAPIA This is a reissue of BR Pub 20/01 – 20/05. For more information about the earlier publication of this Public Ruling, see the Commentary to this Ruling. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 2 of 64 Public Ruling BR Pub 23/09: Income tax – Dividends derived by New Zealand resident investor in a United States limited liability company that is a foreign investment fund, where the total cost of all the investor’s attributing interests is $50,000 or less This is a public ruling made under s 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation laws | Ture tāke All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 (the Act) unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of sections CD 1, CD 3, CD 18, CQ 5(1)(d), CQ 5(1)(e), CQ 5(5), EX 1, EX 28, LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1), and the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies | Te Whakaritenga i pāngia e tēnei Whakataunga The Arrangement is as follows: A New Zealand investor is one of the members of a United States limited liability company (US LLC) that has not made an election to be taxed as a corporation in the US. The New Zealand investor either is a natural person who is not a transitiona l r esident or is a trustee that meets the requirements of s CQ 5(5). The US LLC investment is an attributing foreign investment fund (FIF) interest a s d escribed in s EX 29, where the total cost of all of the New Zealand investor’s attributing interests in all FIFs is $50,000 or less throughout the year so the circumstances under s CQ 5(1)(d)(i) or s CQ 5(1)(e)(i), as relevant, do not apply. The circumstances in s CQ 5(1)(d)(ii) and (iii) or s CQ 5(1)(e)(ii) and (iii), as relevant, do not apply. The US LLC makes a distribution to the New Zealand investor. The US LLC withholds and pays US federal income tax on the New Zealand investor’s partnership income on the investor’s behalf. No US federal income tax is paid on the distribution from the US LLC to the New Zealand investor. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 3 of 64 The US LLC’s operating agreement provides that the Managing Members have t he power to make distributions to members of the US LLC in their sole discretion. All amounts are expressed in New Zealand dollars. For the purposes of this Ruling, the term: “d istribution” means a member’s share of the US LLC’s net profit that is allocated and credited to their capital account and that the Managing Members have re solved to be distributed to a member; “d ividend” means a dividend as defined in s CD 3; “FIF” means a FIF as defined in s EX 28; “Managing Members” means the members of the US LLC who are authorised to act on behalf of the US LLC in carrying on the US LLC’s business; “member” means a person who has an ownership interest in a US LLC; “New Zealand – United States Double Tax Agreement (NZ–US DTA)” means the agreement under the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983; “p artnership income” means a member’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income that is treated as their partnership income for US federal income tax purposes; and “US LLC” means a limited liability company formed under state law in the US and classified as a partnership for US federal income tax purposes that is not treated as tax resident in New Zealand. For the avoidance of doubt, the Arrangement does not include arrangements where subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement. How the taxation laws apply to the Arrangement | Ko te pānga o ngā ture tāke ki te Whakaritenga The taxation laws apply to the Arrangement as follows: The New Zealand investor does not have FIF income under s CQ 5(1) as the c ircumstances in s CQ 5(1)(d) or s CQ 5(1)(e), as relevant, do not apply. The distribution from the US LLC to the New Zealand investor will be a dividend and therefore income under s CD 1. The New Zealand investor may reduce the amount of their dividend derived from the US LLC under s CD 18 to take into account US federal income tax paid o n t heir partnership income. The amount of the reduction is calculated using t he formula in s CD 18(2). This formula takes into account the total federal income \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 4 of 64 tax paid on the US LLC interest since acquiring it, any refund, and the amounts of such tax that have already reduced other dividends of the New Zealand i nvestor in accordance with s CD 18. The New Zealand investor cannot claim a New Zealand foreign tax credit (under ss LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1) or the NZ–US DTA) for US federal income tax paid on partnership income against their New Zealand tax liability on dividends derived from the US LLC. The period for which this Ruling applies | Ko te wā i pāngia e tēnei Whakataunga This Ruling will apply for the period beginning 26 June 2023 and ending 5 years from that date. This Ruling is signed by me on 24 July 2023. Rhonda Gregory Senior Tax Counsel, Tax Counsel Office | Rōia Tāke, Te Tari Tohutohu Tāke \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 5 of 64 Public Ruling BR Pub 23/10 : Income tax – Foreign investment fund income and dividends derived by a New Zealand resident investor in a United States limited liability company This is a public ruling made under s 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation laws | Ture tāke All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 (the Act) unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of sections CD 1, CD 3, CD 18, CD 36, CQ 4, CQ 5, CQ 6, CX 57B, EX 1, EX 28, EX 29, EX 44, EX 51, EX 59(2), LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1), and the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies | Te Whakaritenga i pāngia e tēnei Whakataunga The Arrangement is as follows: A New Zealand investor is one of the members of a United States limited liability company (US LLC) that has not elected to be taxed as a corporation in the US. The US LLC investment is an attributing foreign investment fund (FIF) interest a s d escribed in s EX 29 for the New Zealand investor. Where the New Zealand investor is a natural person who is not a transitiona l r esident, or a trustee who meets the requirements of s CQ 5(5), the total cost of all of their attributing interests in FIFs throughout the year is greater than $50,000, or they have opted in to the FIF rules under s CQ 5(1)(d)(ii) or (iii) or s CQ 5(1)(e)(ii) or (iii). The New Zealand investor can adopt and chooses to adopt one of the following FIF income calculation methods subject to any limitations under s EX 44(2): t he f air dividend rate, comparative value, cost method or deemed rate of return. The US LLC makes a distribution to the New Zealand investor. The US LLC withholds US federal income tax and pays it on the New Zealand investor’s partnership income on the investor’s behalf. No US federal income tax is payable on the distribution from the US LLC to the New Zealand investor. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 6 of 64 The US LLC’s operating agreement provides that the Managing Members have t he power to make distributions to members of the US LLC in their sole discretion. All amounts are expressed in New Zealand dollars. For the purposes of this Ruling, the term: “d istribution” means a member’s share of the US LLC’s net profit that is allocated and credited to their capital account and that the Managing Members have r esolved to be distributed to a member; “d ividend” means a dividend as defined in s CD 3; “FIF” means a FIF as defined in s EX 28; “Managing Members” means the members of the US LLC who are authorised to act on behalf of the US LLC in carrying on the US LLC’s business; “member” means a person who has an ownership interest in a US LLC; “New Zealand – United States Double Tax Agreement (NZ–US DTA)” means the agreement under the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983; “p artnership income” means a member’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income that is treated as their partnership income for US federal income tax purposes; and “US LLC” means a limited liability company formed under state law in the US and classified as a partnership for US federal income tax purposes that is not treated as tax resident in New Zealand. For the avoidance of doubt, the Arrangement does not include arrangements where subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement. How the taxation laws apply to the Arrangement | Ko te pānga o ngā ture tāke ki te Whakaritenga The taxation laws apply to the Arrangement as follows: The New Zealand investor will be subject to tax on their FIF income as calculated by applying one of the FIF calculation methods available to them (the fair dividend rate, comparative value, cost method or deemed rate of return) under ss CQ 4, CQ 5 and EX 44. If the New Zealand investor is able to use the comparative value method, they may deduct US federal income tax paid in the income year on the partnershi p income as a cost under s EX 51(6)(b), when calculating their FIF income under the f ormula in s EX 51(1). The amount is also a gain under s EX 51(4) and a reductio n \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 7 of 64 in the closing value under s EX 51(3) in the formula. The overall net result is a reduction in FIF income as calculated under s EX 51(1) by the amount of the US federal income tax paid. Any amount derived by the New Zealand investor from their interest in the FIF (other than FIF income) is excluded income under ss EX 59(2) and CX 57B. A distribution the US LLC pays to the New Zealand investor is not treated as a dividend for New Zealand tax purposes under s CD 36. Section CD 18 does not apply because the distribution from the US LLC to t he N ew Zealand investor is deemed not to be a dividend under s CD 36. The New Zealand investor cannot claim a New Zealand foreign tax credit (unde r s s LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1) or the NZ–US DTA) for US federal income tax paid on partnership income against their New Zealand tax liability on FIF income. The period for which this Ruling applies | Ko te wā i pāngia e tēnei Whakataunga This Ruling will apply for the period beginning 26 June 2023 and ending 5 years from that date. This Ruling is signed by me on 24 July 2023. Rhonda Gregory Senior Tax Counsel, Tax Counsel Office | Rōia Tāke, Te Tari Tohutohu Tāke \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 8 of 64 Public Ruling BR Pub 23/11: Income tax – Attributed foreign investment fund income and dividends derived by a New Zealand resident investor in a United States limited liability company This is a public ruling made under s 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation laws | Ture tāke All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 (the Act) unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of ss CD 1, CD 3, CD 18, CQ 4, CQ 5, CQ 6, CW 9, EX 1, EX 28, EX 29, EX 44(1)(b), EX 50, LK 1(1)(d), OE 1(2) and OE 20, and the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies | Te Whakaritenga i pāngia e tēnei Whakataunga The Arrangement is as follows: A New Zealand investor is one of the members of a United States limited liability company (US LLC) that has not made an election to be taxed as a corporation in the US. The US LLC investment is an attributing foreign investment fund (FIF) interest a s d escribed in s EX 29 for the New Zealand investor. Where the New Zealand investor is a natural person who is not a transitiona l r esident, or a trustee who meets the requirements of s CQ 5(5), the total cost of their attributing interests in FIFs throughout the year is greater than $50,000, or they have opted in to the FIF rules under s CQ 5(1)(d)(ii) or (iii) or s CQ 5(1)(e)(ii) or (iii). The New Zealand investor can adopt and chooses to adopt the attributable FI F in come method for calculating FIF income. The exemption for a non-attributing active FIF in s CQ 5(1)(c)(xv) does not apply to the New Zealand investor. The US LLC makes a distribution to the New Zealand investor. The US LLC withholds US federal income tax and pays it on the New Zealand investor’s partnership income on the investor’s behalf. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 9 of 64 No US federal income tax is payable on the distribution from the US LLC to the New Zealand investor. The US LLC’s operating agreement provides that the Managing Members ha ve t he power to make distributions to members of the US LLC in their sole discretion. All amounts are expressed in New Zealand dollars. This Ruling does not consider the tax implications of any indirect FIF interests held by a New Zealand investor via their interest in the US LLC. For the purposes of this Ruling, the term: “distribution” means a member’s share of the US LLC’s net profit that is allocated and credited to their capital account and that the Managing Members hav e r esolved to be distributed to a member; “d ividend” means a dividend as defined in s CD 3; “FIF” means a FIF as defined in s EX 28; “Managing Members” means the members of the US LLC who are authorised to act on behalf of the US LLC in carrying on the US LLC’s business; “member” means a person who has an ownership interest in a US LLC; “New Zealand – United States Double Tax Agreement (NZ–US DTA)” means the agreement under the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983; “p artnership income” means a member’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income that is treated as their partnership income for US federal income tax purposes; and “US LLC” means a limited liability company formed under state law in the US and classified as a partnership for US federal income tax purposes that is not treated as tax resident in New Zealand. For the avoidance of doubt, the Arrangement does not include arrangements where subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement. How the taxation laws apply to the Arrangement | Ko te pānga o ngā ture tāke ki te Whakaritenga The taxation laws apply to the Arrangement as follows: The New Zealand investor will be subject to New Zealand tax on the attribute d i ncome from their interest in the FIF under ss CQ 4, CQ 5, CQ 6, EX 44(1)(b) and EX 50. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 10 of 64 US federal income tax paid for the New Zealand investor on their partnership i ncome is creditable against the New Zealand investor’s FIF attributed income tax liability under s LK 1(1)(d). However, this is only to the extent that it does no t ex ceed the New Zealand tax payable on the FIF attributed income and the tax credit only relates to foreign tax paid in relation to income that is attributed FIF income. The distribution from the US LLC to the New Zealand investor will be a dividend and therefore income under s CD 1. Where the New Zealand investor is a company, any dividends it derives from a f oreign company are exempt income under s CW 9 unless subs (2) or (3) o f s CW 9 applies. Where the New Zealand investor is a natural person, they may reduce their dividend income under s CD 1 by the amount of the US federal income tax paid on their partnership income under s CD 18. The amount of the reduction is calculated using the formula in s CD 18(2). This formula takes into account the total federal income tax paid on the US LLC interest since acquiring it, any refund, and the amounts of such tax that have already reduced other dividends of t he N ew Zealand investor in accordance with s CD 18. An individual New Zealand investor may choose to be a branch equivalent tax account person under s OE 1(2). If the individual investor has a New Zealand tax liability on their attributed FIF income (after claiming foreign tax credits), then t he i ndividual investor may claim a branch equivalent tax account tax credit (for t he N ew Zealand tax they have paid on their attributed FIF income) against the New Zealand tax liability on the reduced dividend (net of foreign tax paid through the application of s CD 18) under s OE 20. The period for which this Ruling applies | Ko te wā i pāngia e tēnei Whakataunga This Ruling will apply for the period beginning 26 June 2023 and ending 5 years from that date. This Ruling is signed by me on 24 July 2023. Rhonda Gregory Senior Tax Counsel, Tax Counsel Office | Rōia Tāke, Te Tari Tohutohu Tāke \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 11 of 64 Public Ruling BR Pub 23/12 : Income tax – Attributed c ontrolled foreign company income and dividends derived by a New Zealand resident investor in a United States limited liability company This is a public ruling made under s 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation laws | Ture tāke All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 (the Act) unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of sections CD 1, CD 3, CD 18, CQ 1, CQ 2, CW 9, EX 1, EX 14, EX 15, EX 16, EX 17, EX 21B, LK 1(1)(d), OE 1(2) and OE 20, and the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies | Te Whakaritenga i pāngia e tēnei Whakataunga The Arrangement is as follows: A New Zealand investor is one of the members of a United States limited liability company (US LLC) that has not elected to be taxed as a corporation in the US an d t heir interest is in a controlled foreign company ( CFC). The New Zealand investor has an income interest of 10% or more in the US LLC under ss EX 14 to EX 17. The CFC is not a non-attributing active CFC under ss CQ 2(1)(h) and EX 21B. Where the New Zealand investor is a natural person, they are not a transitional resident. The US LLC makes a distribution to the New Zealand investor. The US LLC withholds US federal income tax and pays it on the New Zealand investor’s share of partnership income on the investor’s behalf. No US federal income tax is payable on the distribution from the US LLC. The US LLC’s operating agreement provides that the Managing Members ha ve t he power to make distributions to members of the US LLC in their sole discretion. This Ruling does not consider the tax implications of any indirect foreign investment fund (FIF) interests held by a New Zealand investor via their interest in the US LLC. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 12 of 64 For the purposes of this Ruling, the term: “CFC” means a CFC as defined in s EX 1; “d istribution” means a member’s share of the US LLC’s net profit that is allocated and credited to their capital account and that the Managing Members hav e r esolved to be distributed to a member; “d ividend” means a dividend as defined in s CD 3; “FIF” means a FIF as defined in s EX 28; “Managing Members” means the members of the US LLC who are authorised to act on behalf of the US LLC in carrying on the US LLC’s business; “member” means a person who has an ownership interest in a US LLC; “New Zealand – United States Double Tax Agreement (NZ–US DTA)” means the agreement under the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983; “p artnership income” means a member’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income that is treated as their partnership income for US federal income tax purposes; and “US LLC” means a limited liability company formed under state law in the US and classified as a partnership for US federal income tax purposes that is not treated as tax resident in New Zealand. For the avoidance of doubt, the Arrangement does not include arrangements where subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement. How the taxation laws apply to the Arrangement | Ko te pānga o ngā ture tāke ki te Whakaritenga The taxation laws apply to the Arrangement as follows: The New Zealand investor will be subject to New Zealand tax on the attributed i ncome from their interest in the CFC under ss CQ 1 and CQ 2. US federal income tax paid for the New Zealand investor on their partnershi p i ncome is creditable against the New Zealand investor’s CFC attributed incom e t ax liability in terms of s LK 1 (1)(d). However, this is only to the extent that it does not exceed the New Zealand tax payable on the CFC attributed income and t he tax credit only relates to foreign tax paid in relation to income that is attributed C FC income. The distribution from the US LLC to the New Zealand investor will be a dividend and therefore income under s CD 1. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 13 of 64 Where the New Zealand investor is a company, any dividends it derives from a f oreign company are exempt income under s CW 9 unless subs (2) or (3) of s CW 9 applies. Where the New Zealand investor is a natural person, they may reduce their dividend income under s CD 1 by the amount of the US federal income tax paid on their partnership income under s CD 18. The amount of the reduction is calculated using the formula in s CD 18(2). This formula takes into account the total federal income tax paid on the US LLC interest since acquiring it, any refund, and the amounts of such tax that have already reduced other dividends of t he N ew Zealand investor in accordance with s CD 18. An individual New Zealand investor may choose to be a branch equivalent tax account person under s OE 1(2). If the individual investor has a New Zealand tax liability on their attributed CFC income (after claiming foreign tax credits), then t he individual investor may claim a branch equivalent tax account tax credit (for the New Zealand tax they have paid on their attributed CFC income) against t he N ew Zealand tax liability on the reduced dividend (net of foreign tax pai d t hrough the application of s CD 18) under s OE 20. The period for which this Ruling applies | Ko te wā i pāngia e tēnei Whakataunga This Ruling will apply for the period beginning 26 June 2023 and ending 5 years from that date. This Ruling is signed by me on 24 July 2023. Rhonda Gregory Senior Tax Counsel, Tax Counsel Office | Rōia Tāke, Te Tari Tohutohu Tāke \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 14 of 64 Public Ruling BR Pub 23/13 : Income tax – Dividends derived by a New Zealand resident investor in a United States limited liability company that is either a non-attributing active foreign investment fund or a non-attributing active controlled foreign company This is a public ruling made under s 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation laws | Ture tāke All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 (the Act) unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of ss CD 1, CD 3, CD 18, CW 9, CQ 2(1)(h), CQ 5(1)(c)(xv), EX 1, EX 28, EX 50, LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1), and the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies | Te Whakaritenga i pāngia e tēnei Whakataunga The Arrangement is as follows: A New Zealand investor is one of the members of a United States limited liability company (US LLC) that has not elected to be taxed as a corporation in the US an d t heir interest is in a non-attributing active foreign investment fund (FIF) or a non- attributing active controlled foreign company ( CFC). Where the New Zealand investor is a natural person, they are not a transitional resident. The US LLC makes a distribution to the New Zealand investor. The US LLC withholds US federal income tax and pays it on the New Zealand investor’s partnership income on the investor’s behalf. No US federal income tax is payable on the distribution from the US LLC. The US LLC’s operating agreement provides that the Managing Members have t he power to make distributions to members of the US LLC in their sole discretion. This Ruling does not consider the tax implications of any indirect FIF interests held by a New Zealand investor via their interest in the US LLC. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 15 of 64 For the purposes of this Ruling, the term: “CFC” means a CFC as defined in s EX 1; “d istribution” means a member’s share of the US LLC’s net profit that is allocated and credited to their capital account and that the Managing Members hav e r esolved to be distributed to a member; “d ividend” means a dividend as defined in s CD 3; “FIF” means a FIF as defined in s EX 28; “Managing Members” means the members of the US LLC who are authorised to act on behalf of the US LLC in carrying on the US LLC’s business; “member” means a person who has an ownership interest in a US LLC; “New Zealand – United States Double Tax Agreement (NZ–US DTA)” means the agreement under the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983; “n on-attributing active FIF or non-attributing active CFC” means a non-attributin g a ctive FIF interest under ss CQ 5(1)(c)(xv), EX 21B and EX 50, or a non-attributin g a ctive CFC under ss CQ 2(1)(h) and EX 21B; “p artnership income” means a member’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income that is treated as their partnership income for US federal income tax purposes; and “US LLC” means a limited liability company formed under state law in the US and classified as a partnership for US federal income tax purposes that is not treated as tax resident in New Zealand. For the avoidance of doubt, the Arrangement does not include arrangements where subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement. How the taxation laws apply to the Arrangement | Ko te pānga o ngā ture tāke ki te Whakaritenga The taxation laws apply to the Arrangement as follows: The New Zealand investor will not have attributed income for either FIF or CFC purposes under ss CQ 5(1) or CQ 2(1), due to ss CQ 5(1)(c)(xv) or CQ 2(1)(h) respectively. The distribution from the US LLC to the New Zealand investor will be a dividend and therefore income u nder s CD 1. Where the New Zealand investor is a company, any dividends it derives from a f oreign company are exempt income under s CW 9 unless subs (2) or (3) o f s CW 9 applies. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 16 of 64 Where the New Zealand investor is a natural person, they may reduce their dividend income under s CD 1 by the amount of the US federal income tax paid on their partnership income under s CD 18. The amount of the reduction is calculated using the formula in s CD 18(2). This formula takes into account the total federal income tax paid on the US LLC interest since acquiring it, any refund, and the amounts of such tax that have already reduced other dividends of the New Zealand investor in accordance with s CD 18. The New Zealand investor cannot claim a New Zealand foreign tax credit (under ss LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1) or the NZ–US DTA) for US federal income tax on partnership income against their New Zealand tax liability on dividend income derived from the US LLC. As there is no attributed FIF or CFC income for the income year, no branch equivalent tax account credit is available for that year. The period for which this Ruling applies | Ko te wā i pāngia e tēnei Whakataunga This Ruling will apply for the period beginning 26 June 2023 and ending 5 years from that date. This Ruling is signed by me on 24 July 2023. Rhonda Gregory Senior Tax Counsel, Tax Counsel Office | Rōia Tāke, Te Tari Tohutohu Tāke \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 17 of 64 Commentary on Public Ruling | Takinga kōrero o ngā Whakatau Tūmatanui BR Pub 23/09 – 23/13 This commentary is not a legally binding statement. The commentary is intended to help readers understand and apply the conclusions reached in Public Rulings BR Pub 23/09 – 23/13 (the Rulings). Contents | Ihirangi Summary | Whakarāpopoto .................................................................................................................. 18 B ackground | Horopaki.......................................................................................................................... 20 W hat is a US LLC? ..................................................................................................................................... 21 C haracteristics of a US LLC that make it a company for New Zealand tax purposes ............ 23 W hy a US LLC is not a partnership for New Zealand tax purposes............................................ 25 W hy a US LLC is treated for New Zealand tax purposes as deriving the income it earns from the conduct of the US LLC’s business ...................................................................................... 25 H ow a New Zealand resident investor is taxed on income derived from a US LLC ............... 26 W hat a dividend is for New Zealand tax purposes ................................................................ 26 W hen a dividend is derived for New Zealand tax purposes ................................................ 27 W hat a dividend is in the US LLC context ................................................................................. 28 H ow the FIF regime applies to investments in a US LLC....................................................... 29 W here total cost of the investor’s interests in FIFs is $50,000 or less ..................... 31 Wh ere the US LLC is a FIF and the FIF income is calculated by applying the fair dividend rate, comparative value, cost method or deemed rate of return ............ 31 W here the US LLC is a FIF and the investor adopts the AFIM .................................. 33 Wh ere the US LLC is a FIF that is a non-attributing active FIF ................................. 34 H ow the CFC regime applies to investments in a US LLC ..................................................... 35 Wh ere the US LLC is a CFC ................................................................................................. 35 Wh ere the US LLC is a non-attributing active CFC ...................................................... 36 Additional FIF income on indirect FIF interests where the US LLC is a CFC, or a FIF where the investor adopts the AFIM.......................................................................................... 37 W hat foreign taxes a New Zealand investor pays in respect of a US LLC are creditable against their FIF income, CFC income or dividend tax liability ................................................... 37 S ections LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1) – general rule ................................................................................. 37 BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 18 of 64 Section LJ 2(6) and (7) – special rule .......................................................................................... 39 Subpart LK – CFC and FIF income ............................................................................................... 40 H ow s CD 18 applies to investments in a US LLC ............................................................................ 42 Ho w subpart OE (BETA) applies to individual investors in a US LLC ......................................... 44 H ow the NZ–US DTA applies to an investment in a US LLC ........................................................ 45 Article 22 of the NZ–US DTA provides relief where the same income is taxed to the same person in two tax jurisdictions ......................................................................................... 45 A rticle 1(6) of the NZ–US DTA applies to a foreign investment by a New Zealand or US resident through a transparent entity ....................................................................................... 47 O verseas authority .................................................................................................................................. 47 E xamples.................................................................................................................................................... 49 R eferences | Tohutoro............................................................................................................................ 58 A ppendix | Āpititanga ............................................................................................................................ 59 A bout this document | Mō tēnei tuhinga ......................................................................................... 64 Summary | Whakarāpopoto 1.This commentary explains the income tax treatment for a New Zealand investor in a United States limited liability company (US LLC) and the circumstances when a foreign tax credit (FTC) or other relief is available for US federal income tax that they pay on their “distributive share” of the US LLC’s income. This depends on whether the US LLC is a foreign investment fund (FIF) or a controlled foreign company (CFC), and if t he US LLC pays a dividend to the New Zealand investor. 2.By way of background, a US LLC is a hybrid entity 1 formed in the US that has company and partnership characteristics. A US LLC is a company that members form to hol d bus iness assets and conduct a specific business, and provides limited liability to its members. These Rulings focus on US LLCs that are treated as a partnership, where its members are taxed as partners for US federal income tax purposes. 3.For New Zealand tax purposes, a US LLC is a company and is a separate legal entity from its members. As a US LLC owns the business assets and conducts the specific business, the US LLC is treated as deriving the income that it earns from the conduct of that business for New Zealand tax purposes. Although a US LLC has partnershi p 1 US LLCs do not satisfy the definition of a “hybrid entity” for the purposes of the hybrid mismatch rules in subpart FH. While US LLCs may be reverse hybrid entities, the provisions in subpart FH are not expressly relevant in the context of the Rulings. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 19 of 64 characteristics, a US LLC does not meet the New Zealand legal requirements for being taxed as a partnership. 4.The Rulings set out that the income tax treatment for a New Zealand investor in a US LLC can vary d epending on who holds the interest, whether the New Zealand investor’s FIF interests are under the FIF threshold, the choice of calculation method, and whether the US LLC is classified as a FIF, a CFC, or a non-attributing active FIF or CFC. 5.A New Zealand investor is entitled to claim a New Zealand FTC for US federal income ta x they pay and/or “relief” in terms of s CD 18, s EX 51, subpart LK or subpart OE in the three circumstances set out in the Rulings. 6.The first circumstance is where the US LLC is a CFC or a FIF (where the investor chooses to adopt the attributable FIF income method) and the New Zealand investor has attributed CFC or FIF income. The New Zealand investor may claim an FTC under subpart LK for any US federal income tax they pay on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income against their New Zealand tax liability on attributed CFC or FIF income. Where the New Zealand investor is an individual, they may also claim a branch eq uivalent tax account (BETA) tax credit under subpart OE (for New Zealand tax paid on attributed CFC or FIF income) against their tax liability on dividend income. 7.The second circumstance is where the New Zealand investor derives a dividend from the US LLC. The New Zealand investor may reduce the amount of the dividend by any US federal income tax they paid on their distributive share of the US LLC’s incom e und er s CD 18. The New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand tax on t he r educed dividend amount. Where the New Zealand investor is not subject to New Zealand tax on the dividend from the US LLC, the relief under CD 18 does not apply because the dividend is not taxable. This will be the case if the New Zealand investor is a company and the foreign dividends it derives are exempt income under s CW 9 (provided subss (2) and (3) of s CW 9 do not apply), and where the New Zealand investor chooses to adopt one of the following FIF income calculation methods: fair dividend rate, comparative value, cost method or deemed rate of return. 8.The third circumstance is where the New Zealand investor chooses to adopt the comparative value method for their FIF income and includes US federal income tax paid on their distributive share of US LLC income as a cost, a gain, and a reduction of the closing value in the formula in s EX 51(1). 9.A New Zealand investor may also be entitled to relief under the Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983 (NZ–US DTA). However, under the specific facts of the arrangements these Rulings cover, the articles in the NZ–US DTA dealing specifically with relief from double taxation do not apply to provide any relief for dividend income derived from a US LLC. For completeness, we note the NZ–US DTA BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 20 of 64 does not impact on the circumstances for which relief is available under s CD 18, s EX 51, subpart LK or subpart OE in the three circumstances discussed at \[6\] to \[8\]. 10.The Rulings outline when t ax relief is available to individual investors under s CD 18 and subpart OE (as discussed at \[6\] and \[7\]). While this relief may also apply to other investors that are not companies or individuals, the Rulings and commentary do not specifically consider how the taxation laws could apply to such persons. Background | Horopaki 11.BR Pub 23/09 – 23/13 is a reissue of BR Pub 20/01 – 20/05, which expired on 25 June 20 23. The Rulings apply from 26 June 2023 to 25 June 2028. The Commissioner’s view remains unchanged from when BR Pub 20/01 – 20/05 was published. 12.In this commentary, we discuss: 12.1what a US LLC is (from \[14\]); 12.2the characteristics of a US LLC that make it a company for New Zealand tax purposes (from \[24\]); 12.3why a US LLC is not a partnership for New Zealand tax purposes (from \[29\]); 12.4why a US LLC is treated for New Zealand tax purposes as deriving the income that it earns from the conduct of the US LLC’s business (from \[32\]); 12.5how a New Zealand resident investor is taxed on income derived from a US LLC (from \[35\]); 12.6what foreign taxes that a New Zealand investor pays in respect of a US LLC are creditable against the investor’s income (from \[91\]) ; 12.7how s CD 18 a pplies to investments in a US LLC (from \[111\]); 12.8how subpart OE (branch equivalent tax accounts) applies to individual investors in a US LLC (from \[116\]) ; and 12.9the NZ–US DTA in respect of an investment in a US LLC (from \[122\]) . 13.Examples following \[ 136\] outline a range of different circumstances and the tax consequences of each one. An Appendix after the references contains flow chart s s howing how to work out which ruling applies and providing an overview of the tax treatment of income derived. It also includes tables setting out the tax treatment for FIFs and CFCs. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 21 of 64 What is a US LLC? 14.A US LLC is a hybrid legal entity that is a limited liability company but also has characteristics of a partnership. 2 US LLCs are established at the state level under local state law but are similar in structure across the US. 15.US LLCs have four common features: 15.1The US LLC is a separate legal entity from its members. 15.2The US LLC, not its members, conducts the business of the US LLC. 15.3The US LLC, not its members, owns the assets used for carrying on the business of the US LLC. 15.4The US LLC is liable for the debts incurred as a result of carrying on the US LLC’s business. The members have no liability for the liabilities of the US LLC. 16.The operations of a US L LC are generally governed by an operating agreement. Most operating agreements include an explanation of: 16.1each member’s percentage interest in the US LLC represented by their capital account; 16.2the members’ rights and responsibilities; 16.3how the US LLC will be managed; 16.4dissolution procedures; 16.5how profits and losses for financial accounting and tax are to be allocated to each member; and 16.6rules governing what distribution of a member’s share of the US LLC’s profits is to be made in a particular year. 2 US LLCs with two or more members are taxed as partnerships by default unless they elect to be taxed as a corporation. When a US LLC is treated as a partnership, the members are taxed as partners for federal income tax purposes. The allocation of profits or losses of a US LLC must be made in accordance with the US LLC’s limited liability agreement (also known as the US LLC’s operating agreement). See, for example, § 18-503 of the 2014 Delaware Code. The approach to allocating the US LLC’s profits to its members and crediting profits to their capital account is similar to how profits are allocated and accounted for in a partnership. Single-member US LLCs are also taxed on a flow through basis to that member. While the Rulings do not apply to single-member US LLCs, the discussion in this Commentary on the tax outcomes arising could also apply in certain circumstances to single-member LLCs that do not elect to be taxed as a corporation and are taxed with a flow-through treatment. Different outcomes may arise, for example, if the US LLC’s operating agreement contains terms that impact the timing of income derivation. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 22 of 64 17.A US LLC is managed by its members or a manager. A manager may be a group of members (Managing Members) or a third party. 18.Ownership in a US LLC is represented by a membership interest rather than by shares. For this reason, a US LLC’s owners are referred to as members rather tha n s hareholders. 19.Generally, profits are allocated to members in proportion to their membership interests as reflected in their capital accounts. However, the operating agreement may specify profit interests for members that are not based on their capital accounts. This mirro rs pa rtnerships that may include differential profit-sharing arrangements for members to reflect risk and reward. 20.The distributive share of the US LLC’s income on which a member pays US tax is their share of the profits as determined by the operating agreement, adjusted, as necessary, to meet the US tax requirements. As such, it may differ from a proportional share of the net accounting income or the specified profit share, as the case may be. 21.A member’s capital account is essentially a measure of a member’s equity in a US LLC. It is generally added to by contributions the member has made and by the member’s share of profits. The capital account is debited by any share of loss and by any distributions taken by the member. 22.For US federal income tax purposes, a US LLC with multiple members is treated and taxed as a partnership unless it elects to be taxed as a corporation. 3 Each member of a US LLC pays tax on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income, which they report on their individual US federal income tax return. 4 The US LLC files a federal partnership r eturn, and the individual member must include their distributive share in their personal federal income tax return. 5 23.A US LLC is required to withhold and pay tax from US-sourced profits allocated to non- resident members on the members’ behalf. Different rates apply depending on t he in come category but commonly 30% applies. Since a member has already paid tax o n t heir share of the US LLC’s taxable income, the member generally pays no further US tax when the US LLC distributes that income to them. However, further US tax would be payable if, for example, the member was distributed an amount in excess of their 3 Taxation of Limited Liability Companies (Publication 3402, Internal Revenue Service, Washington, 2016) provides that a US LLC with at least two members is classified as a partnership for federal income tax purposes. 4 The US Internal Revenue Code, § 701, states that partners, not the partnership, are liable for tax. Each member must file an annual federal income tax return. 5 As the US LLC is classified as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, the US LLC must file a federal partnership return reporting the taxable income of the partnership computed in terms of § 703 of the Internal Revenue Code (US). However, it is the partners, not the partnership, who are liable for income tax: § 701 of the Internal Revenue Code (US). BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 23 of 64 capital account. When a member files their US tax return they may receive a refund of US tax, for example, if the NZ-US DTA reduces the applicable rate on the type of income from that withheld and paid by the US LLC on behalf of the investor. Characteristics of a US LLC that make it a company for New Zealand tax purposes 24.The word “company” is defined in s YA 1. Company (in part): YA 1 Definitions In this Act, unless the context requires otherwise,— ... company— (a)means a body corporate or other entity that has a legal existence separate from that of its members, whether it is incorporated or created in New Zealand or elsewhere: (ab) does not include a partnership: 25.In S Watson and L Taylor (eds), Corporate Law in New Zealand (online ed, Thomson R euters, 2019), the authors note the attributes of the modern New Zealand company i n t he following terms (at \[16.1.2\]): As a species of corporation, the modern company has the following traditional and modern corporate attributes: (1)It has perpetual succession. Until dissolved, a company continues to exist and survives the death of its directors and shareholders. (2)It owns its property. The assets of a company do not belong to the shareholders. The only interest which they have in the assets of the company is indirectly through the medium of their shares. They have no proprietary rights to the underlying assets. Similarly, creditors of the company are not creditors of the shareholders. The creditors must claim against the company, and it is only if the company is in liquidation and there is some evidence of use of the corporat e f orm to evade obligations that claimants may possibly have recourse against the shareholders. (3)As a separate legal person, the company can transact and can sue or be sued in its own name. (4)The liability of the shareholders of a limited company is usually limited. Shareholders are only liable for the amount unpaid on their shares. (5)As a consequence of limited liability, the capital of the company is locked in creating entity partitioning or strong form entity shielding . BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 24 of 64 (6)As the price of incorporation, the company must comply with the formalities of the Act. This requires payment of the registration fee, and the regular filing o f d ocuments and accounts with the Registrar of Companies. These are the costs of transacting business in this particular way. 26.A US LLC meets the definition of a company for New Zealand company and tax law purposes for six main reasons: 26.1A US LLC is a legal entity that comes into existence by the execution of a certificate of formation. 6 It remains in existence until it is dissolved. 26.2The assets used for carrying on the business of the US LLC belong to the US LLC, not its members. 7 26.3The US LLC (not the members) is liable for the debts incurred as a result of carrying on the US LLC’s business. The members have no liability for the liabilities of the US LLC. 26.4The liability of a member of a US LLC is limited to their capital contributions as defined in the US LLC’s operating agreement or, where there is no operating agreement, under state law. 8 26.5A US LLC’s operating agreement generally specifies how a US LLC will be dissolved and how assets will be allocated to members. In a US LLC, initial capital and retained profits are largely locked in. 26.6Fees and formalities need to be paid and satisfied to create a US LLC in the US. 27.Alternatively, a US LLC could be an “other entity that has a legal existence separate f rom that of its members, whether incorporated or created in New Zealand or elsewhere” (s YA 1). 28.A US LLC is an entity that has a separate legal existence from its members and is incorporated or created in the US. 6 For example, § 18-201 of the Limited Liability Company Act (Delaware) provides that a company formed under that Act is a separate legal entity until the cancellation of the company’s certificate of formation. 7 For example, § 18-701 of the Limited Liability Company Act (Delaware) provides that members have no interest in specific property of the LLC. 8 For example, § 18-502 of the Limited Liability Act (Delaware) states that a member is obligated to an LLC to make their promised cash, property or service contributions. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 25 of 64 Why a US LLC is not a partnership for New Zealand tax purposes 29.Section YA 1 provides that a company does not include a partnership. 30.A “partnership” is defined in s YA 1 to mean a group of 2 or more persons who have bet ween themselves the relationship described in s 8 (1) of the Partnership Law Act 2019. Section 8 of the Partnership Law Act 2019 defines a partnership as t he r elationship that “exists between persons carrying on a business in common with a view to profit”. 31.A US LLC is not a partnership for New Zealand tax purposes because it is the US LLC that carries on the business, not the members of the US LLC. Why a US LLC is treated for New Zealand tax purposes as deriving the income it earns from the conduct of the US LLC’s business 32.A company is a separate legal entity and, for New Zealand tax purposes, is a separate ta xpayer from its shareholders. Where a taxpayer owns business assets and carries on a business, then the income from that business is derived by that taxpayer. Section CB 1 states that “an amount that a person derives from a business is income of the person”. 33.Although in the context of the Rulings, the US LLC is not a New Zealand taxpayer, the s cheme of the Act, as far as business owners are concerned, applies to a US LLC. For this reason, for New Zealand tax purposes a US LLC that is a separate legal entity and owns the assets and conducts the business of the US LLC, will be treated as deriving any income it earns from the business activities it conducts (that is, the income will not be treated as derived by the members of the US LLC). 34.Consequently, a New Zealand investor in a US LLC will be subject to New Zealand tax on dividends derived from the US LLC and/or any FIF income or attributed CFC income, where the US LLC is a FIF or a CFC. The New Zealand income tax consequences for a New Zealand investor in a US LLC are discussed next. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 26 of 64 How a New Zealand resident investor is taxed on income derived from a US LLC 35.A New Zealand investor in a US LLC may be subject to New Zealand tax on dividends derived from the US LLC and/or any FIF income or attributed CFC income, where th e US L LC is a FIF or a CF C. 36.In the following paragraphs, we discuss: 36.1what a dividend is for New Zealand tax purposes (from \[37\]); 36.2when a dividend is derived for New Zealand tax purposes (from \[42\]); 36.3what a dividend is in the US LLC context (from \[44\]); 36.4how the FIF regime applies to investments in a US LLC (from \[53\]); and 36.5how the CFC regime applies to investments in a US LLC (from \[80\]). What a dividend is for New Zealand tax purposes 37.Section CD 1 (1) states that a “dividend derived by a person is income of the person”. Section CD 3 provides that ss CD 4 to CD 20 define what a dividend is. 38.Section CD 4(1) provides: CD 4 Transfers of company value generally Transfers of company value from company (1)A transfer of company value from a company to a person is a dividend if— (a)the cause of the transfer is a shareholding in the company, as described in section CD 6; and (b)none of the exclusions in sections CD 22 to CD 37 applies to the transfer. 39.Section CD 5(1) provides: BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 27 of 64 CD 5 What is a transfer of company value? General test (1)A transfer of company value from a company to a person occurs when— (a)the company provides money or money’s worth to the person; and (b)if the person provides any money or money’s worth to the company under the same arrangement, the market value of what the company provides is more than the market value of what the person provides. 40.Section CD 6(1) expands on s CD 5(1): CD 6 When is a transfer caused by a shareholding relationship? General test (1)A transfer of company value from a company to a person (the recipient) is caused by a shareholding in the company if— (a)the recipient at any relevant time— (i)holds shares in the company; or (ii)is associated with a shareholder; and (iii)\[Repealed\] (b)the company makes the transfer because of that shareholding of the relevant shareholder. 41.In summary, a dividend is a transfer of company value (the provision of money or money’s worth) to a person from a company where that transfer in value is because of that person’s shareholding (for example, the payment of a dividend to a shareholder i n a publicly held company). When a dividend is derived for New Zealand tax purposes 42.A dividend is not income of a person unless it is also derived by that person for New Zealand tax purposes. A dividend is derived when the income is credited to a t axpayer’s account or in some other way dealt with in their interest or on their behalf, regardless of whether the New Zealand investor is a cash-basis or an accruals-basi s ta xpayer, even if it is not treated as derived by them under common law: s BD 3(4). 43.The arrangements to which these Rulings apply assume that the only dividends derived from a US LLC are cash dividends (a dividend other than a non-cash dividend). Section CD 1(2) confirms that income from cash dividends is allocated to the income BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 28 of 64 year it is received. This includes where the dividend is credited to the balance of the person’s current or other account with the entity. What a dividend is in the US LLC context 44.A US LLC’s operating agreement will specify how the annual net accounting profits or losses of the US LLC are allocated to its members and any profit-sharing arrangements that depart from a member’s percentage ownership interest. 9 Generally, a proportional share of net profits or losses or the specified profit share are credited or debited to a member’s capital account, and any subsequent distribution is debited to the member’s capital account. 45.A US LLC’s operating agreement will also contain rules for when amounts in a member’s capital account will be distributed or held in reserve to meet expected or contingent liabilities. 46.The allocation and crediting to a member’s capital account of the member’s share of the US LLC’s profits is a “dividend” as defined in ss CD 4 and CD 5 for New Zealand tax purposes, as it is a transfer of value (the provision of money or money’s worth) by t he US L LC to a member and the cause of transfer is the member’s “shareholding” in t he US L LC. 47.A dividend will be derived by a member when the member has a right to access their share of profits credited to their capital account. This will commonly coincide with t he M anaging Members of the US LLC (or another person authorised to make that decision) resolving to distribute funds to a member and when the funds are placed outside the control of the Managing Members. 48.The time when funds are placed outside the control of the Managing Members depends on the rules relating to distributions in a particular US LLC’s operating agreement. For example, where distributions to a member from the member’s capital account are at the sole discretion of the Managing Members (or those authorised to make the decision), then the dividend will be derived by a member at the time t he Managing Members resolve to make a distribution to a member and the member can a ccess the funds. In these circumstances, the Managing Members have formally parted with control of the funds, and the member can access those funds as they wish. 49.The timing is different where a member of a US LLC is able to withdraw their share of the US LLC’s profits from their capital account (subject to cash being available) becaus e 9 Where there is no term in the operating agreement or no operating agreement exists, then, generally, the US state law on which the US LLC was created will contain a default rule for the allocation of accounting profits or losses to its members. For example, § 18-503 of the 2014 Delaware Code provides that in the absence of a term in the operating agreement, profits or losses should be allocated on the basis of the agreed value of the contributions made by each member. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 29 of 64 the US LLC’s operating agreement provides for mandatory distributions. In this case, the member will derive the dividend for New Zealand tax purposes at the time of crediting to their capital account. Example 2 and Example 3 (following \[136\]) explain the practical effects of this difference. 50.The Commissioner’s approach is consistent with the High Court decision in CI R v A lbany Food Warehouse (2009) 24 NZTC 23,532. The court in Albany was required to consider when amounts credited to a shareholder’s current account should be treated as paid to them for New Zealand tax purposes. The court concluded the amount was paid if it was placed outside the directors’ control as a result of the directors’ resolutio n d eclaring the dividend and crediting the dividend to the shareholder’s current account. The court distinguished the facts of Albany from those in Alliance Group Ltd v CIR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,066, where the High Court had concluded that a payment had no t ha ppened at the time of crediting to the account of the taxpayer, because the taxpayer did not have the right to draw on the funds in the account. 51.The Rulings assume that distributions from a member’s capital account are at the sole d iscretion of the Managing Members, and that a member will be able to access funds in their capital account only once the Managing Members have resolved to distribut e t he funds. In such circumstances, a dividend will be derived for New Zealand tax purposes by a member at the time of distribution to that member. 52.The circumstances, and how a dividend derived by a New Zealand investor in a US LLC will be taxed, depends also on whether the US LLC is a FIF or a CFC. The application of the FIF and CFC rules, New Zealand’s FTC rules and s CD 18 are discussed next. How the FIF regime applies to investments in a US LLC 53.An investment in a US LLC by a New Zealand investor will be an investment in a FIF (unless it is a CFC in which the investor’s income interest is 10% or more) and the FIF rules will apply. 54.Section EX 28 defines a FIF as including a “foreign company”. As discussed at \[24\], s YA 1 defines a “company” to include a body corporate or other entity that has a legal existence separate from its members, whether incorporated or created in New Zealand or elsewhere. Section YA 1 in turn defines a “foreign company” as a company that is not resident in New Zealand. A US LLC is a company for New Zealand tax purposes, and it is assumed that for the purposes of these Rulings the US LLC is not tax residen t i n New Zealand. 55.A New Zealand investor in a US LLC that is a FIF will be subject to tax on FIF income if they hold an “attributing interest” in the FIF as described in s EX 29 and none of the FIF exemptions in ss EX 31 to EX 43 applies. One category of attributing interest that is relevant to an interest in a US LLC is a direct income interest as described in s EX 30(1): BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 30 of 64 EX 30 Direct income interests in FIFs Categories of direct income interest (1)A person has a direct income interest in a foreign company at any time if they hold— (a)any of the shares in the foreign company: (b)any of the shareholder decision-making rights for the company: (c)a right to receive, or to apply, any of the income of the company for the accounting period in which the time falls: (d)a right to receive, or to apply, any of the value of the net assets of the company, if they are distributed. 56.Shares in a foreign company are a direct income interest: s EX 30(1)(a). A “share” is d efined in s YA 1 to “include any interest in the capital of a company”. A member’s ownership in a US LLC is represented by their membership interest in the LLC (generally in proportion to their capital contributions to the LLC) rather than shares. A member’s capital account generally includes initial capital, any additional capital and the allocation of the net accounting profits or losses of the US LLC to its members less distributions made. A member’s interest of a US L LC in their capital account is considered an “interest in the capital of the company” and is a “share” for New Zealand tax purposes. 57.A right to receive, or to apply, any of the income of a foreign company for an a ccounting period in which the time falls is also a direct income interest: s EX 30(1)(c). A US LLC operating agreement may specify a profit interest of each member. In thes e c ircumstances, the percentage of a US LLC’s profits allocated to a member’s capita l a ccount is based on the profit interest specified in the operating agreement rather than based on the member’s capital interest that is reflected by their capital account balance relative to the total capital of the US LLC. A member’s profit interest in a US LLC is considered a “right to receive, or to apply, any of the income of a foreig n c ompany for an accounting period in which the time falls” for New Zealand tax purposes. 58.In summary, a member’s interest or profit interest in a US LLC can be a direct income i nterest, so is an attributing interest in a FIF. In these circumstances, a New Zealand investor who is a member of a US LLC will be subject to tax on FIF income (subject to exemptions). It is assumed for the purposes of the Rulings that none of the FIF exemptions in ss EX 31 to EX 43 applies ( unless it is a CFC in which the investor’s income interest is 10% or more, where the CFC rules will apply instead). Similarly, it is assumed that the member is not a transitional resident who is not taxed i n N ew Zealand on certain foreign-sourced income. 59.The FIF rules apply to the following arrangements, as set out in the Rulings. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 31 of 64 Where total cost of the investor’s interests in FIFs is $50,000 or less 60.A natural person and trustees for a limited variety of trusts holding an interest in a FIF w ill not have FIF income if the cost of the FIF interests they hold does not exceed $50,000 at any time in a year: s CQ 5(1)(d) and (e) respectively. 10 This assumes the per son has not opted to include FIF income despite their FIF interests being less tha n t he threshold. The New Zealand investor will be taxed on only the actual dividends derived from the US LLC (and from any other FIF interests they hold) and does not have FIF income under s CQ 5(1) where the circumstances in s CQ 5(1)(d) and (e) do not apply. 61.Section CD 18 applies to reduce the amount of a dividend derived from the US LLC to take into account US federal income tax paid by the New Zealand investor. T he a mount of the reduction is calculated using the formula in s CD 18(2). This formula requires factoring in any prior reductions to other dividends for US federal tax in accordance with s CD 18 since inception of the investment in the US LLC. This is explained in more detail from \[111\]. 62.No FTCs are available to be claimed against the New Zealand tax on any dividend d erived from the US LLC because no US tax is paid at source on the distributions. 63.A New Zealand investor cannot claim a New Zealand FTC (under ss LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1) or the NZ–US DTA) for US federal income tax on “partnership” income against their New Zealand tax liability on dividend income derived from the US LLC. This is becaus e t he US federal income tax paid on the New Zealand investor’s distributive share is not paid on the dividend distribution from the US LLC. However, the s CD 18 reduction has a similar overall effect, albeit as a different way of recognising the US tax paid by t he N ew Zealand investor. Example 2 and Example 3 ( following \[ 136\]) illustrate how this works in practice. Where the US LLC is a FIF and the FIF income is calculated by applying the fair dividend rate, comparative value, cost method or deemed rate of return 64.Where the $50,000 FIF “exemption” does not apply, a New Zealand investor who has an attributing interest must pay New Zealand tax on their FIF income. Subject to any 10 If the person is a trustee, they must also meet the requirements of s CQ 5(5), which broadly restrict eligibility to testamentary trusts of a person within 5 years of death, certain court-ordered trusts and trusts settled by the Accident Compensation Corporation. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 32 of 64 limitations under s EX 44(2), a New Zealand investor may choose one of the following five methods for calculating FIF income: 11 64.1fair dividend rate (FDR); 64.2comparative value (CV); 64.3cost method (CM); 64.4deemed rate of return (DRR); and 64.5attributable FIF income method (AFIM – covered in the next section). 65.Where a New Zealand investor in a US LLC chooses to adopt the FDR, CV, CM or DRR FI F income calculation methods, the resulting amount from applying that method is FIF income. Any FIF income calculated under the FDR, CV, CM or DRR calculation methods is a substitute for any actual income derived by a New Zealand investor in the FIF. To avoid double taxation, any actual income derived by a New Zealand investor from a FIF (for example, dividends) who chooses to adopt the FDR, CV, CM or DRR calculation method is excluded income under ss EX 59(2) and CX 57B (that is, it is not assessable income). 66.Additionally, s CD 36 provides that where a person adopts the FDR, CV, CM or DRR calculation method, any actual dividends derived from the FIF are “not a dividend”. Section CD 36(1) state s: CD 36 Foreign investment fund income Amount not dividend (1)An amount paid by a company to a person is not a dividend if, — (a)at the time the person derives the amount, the person’s interest in the company is an attributing interest, or would have been if the company had not been liquidated; and (b)the person calculates their foreign investment fund (FIF) income or loss in relation to the interest and the period in which the amount is paid under— (i)the comparative value method: (ii)the deemed rate of return method: (iii)the cost method: (iv)the fair dividend rate method; and 11 The Rulings do not consider the branch equivalent and accounting profits method that were available for use for income years beginning on or before 30 June 2011. In choosing a calculation method, New Zealand investors should also consider any data requirements for the calculation, including practicalities around determining the market value of their interests. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 33 of 64 (c)\[Repealed\] (d)the amount is excluded income under section CX 57B (Amounts derived during periods covered by calculation methods). 67.As s CD 36 excludes an amount derived from a foreign company from being a dividend, s CD 18 does not apply to a New Zealand investor in a FIF who adopts t he FD R, CV, CM or DRR calculation method. Section CD 18 provides relief for New Zealand investors in foreign hybrid entities by allowing the amount of a dividen d t o be reduced for foreign tax paid; s CD 18 cannot apply if there is no dividend (whic h i s the effect of s CD 36). 68.Also, a New Zealand investor cannot claim a New Zealand FTC (under subpart LJ or the NZ– US DTA) for US federal income tax on their distributive share against their New Zealand tax liability on FIF income. This is because the US federal income tax paid on the New Zealand investor’s distributive share is not foreign tax paid on FIF income. 69.For a detailed example, see Example 4 ( following \[136\]). 70.However, relief is available for US federal income tax paid on a New Zealand investor’s distributive share if that investor has chosen to adopt the CV method to calculate their FIF income. Section EX 51(1) provides a formula for calculating CV income. A New Zealand investor may deduct US federal income tax paid in the income year on t he pa rtnership income as a “cost” under s EX 51(6)(b), when calculating their FIF incom e under the formula in s EX 51(1). The amount is also a “gain” under s EX 51(4) and a reduction in the “closing value” under s EX 51(3) in the formula. The overall net result is a reduction in FIF income as calculated under s EX 51(1) by the amount of the US federal income tax paid. Where the US LLC is a FIF and the investor adopts the AFIM 71.In general terms, a New Zealand investor in a FIF may choose to adopt the AFIM for calculating their FIF income, provided the New Zealand investor can give t he C ommissioner (if requested) sufficient information to enable the Commissioner to check the calculations required by s EX 50; and where: 71.1 the FIF is a foreign company and the New Zealand investor: 71.1.1 has an income interest of 10% or more in the FIF; and 71.1.2 is not a portfolio investment entity; or 71.2 the FIF is a CFC that does not have a readily available market value except one calculated by independent valuation and certain other conditions apply: s EX 46(3)(b). BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 34 of 64 72.A New Zealand investor will, generally, be subject to tax on any dividends derived from the FIF, and any FIF income calculated by applying the AFIM ( unless it is a non- attributing active FIF as discussed below). 73.The New Zealand investor is taxed on their share of the FIF’s income under ss CQ 4, CQ 5, CQ 6, EX 44(1)(b) and EX 50. 74.US federal income tax paid by the New Zealand investor on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income is creditable against the New Z ealand investor’s income tax liability on attributed FIF income: s LK 1(1)(d). \[Note that this tax credit is only available to the extent it does not exceed the New Zealand tax payable on the FIF attributed income and it only relates to foreign tax paid in relation to income that is attributed FIF income.\] 75.A distribution from the US LLC is a dividend and will therefore be income under s CD 1 fo r New Zealand tax purposes. The New Zealand tax consequences of the dividend distribution are as follows: 75.1 Where the New Zealand investor is a company, any dividends derived by a company from a foreign company are exempt income under s CW 9 provided the exclusions in s CW 9(2) and (3) do not apply. No FTCs are claimable. 75.2 Where the New Zealand investor is an individual, they may reduce the amount of the dividend they derive from the US LLC by the amount of US federal income tax they paid on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income: s CD 18. The New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand tax on the reduced dividend. 75.3 An individual New Zealand investor may choose to be a branch equivalent tax account (BETA) person under s OE 1(2). If the individual investor has a net New Zealand tax liability on their attributed FIF income (after claiming FTC), then the individual investor can claim a BETA tax credit (for the New Zealand tax they have paid on their attributed FIF income) against the New Zealand tax liability on the reduced dividend (net of foreign tax paid through the application of s CD 18) under s OE 20. 76.For a detailed example, see Example 5 ( following \[ 136\]). Where the US LLC is a FIF that is a non-attributing active FIF 77.Where a New Zealand investor applies the AFIM, they may also apply the active bus iness exemption. In simple terms, a FIF will satisfy the active business exemptio n w here it has attributable income (income from “passive” sources) that is less than 5% of the FIF’s gross income. Where the active exemption applies, the New Zealand investor in the FIF is treated as having an exemption for holding a non-attributin g BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 35 of 64 active FIF interest: s CQ 5(1)(c)(xv). In these circumstances, an individual New Zealand investor will be taxed in New Zealand only on any dividend derived from the US LLC. The New Zealand investor may reduce the amount of the dividend derived from the US LLC by the amount of any US federal income tax paid on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income: s CD 18. The New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand tax on the reduced dividend. 78.On the other hand, a New Zealand company investor is not subject to New Zealand tax because dividends from a foreign company are exempt income under s CW 9, provided the exclusions in s CW 9(2) and (3) do not apply. 79.For a detailed example, see Example 7 ( following \[ 136\]). How the CFC regime applies to investments in a US LLC 80.A CFC is defined in the Act as a foreign company controlled by New Zealand residents. A US LLC is a company and will be a “foreign company”, provided it is not resident i n N ew Zealand. 81.The US LLC will be “controlled” by New Zealand residents if, for example, a group of five or fewer New Zealand residents has a total control interest of more than 50% i n a ny one of the control interest categories. 82.In general terms, a New Zealand investor will have attributed CFC income in a US LLC (which is a CFC) if they have an income interest in the CFC of 10% or more, the CFC has “net attributable CFC income”, and the CFC is not a non-attributing active CFC. Where the US LLC is a CFC 83.In summary, the New Zealand tax consequences for a US LLC that is a CFC are as f ollows (which are the same as the tax consequences for a New Zealand investor in a FIF where the investor chooses to adopt the AFIM): 83.1 The New Zealand investor pays New Zealand tax on their share of attributed CFC income under ss CQ 1 and CQ 2. 83.2 Any US federal income tax paid by the New Zealand investor on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income is creditable against their CFC attributed income tax liability: s LK 1(1)(d). Note that this tax credit is available only to the extent it does not exceed the New Zealand tax payable on the CFC attributed income and it only relates to foreign tax paid in relation to income that is attributed CFC income. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 36 of 64 83.3 A distribution from the US LLC is a dividend and will therefore be income under s CD 1 for New Zealand tax purposes. The New Zealand tax consequences of the dividend distribution are as follows: 83.3.1 Where the New Zealand investor is a company, any dividends derived by the company from a foreign company are exempt income under s CW 9, provided the exclusions in s CW 9(2) and (3) do not apply. No FTCs are claimable. 83.3.2 Where the investor is an individual, they may reduce the amount of the dividend they derived from the US LLC by the amount of US federal income tax they paid on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income: s CD 18. The New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand tax on the reduced dividend. 83.3.3 An individual investor can choose to be a BETA person under s OE 1(2). If the individual investor has a net New Zealand tax liability on their attributed CFC income (after claiming FTC), then the individual investor can claim a BETA tax credit (for the New Zealand tax they have paid on their attributed CFC income) against the New Zealand tax liability on the reduced dividend (net of foreign tax paid through the application of s CD 18) under s OE 20. 84.For a detailed example, see Example 6 ( following \[ 136\]). Where the US LLC is a non-attributing active CFC 85.Where the US LLC is a non-attributing active CFC, then the tax consequences are the s ame as described at \[77\] to \[79\] for a non-attributing active FIF. 86.There is no attributed income from the CFC under s CQ 2(1)(h). 87.A dividend is income under s CD 1. A New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand tax only on dividends derived from the US LLC as follows: 87.1 Where the investor is a company, any dividends derived by the company from a foreign company are exempt income under s CW 9, provided the exclusions in s CW 9(2) and (3) do not apply. No FTCs are claimable. 87.2 Where the investor is an individual, they may reduce the amount of the dividend they derived from the US LLC by the amount of US federal income tax they paid on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income: s CD 18. The New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand tax on the reduced dividend. 88.For a detailed example, see Example 7 ( following \[136\]). BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 37 of 64 Additional FIF income on indirect FIF interests where the US LLC is a CFC, or a FIF where the investor adopts the AFIM 89.For completeness, where a US LLC holds FIF interests and the US LLC is a CFC, or a FIF w here the AFIM is adopted, additional FIF income (or loss) may arise for a New Zealand investor under ss EX 58 or EX 50(6). The additional FIF income or loss can aris e r egardless of whether or not the US LLC is a non-attributing active FIF or CFC. 90.The Rulings and commentary do not specifically consider the tax implications of any indirect FIF interests held by a New Zealand investor via their interest in a US LLC. This is because additional FIF income or loss may arise in respect of an indirect FIF interest regardless of whether the interest is held via a US LLC o r not. In other words, the tax implications of such indirect holdings in FIFs are not specific to the taxation of US LLCs and are out of scope of the Rulings and commentary. What foreign taxes a New Zealand investor pays in respect of a US LLC are creditable against their FIF income, CFC income or dividend tax liability 91.Several FTC provisions may apply to a New Zealand investor in a US LLC in this context: 91.1 Sections LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1) set out the general rule for claiming an FTC where f oreign tax has been paid on a New Zealand investor’s foreign-sourced income, which is also subject to New Zealand tax. 91.2 Section LJ 2(6) and (7) sets out a special rule for claiming an FTC where the New Zealand investor adopts the FDR, CV, CM or DRR FIF income calculation method. A New Zealand investor may claim foreign tax paid on actual foreign-sourced dividends against the New Zealand tax liability on the FIF income they derived. 91.3 Section LK 1 sets out the FTC rules that apply to a New Zealand resident investor with attributed income from a CFC or a FIF where they have adopted the AFIM. Sections LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1) – general rule 92.Sections LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1) provide the general rule that a person is entitled to a tax credit for foreign tax paid against their New Zealand income tax liability in relation to foreign-sourced income. These sections also set out how to calculate the New Zealand tax applicable on that foreign-sourced income. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 38 of 64 93.Section LJ 1(1) and (2)(a) provides: LJ 1 What this subpart does When tax credits allowed (1)This subpart provides the rules for dividing assessable income from foreign-sourced amounts into segments and allows a tax credit for foreign income tax paid in relation to a segment of that income. Limited application of rules (2)The rules in this subpart apply only when— (a)a person resident in New Zealand derives assessable income that is sourced from outside New Zealand;... \[Emphasis added\] 94.Section LJ 2(1) to (3) provides: LJ 2 Tax credits for foreign income tax Amount of credit (1)A person described in section LJ 1(2)(a) has a tax credit for a tax year for an amount of foreign income tax paid on a segment of foreign-sourced income, determined as if the segment were the net income of the person for the tax year. The amount of the New Zealand tax payable is calculated under section LJ 5. Limitation on amount of credit (2)The amount of the person’s credit in subsection (1) must not be more than the amount of New Zealand tax payable by the person in relation to the segment calculated under section LJ 5(2), modified as necessary under section LJ 5(4). Amount adjusted (3)The amount of the person’s credit in subsection (1) may be reduced or increased if either section LJ 6 or LJ 7 applies. \[Emphasis added\] 95.Section LJ 4 defines “segment of foreign-sourced income” as “a person has a segment of foreign-sourced income equal to an amount of assessable income derived from 1 foreign country that comes from 1 source or is of 1 nature” \[ original emphasis\]. For example, a dividend derived by a New Zealand investor from a US LLC would be a segment of foreign-sourced income (along with any other dividends derived from t he US) because it is an amount of assessable income they derived from one foreign c ountry (the US) that comes from one source (the US LLC) or is of one nature (a dividend). This is modified by s LJ 2(7) for FIF attributing interests, such that each FIF attributing interest is a separate segment of foreign-sourced income. This means FIF attributing interests from the same country are not aggregated and calculations must be done for each individual interest. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 39 of 64 96.A New Zealand investor may claim an FTC against New Zealand tax payable on that foreign-sourced dividend, for an “amount of foreign tax paid” on that segment of foreign-sourced income. The FTC claimable by the New Zealand investor cannot exceed the New Zealand tax payable in relation to the foreign-sourced dividend: s LJ 2(2). 97.Section LJ 2(1) and (2) does not apply to the arrangements in the Rulings for two reasons. 98.The first reason is that no US tax is paid on the dividend distributions (segment of foreign-sourced income) that are taxed in New Zealand. 99.The second reason is that a New Zealand investor pays US federal income tax on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income. However, this cannot be claimed as an FTC against the New Zealand investor’s dividend income derived from the US LLC, becaus e th at foreign tax is not paid “on” that segment of foreign-sourced income under s LJ 2(1). In other words, as the New Zealand investor’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income is not income derived for New Zealand tax purposes, there is no relevant segment of foreign-sourced income on which to claim an FTC in New Zealand. 100.We consider how the NZ–US DTA applies for US LLC investments from \[ 122\] to \[130\]. Article 22 of the NZ–US DTA operates in essentially the same way as ss LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1) by permitting an FTC for foreign tax paid but only on the same income, for example, a foreign-sourced dividend taxed in New Zealand and in the US. Section LJ 2(6) and (7) – special rule 101.Section LJ 2(6) and (7) provides: When subsection (7) applies (6)Subsection (7) applies to a person who derives an amount from an attributing interest in a FIF when the amount is treated as not being income under section EX 59(2) (Codes: comparative value method, deemed rate of return method, fair dividend rate method, and cost method). Tax credit (7)The person has a tax credit under this subpart for foreign income tax paid on or withheld in relation to the amount. The calculation of the maximum amount of the tax credit is made under section LJ 5(2), modified so that the item segment in the formula is the amount of FIF income from the attributing interest that the person derives in the period referred to in section EX 59(2). 102.Any FIF income calculated under the FDR, CV, CM or DRR calculation method is a substitute for actual income derived by a New Zealand investor in the FIF. To avoid BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 40 of 64 double taxation, any actual income derived from a FIF by a New Zealand investor who has chosen to adopt the FDR, CV, CM or DRR calculation method is excluded income under ss EX 59(2) and CX 57B (that is, it is not assessable income). 103.Notwithstanding this “exemption”, the special rule in s LJ 2 (6) and (7) provides that any foreign tax paid on such actual income derived by a New Zealand investor may be c redited against their New Zealand tax liability on FIF income calculated under the FDR, CV, CM or DRR calculation method. For example, if a New Zealand investor derives a foreign-sourced amount that has been subject to foreign tax, then they can claim an FTC under s LJ 2(6) and (7) against their New Zealand tax liability on FIF income calculated under the FDR, CV, CM or DRR calculation method (but not exceeding t he N ew Zealand tax applicable on the FIF income: s LJ 2(2)). 104.However, s LJ 2(6) and (7) does not apply to the distributions from the US LLC in the c ontext of the arrangements in the Rulings, as no US tax is paid on the distributions from the US LLC that are dividends for New Zealand tax purposes. Section LJ 2(6) and (7) a lso does not apply in relation to any US federal income tax paid by a New Zealand investor in a US LLC on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income. That “partnership” income is not income derived by the New Zealand investor for New Zealand tax purposes. Subpart LK – CFC and FIF income 105.Where a person has attributed CFC income or applies the AFIM to their FIF interest, then that person is entitled to an FTC under s LK 1 against their New Zealand CFC o r F IF income tax liability. 106.Section LK 1(1) provides: LK 1 Tax credits relating to attributed CFC income When tax credits allowed (1)A person who has an amount of attributed CFC income for an income year has a tax credit for the tax year corresponding to the income year equal to the following amounts paid or payable in relation to the attributed CFC income: (a)an amount of income tax paid by the CFC from which the income is derived: (b)an amount of tax withheld and paid on behalf of the CFC from which the income is derived: (c)the amount of foreign income tax paid by the CFC from which the income is derived: (d)the amount of foreign income tax paid by the person in relation to the CFC from which the income is derived: BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 41 of 64 (e)the amount of foreign tax paid, under legislation of another country or territory that is equivalent of the international tax rules, by a foreign company in relation to income derived by the CFC. 107.Section LK 1(1) sets out the rules for claiming FTCs for foreign tax paid or payable by a CFC or a FIF (applying the AFIM), against a person’s New Zealand tax liability on attributed FIF or CFC income. Subpart LK is designed to accommodate timin g m ismatches that can routinely occur between different jurisdictions. Consequently, a per son in New Zealand can claim as a credit tax paid or payable in the US that relates to the CFC or FIF attributed income they derived, even if not paid in the relevant income year in New Zealand. 108.Section 93C of the Tax Administration Act 1994 assists if the amount of the credit c annot be determined before a return is filed. The Commissioner must amend a n a ssessment on request to reflect a credit if the request is made within 4 years from t he end of the relevant income year. It is not possible, however, to claim an FTC under s LK 1 if it relates to attributed income in a different income year. That is, FTCs can only be applied against the person’s income tax liability for the same tax year. Any FTC claimed is limited to an amount that offsets the tax payable in New Zealand on t he a ttributed FIF or CFC income derived as if it were stand-alone income in the relevant year. Any surplus is not refundable but may be carried forward to a subsequent income year under s LK 4 provided the loss carry forward requirements of s LK 5 are met. 109.In ordinary circumstances, the tax is paid by the CFC or FIF (that is, s LK 1(1)(c) applies). Section LK 1(1)(d) is an important exception, as it deals with the scenario where a CFC or a FIF does not itself pay the CFC’s or FIF’s foreign income tax, but another perso n d oes (for example, a New Zealand investor in the CFC or FIF that is a foreign hybrid entity). Section LK 1(1)(d) was introduced to enable a New Zealand investor in a CFC or a FIF (which is a hybrid company or partnership) to claim an FTC for any foreign income tax paid (for example, US federal income tax paid by the New Zealand investor on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income) against their New Zealand ta x li a bility on attributed CFC or FIF income. 110.The effect of s LK 1(1)(d) is that a New Zealand investor in a hybrid entity (for example, a US LLC) that is a CFC or a FIF (applying the AFIM) may claim an FTC for foreign tax that they pay in relation to that CFC or FIF. This is in the same way as a New Zealand investor in a foreign company that is not a hybrid entity and that is also a CFC or a FIF (applying the AFIM) may claim a tax credit for foreign tax that the CFC or FIF pays. The tax credit can be applied against attributed CFC or FIF income (under the AFIM) only. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 42 of 64 How s CD 18 applies to investments in a US LLC 111.Section CD 18 is a special provision that addresses the possible over-taxation of f oreign-sourced dividend income derived by a New Zealand investor from a foreig n hy brid entity. This situation arises where a shareholder pays the foreign tax of t he hy brid entity that, in ordinary circumstances, the hybrid entity would pay, and this reduces the amount available for distribution as a dividend by the entity. Section CD 18 is directed at hybrid entities such as a US LLC, which is a company for New Zealand tax purposes but taxed as a partnership for US tax purposes. Section CD 18 provides: CD 18 Dividend reduced if foreign tax paid on company’s income When this section applies (1)This section applies when a person— (a)derives a dividend from a company that is a foreign company; and (b)has a liability under the laws of a country or territory outside New Zealand for income tax on income of the company corresponding to the liability that the person would have under the laws of New Zealand for income tax on income of the company if the company were a partnership in which the person were a partner; and (c)pays the income tax; and (d)provides to the Commissioner upon request, in the time allowed by the Commissioner, sufficient information to satisfy the Commissioner as to the amount of income tax paid. When this section applies (2)The amount of the dividend is reduced by the greater of zero and the amount calculated using the formula— total tax paid − earlier reductions Definition of items in formula (3)In the formula,— (a)total tax paid is the total amount of income tax on income of the company that the person has paid in the country or territory by the time that the person derives the dividend: (b)earlier reductions is the total amount of reductions under this section that, by the time that the person derives the dividend, have affected other dividends derived by the person from the company. \[Original emphasis\] 112.Section CD 18 works to eliminate the over-taxation of dividends derived by a New Zealand investor in a hybrid entity such as a US LLC, so that the New Zealand BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 43 of 64 investor is treated for New Zealand tax purposes as deriving the same amount of dividend income as a New Zealand investor in an ordinary (that is, non-hybrid) foreign company. This outcome is achieved by allowing a New Zealand investor in a foreign hybrid entity to reduce the amount of a dividend derived from the foreign hybrid entity by any foreign tax that the New Zealand investor pays (for example, as a “partner”) on the foreign hybrid’s income. Note that the provision only permits a reduction for tax actually paid by the time the dividend is derived. Unlike subpart LK, it does not extend to “tax paid or payable” to cover any timing mismatches between New Zealand and the foreign jurisdiction. Also, any refunds of foreign tax received must reduce the amount available as a reduction under s CD 18. A New Zealand investor in a US LLC may receive a refund as a result of filing their required personal tax return in the US. For an illustration of the treatment of a tax refund, see Example 2 ( following \[136\]) . 113.There is a requirement under the formula in s CD 18(2) to reconcile the foreign tax deducted from all dividends derived since inception of the investment in the company. This requirement ensures that only amounts of foreign tax the New Zealand investor has paid but has not already claimed as a reduction are available to reduce t he d ividends from the company that are taxed in New Zealand each year. 114.Example 1 illustrates clearly how s CD 18 applies. Example | Tauira 1 – How s CD 18 applies to eliminate over-taxation of dividends This example assumes the following: An individual New Zealand investor’s interest in a US LLC cost less than $50,000 in a year and the investor does not hold any other interest in FIFs. (T hat is, the New Zealand investor is required to pay tax on only dividends derived from the FIF.) The New Zealand investor’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income for federal income tax purposes is $1,000. The US LLC makes a $700 distribution in that year. The US imposes 30% ($300) federal income tax on the New Zealand investor’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income. The US LLC withholds the tax and pays it on behalf of the New Zealand investor. The US LLC made a distribution to the New Zealand investor in the prior year when the interest in the LLC was first acquired and US federal income tax was paid on that and then used to reduce the dividend derived in the prior year for New Zealand tax purposes. All amounts are expressed in New Zealand dollars. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 44 of 64 New Zealand tax consequences For New Zealand tax purposes, the $700 distribution and $300 US tax paid on the investor’s behalf will both be a dividend. If the full $1,000 is taxed in New Zealand, there would be over-taxation of that dividend from the New Zealand investor’s perspective compared with a dividend paid by an ordinary non-hybrid foreign company, because no recognition is given to the $300 US federal income tax the New Zealand investor paid. In the case of an ordinary non-hybrid foreign company, the US company would pay the US tax of $300, and the dividend paid to the New Zealand investor would be $700 (after US company tax is paid). Section CD 18 achieves its objective by allowing the New Zealand investor to reduce the amount of the dividend that they derive from a foreign hybrid (the US LLC in this case) by the foreign tax that they pay on their distributive share of “partnership” income. In this example, the New Zealand investor is taxed on $700 ($1,000 – $300), which is the same amount they would have been taxed on if the US LLC had been an ordinary US company and paid the $300 company tax on its own income, before distributing the remaining (after tax) amount of $700. The $300 reduction was made after taking into account the total US federal tax paid on the US LLC since the investment began under the formula in s CD 18(2) and the amount of that tax used to reduce the dividend derived in the prior year. 115.In the context of the Rulings, even though it uses a different mechanism than allowing FTCs, s CD 18 provides relief from the cross-jurisdictional taxation of dividends derived by New Zealand investors from a foreign hybrid entity. Section CD 18 reductions ar e a vailable to investors in a US LLC that is a FIF or a CFC, except where the New Zealand investor is either: 115.1 taxed on FIF income calculated applying the FDR, CV, CM or DRR FIF income calculation methods, because the dividend is “exempt” in this case; or 115.2 a New Zealand company where the dividends derived from a foreign company are exempt income under s CW 9 ( assuming the exclusions in s CW 9(2) or (3) do not apply). How subpart OE (BETA) applies to individual investors in a US LLC 116.Section OE 1(2) provides that a natural person resident in New Zealand may choose to be a BETA person and maintain a BETA. These rules apply to an investment in a CFC and a FIF (where the New Zealand investor adopts the AFIM: s OE 5). BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 45 of 64 117.A BETA is available to an individual investor who has a net New Zealand tax liability (after FTCs have been applied) on their attributed CFC or FIF income. Its purpose is to enable such an investor to credit that amount to their BETA and to use this credit to satisfy any New Zealand tax liability payable on dividends derived from the FIF or CFC. 118.A BETA allows an individual investor to claim a tax credit (for tax that they pay on a ttributed CFC or FIF income) against their tax liability on dividend income, similar to the way an investor in a New Zealand resident company claims an imputation credit for underlying tax paid by the company. In both cases, the purpose of the credit is to avoid economic double taxation on the dividend derived by an individual investor. 119.A New Zealand resident company cannot maintain a BETA. However, as dividends it derives from a foreign company are exempt income under s CW 9 (assuming t he ex clusions in s CW 9(2) and (3) do not apply), economic double taxation does not arise. 120.The BETA tax credit is calculated by applying the formula set out in s OE 19. For example, a New Zealand investor may have attributed CFC or FIF income of $10,000 and foreign tax paid relating to that income of $3,000 (30%). Assume that t he N ew Zealand investor’s New Zealand tax liability is $3,300 (33%). The New Zealand investor can satisfy the New Zealand income tax liability by applying FTCs of $3,000 and paying the net tax liability of $300. The net tax paid of $300 can be credited to a person’s BETA and applied against any subsequent New Zealand tax liability on any dividend derived from the CFC or FIF. 121.The New Zealand investor’s right to use BETA tax credits to satisfy an income tax lia bility and the criteria that need to be satisfied for their use are set out in s OE 20. How the NZ–US DTA applies to an investment in a US LLC 122.A double tax agreement can extend the circumstances where two countries agree to double taxation relief beyond their respective domestic tax laws. Two articles in t he NZ– US DTA deal with relief from double taxation (arts 1(6) and 22) and may be r elevant to the Rulings. Here we consider these articles in the context of whether they can provide any taxation relief beyond the applicable New Zealand domestic laws. Article 22 of the NZ–US DTA provides relief where the same income is taxed to the same person in two tax jurisdictions 123.Article 22 of the NZ–US DTA provides (in part): In the case of New Zealand, double taxation shall be avoided as follows: BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 46 of 64 In accordance with, and subject to any provisions of, the law of New Zealand which may from time to time be in force and which relate to the allowance of a credit against New Zealand tax for tax paid in a country outside New Zealand (which shall not affect the general principle hereof), United States tax paid under the law of the United States and consistently with this Convention, whether directly or by deduction, in respect of income derived by a resident of New Zealand arising in the United States (excluding in the case of a dividend, tax paid in respect of the profits out of which the dividend is paid) shall be allowed as a credit against New Zealand tax payable in respect of that income; except that such credit shall not exceed the amount of the tax that would be paid to the United States if the resident were not a United States citizen or a United States company. ... For the purpose of allowing relief from double taxation pursuant to this Article, income shall be deemed to arise as follows: (a)income derived by a resident of the United States which may be taxed in New Zealand in accordance with this Convention shall be deemed to arise in New Zealand; (b)income derived by a resident of New Zealand which may be taxed in the United States in accordance with the Convention (other than income taxed by the United States solely because the beneficial owner is a citizen of the United States or a United States company) shall be deemed to arise in the United States; (c)For purposes of paragraph 3, income beneficially owned by a resident o f N ew Zealand who is a citizen of the United States or a United States company shall be deemed to arise in New Zealand to the extent necessary to give effect to the provisions of this paragraph. \[Emphasis added\] 124.Article 22 applies to US tax paid on the same income derived by a New Zealand resident and arising in the US. That is, art 22 provides relief where the same income is taxed to the same person in two tax jurisdiction s. 125.In the US LLC context, an amount allocated and credited to a member’s capital account and distributed to a New Zealand investor is a dividend derived for New Zealand ta x pur poses and will “arise” in the US. However, in terms of the arrangements in t he R ulings, no US tax is paid at source on this dividend distribution, so no FTC is claimable. The New Zealand investor has paid US federal income tax on their distributive share of the US LLC’s US taxable income on a partnership basis, but that is not US tax paid on the distribution to the New Zealand investor (which is a dividend for New Zealand tax purposes). 126.As such, art 22 does not operate to provide any taxation relief for dividend income derived from US LLCs. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 47 of 64 Article 1(6) of the NZ–US DTA applies to a foreign investment by a New Zealand or US resident through a transparent entity 127.Article 1(6) of the NZ–US DTA deals with transparent entities, stating: An item of income, profit or gain derived through an entity that is fiscally transparent under the laws of either Contracting State shall be considered to be derived by a resident of a State to the extent that the item is treated for purposes of the taxation law of such Contracting State as the income, profit or gain of a resident. 128.Article 1(6) applies to a foreign investment by a New Zealand or US resident through a transparent entity. Income derived through a transparent entity is taxed to a New Zealand or US resident only where that entity is treated as transparent for t he pur poses of New Zealand and US tax law respectively. For example, it applies for a N ew Zealand investor in a partnership established in the US that is also a partnershi p for New Zealand tax purposes. The US partnership is a partnership for New Zealand tax purposes and is transparent for New Zealand tax purposes: s HG 2. In thes e c ircumstances, the New Zealand partner is taxed directly on their share of t he pa rtnership income. 129.In the context of the Rulings, a New Zealand investor in a US LLC derives partnership i ncome under US federal income tax law (which satisfies the first part of art 1(6)), but that partnership income is not treated for the purposes of the taxation law of New Zealand as the income, profit or gain of the New Zealand investor in the US L LC (so the second part of art 1(6) is not satisfied). This is because the US LLC is a company and not a transparent entity for New Zealand tax purposes. 12 130.Article 1(6) does not assist on the facts of the Rulings. Overseas authority 131.The United Kingdom (UK) Supreme Court in Anson v Commissioners for HMRC \[2015\] UKSC 44 considered a dispute involving a UK investor in a Delaware LLC that was taxe d a s a partnership for US income tax purposes. Anson was resident but non-domiciled in the UK for UK tax purposes, meaning he was liable to UK income tax on foreign incom e r emitted to the UK. The dispute revolved around whether Anson was entitled to an 12 This is confirmed in the US Department of the Treasury, Department of the Treasury Technical Explanation of the Protocol Between the United States of America and New Zealand ... signed at Wellington on July 23, 1982 (US Department of the Treasury, Washington, 2008), in an example at 4, last paragraph. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 48 of 64 FTC for US tax he paid on his distributive share of the US LLC’s income against UK tax paid on foreign remitted income from the US LLC. 132.The UK Supreme Court had to consider whether the income on which Anson paid tax in the US was the “same” as the income on which he was liable to tax in the UK for t he pur poses of art 23(2)(a) of the UK–US Double Tax Agreement. The UK Supreme Court considered that answering that question depended on analysing the legal regim e g overning the respective rights of the entity and its members in relation to the profit. 133.Based on the First-tier Tribunal’s findings of fact that Anson was entitled to the share o f the profits allocated to him by the US LLC as they arose, the UK Supreme Court held that it followed that Anson’s “income arising” in the US was his share of the profits, and this was therefore the income liable to tax under UK law to the extent it was remitte d t o the UK. Therefore, Anson qualified for double tax relief under art 23(2)(a) of the UK– US Double Tax Agreement as his liability to tax in the UK was computed by reference to the “same” income as was taxed in the US. 134.The Commissioner does not consider that the decision of the UK S upreme Court in Anson affects the analysis set out in this commentary. To determine how profit or income is to be taxed in New Zealand, the New Zealand legislative scheme requires a n ent ity to be classified for New Zealand tax purposes. Based on the characteristics of a US LLC under US law, the Commissioner considers that a US LLC is a company becaus e the legal characteristics of the US LLC meet the New Zealand tax definition of “company” 13 . Accordingly, the New Zealand legislative scheme treats the US LLC as deriving the income from the conduct of its business (that is, the income is treated as derived by the US LLC, rather than by the members of the US LLC). Consequently, a New Zealand investor in a US LLC will be subject to New Zealand tax on distributions or dividends they derived from the US LLC and/or any FIF income or attributed CFC income, where the US LLC is a FIF or a CFC. 135.Section CD 18 is also an important feature of the scheme of the Act dealing with f oreign hybrid entities. It deals explicitly with company–partnership foreign hybrids (US LLCs in this context) and the over-taxation of foreign source dividend incom e d erived from a foreign hybrid entity. Section CD 18 permits a New Zealand investor i n a foreign hybrid entity to reduce the amount of the dividend they derive from t he f oreign company by the foreign tax that they have paid. Section CD 18 is premised o n t he foreign hybrid entity (US LLC in this context) being a company that derives its own income and pays a dividend to its shareholder (even though it is taxed as a partnershi p i n the foreign tax jurisdiction). 13 In New Zealand, entities and transactions are characterised according to their legal form and not what transaction or entities they most closely resemble: Mills v Dowdall \[1983\] NZLR 154 (CA) at 159. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 49 of 64 Examples 136.The six examples that follow have these common features: 136.1A New Zealand investor (natural person or company) invests in a US LLC and is not the sole shareholder. 136.2The US LLC is a company for New Zealand tax purposes. 136.3The US LLC owns the assets of the business, and the business is conducted by the US LLC rather than by its members. 136.4The US LLC is treated as a partnership in the US, has not made an election to be taxed as a corporation in the US and the New Zealand investor is subject to US federal income tax on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income. 136.5The New Zealand investor’s US federal income tax liability is withheld by the US LLC and paid on behalf of the New Zealand investor. 136.6The New Zealand investor is required to and does file a US tax return, including their distributive share of the US LLC income and tax withheld on their behalf by the US LLC. 136.7The payment of US federal income tax by the US LLC withheld on behalf of a New Zealand investor is treated in the US LLC’s accounts as a distribution to the investor (that is, as a debit to the member’s capital account). 136.8The US LLC’s payment of the member’s US federal income tax on their behalf is a distribution and a dividend for New Zealand tax purposes. 136.9The Managing Members of the US LLC have the power to make distributions in their sole discretion. (Note that this feature does not apply to Example 2.) 136.10No US tax is paid on distributions from the US LLC, which are dividends for New Zealand tax purposes. 136.11The US federal income tax rate is assumed to be 30%. 136.12Where the New Zealand investor is a natural person, it is assumed they have a marginal tax rate of 33%, are not a transitional resident, and have not opted into the FIF rules where the total cost of all FIF interests they hold are $50,000 or less. 136.13 All amounts are expressed in New Zealand dollars. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 50 of 64 Example | Tauira 2 – Individual New Zealand investor’s investment in a US LLC is under the $50,000 FIF threshold and distributions to members are mandatory Circumstances An individual New Zealand investor invests in a US LLC that is a FIF for New Zealand tax purposes. The cost of the individual investor’s attributing interest in FIFs does not exceed $50,000 throughout the year. The New Zealand investor can withdraw amounts from their capital account, representing their share of the US LLC’s annual net accounting profits on request, subject to cash being available. The New Zealand investor’s share of the US LLC’s net accounting profit is $1,100, as determined by the US LLC’s operating agreement. This share is credited to the New Zealand investor’s capital account in year 1. The New Zealand investor can withdraw this amount from their capital account as they wish. The New Zealand investor’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income for US federal income tax purposes is $1,000, and the US federal income tax liability on that income is $300 (30%). The distributive share is the New Zealand investor’s proportional share of net accounting profits adjusted as required to meet US tax requirements. The New Zealand investor’s US federal tax liability is withheld by the US LLC on behalf of the investor and is treated as a distribution by the US LLC (debited against the New Zealand investor’s capital account) in year 1. The US LLC subsequently distributes $700 to the New Zealand investor in year 2. The New Zealand investor also receives a US tax refund of $50 in year 2 after filing their US tax return for year 1. Years 1 and 2 correspond to two different New Zealand income tax years – New Zealand income tax years 1 and 2. New Zealand tax consequences The New Zealand investor will be taxed on the $1,100 dividend (the amount credited to their capital account and able to be withdrawn by the New Zealand investor) derived from the US LLC, allocated to the income year their capital account is credited. The investor does not have FIF income due to s CQ 5(1)(d). The New Zealand investor will be subject to tax on this dividend in New Zealand in income tax year 1, which is the year when the amount was credited to the New Zealand investor’s capital account and available for the New Zealand investor to withdraw. The total distribution of $1,000 (the $700 distribution and the $300 US federal income tax that the US LLC paid on behalf of the New Zealand investor) is not subject to New BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 51 of 64 Zealand tax. This is because the dividend has already been subject to New Zealand tax in New Zealand income tax year 1. The dividend cannot be taxed twice due to s BD 3(6). Section CD 18 applies to reduce the amount of the dividend by the US federal income tax paid by the New Zealand investor ($300) in year 1. In other words, the New Zealand investor’s dividend income is $1,100 (the dividend) less $300 (the US tax paid by the New Zealand investor). The New Zealand investor pays New Zealand income tax (at 33%) on the reduced dividend of $800 ($264). Both the US tax of $300 taken as a reduction of dividend income and the $50 tax refund received in year 2 decrease the amount of US tax that can be claimed in the future under s CD 18 from year 2 onwards. The New Zealand investor cannot claim a New Zealand FTC (under ss LJ 1(1) and LJ 2(1) or the NZ–US DTA) for US federal income tax on the distributive share of the US LLC’s income against their New Zealand tax liability on dividend income derived from the US LLC. This is because the US federal income tax paid on the New Zealand investor’s distributive share is not US tax paid on a dividend derived from the US LLC and so is not tax paid on the relevant segment of foreign-sourced income. E xample | Tauira 3: Individual New Zealand investor’s investment in a US LLC is under the $50,000 FIF threshold and distributions are not mandatory Circumstances An individual New Zealand investor invests in a US LLC that is a FIF for New Zealand tax purposes. The cost of the individual investor’s attributing interest in FIFs does not exceed $50,000 throughout the year. The New Zealand investor’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income for US federal income tax purposes is $1,000, and the US federal income tax liability on that income is $300 (30%). The New Zealand investor’s US federal tax liability is withheld and paid by the US LLC on behalf of the investor and is treated as a distribution by the US LLC (debited against the New Zealand investor’s capital account). The US LLC subsequently distributes $700 to the New Zealand investor. New Zealand tax consequences The New Zealand investor will be taxed on only the actual dividends (the $700 distribution and $300 US federal income that the US LLC paid on behalf of the New BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 52 of 64 Zealand investor) derived from the US LLC under s CD 1. The investor does not have FIF income due to s CQ 5(1)(d). Section CD 18 applies to reduce the amount of the dividend by the US federal income tax paid by the New Zealand investor ($300). In other words, the New Zealand investor’s dividend income is $1,000 (the dividend) less $300 (the US tax paid by the New Zealand investor). The New Zealand investor pays New Zealand income tax (at 33%) on the reduced dividend of $700 ($231). The New Zealand investor cannot claim a New Zealand FTC (under subpart LJ or the New Zealand–US DTA) for US federal income tax paid on the distributive share against their New Zealand tax liability on the $1,000 distribution treated as dividend income derived from the US LLC. This is because the US federal income tax paid on the New Zealand investor’s US LLC distributive share is not paid on the dividend distribution from the US LLC and so is not tax paid on the relevant segment of foreign-sourced income. E xample | Tauira 4: Individual New Zealand investor in a US LLC adopts one of four FIF income calculation methods Circumstances A New Zealand individual investor invests in a US LLC that is a FIF for New Zealand tax purposes. The cost of their interest is $60,000. The New Zealand investor can adopt and chooses to adopt one of the four FIF income calculation methods: FDR, CV, CM or DRR. The New Zealand investor’s FIF income from the US LLC adopting FDR is $2,000. The New Zealand investor’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income for federal income tax purposes is $2,800, and the US federal income tax liability on that income is $840 (30%). The New Zealand investor’s US federal tax liability is withheld and paid by the US LLC on behalf of the investor and is treated as a distribution by the US LLC (debited against the New Zealand investor’s capital account). The US LLC subsequently distributes $1,900 to the New Zealand investor. New Zealand tax consequences BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 53 of 64 The New Zealand investor will be taxed on their FIF income as calculated by applying one of the four FIF income calculation methods. In this example, the FIF (FDR) income is $2,000 and New Zealand tax (at 33%) is $660. The total distribution of $2,740 (the $1,900 distribution and the $840 US federal income tax paid by the US LLC on behalf of the New Zealand investor) paid to the New Zealand investor by the US LLC is excluded income under ss EX 59(2) and CX 57B. Section CD 36 also explicitly excludes it from being a dividend for New Zealand tax purposes. Under s CD 36, a distribution is not a dividend where a person adopts one of the four methods (FDR, CV, CM or DRR) of calculating FIF income. Section CD 18, which provides relief from the over-taxation of dividend distributions from foreign hybrid entities, does not apply because the distribution is not a dividend under s CD 36. A New Zealand investor cannot claim a New Zealand FTC (under subpart LJ or the NZ– US DTA) for US federal income tax on their distributive share against their New Zealand tax liability on FIF income. This is because the US federal income tax paid on the New Zealand investor’s distributive share is not foreign tax paid on FIF income and so is not tax paid on the relevant segment of foreign-sourced income. A New Zealand investor who chooses to adopt CV for their FIF income will treat the payment of the $840 of US tax on its behalf as a cost, a gain, and a reduction of the closing value under the formula in s EX 51(1) when calculating their FIF income. E xample | Tauira 5: New Zealand investor adopts the AFIM for calculating FIF income Circumstances A New Zealand investor (a company or individual) invests in a US LLC that is a FIF for New Zealand tax purposes. The New Zealand investor can adopt and chooses to adopt the AFIM for calculating FIF income, and the exemption for a non-attributing active FIF in s CQ 5(1)(c)(xv) does not apply. The US LLC does not hold any FIF interests. The New Zealand investor’s FIF attributed income is $2,000 in their first year of holding the US LLC. The New Zealand investor’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income for federal income tax purposes is $2,100. T he US federal income tax liability on that income in the first year is $630 (30%). BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 54 of 64 The New Zealand investor’s US federal tax liability ($630) is withheld and paid by the US LLC on behalf of the investor and is treated as a distribution by the US LLC (debited against the New Zealand investor’s capital account). The US LLC subsequently distributes $1,400 to the New Zealand investor. New Zealand tax consequences The New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand income tax on FIF income and (if they are an individual) on any dividends they derived from the US LLC. The New Zealand investor is taxed on their share of the FIF’s income ($2,000), and New Zealand tax is $660 (33% if an individual) or $560 (28% if a company) under ss CQ 4, CQ 5, CQ 6, EX 44(1)(b) and EX 50. The US federal income tax the New Zealand investor paid ($630) on their share of the US LLC’s income is creditable against their FIF attributed income tax liability: s LK 1(1)(d). Note that this tax credit only applies to the extent it does not exceed the New Zealand tax payable on the FIF attributed income and it only relates to foreign tax paid in relation to income that is attributed FIF income. The individual New Zealand investor’s net New Zealand tax liability is $660 less $630 (the FTC for US tax paid on their distributive share of the US LLC’s profit), which equals $30 net New Zealand tax payable. For a company investor, no further New Zealand tax is payable as the FTC exceeds the New Zealand tax amount ($560 – $630). The total distribution of $2,030 (the $1,400 distribution and the $630 US federal income tax paid by US LLC on behalf of the New Zealand investor) from the US LLC is a dividend and so it is income under s CD 1 for New Zealand tax purposes. The New Zealand tax consequences of the dividend distribution are as follows: Where the New Zealand investor is a company, any dividends derived by a company from a foreign company are exempt income under s CW 9 (provided the exclusions in s CW 9(2) and (3) do not apply). No FTCs are claimable. If the New Zealand investor is an individual, they may reduce the amount of the dividend they derived from the US LLC ($2,030) by the US federal income tax paid on their share of the US LLC’s income ($630): s CD 18. The New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand tax on the reduced dividend (that is, net of foreign tax they paid in the US, which is $1,400). An individual New Zealand investor may choose to be a BETA person under s OE 1(2). If the individual investor has a net New Zealand tax liability on BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 55 of 64 their attributed FIF income (after claiming an FTC), then the individual investor may claim a BETA tax credit (for the New Zealand tax they have paid on their attributed FIF income) against the New Zealand tax liability on the reduced dividend (net of foreign tax paid through the application of s CD 18) under s OE 20. The individual New Zealand investor’s net New Zealand tax liability after FTCs is $30 (the FIF income tax liability of $660 ($2,000 FIF income × 33% tax rate) less FTC $630 = $30). The investor may use the $30 as a BETA tax credit to satisfy any New Zealand tax liability on dividends they derived from the FIF. E xa mple | Tauira 6: Investment in a US LLC that is a CFC Circumstances A New Zealand investor (company or individual) has an income interest of 10% in a US LLC that is a CFC. The CFC is not a non-attributing active CFC under ss CQ 2(1)(h) and EX 21B. The US LLC does not hold any FIF interests. The New Zealand investor’s CFC income is $2,000 in the first year of their investment. The New Zealand investor’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income in that same year is $1,900. The US federal income tax liability on that income is $570 (30%). The New Zealand investor’s US federal tax liability ($570) is withheld and paid by the US LLC on behalf of the investor and is treated as a distribution by the US LLC (debited against the New Zealand investor’s capital account). The US LLC subsequently distributes $1,300 to the New Zealand investor. New Zealand tax consequences The New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand income tax on CFC income and any dividends derived from the US LLC. The New Zealand investor is taxed on their share of the CFC’s income, that is $2,000. New Zealand tax for the individual (at 33%) is $660 and for the company (at 28%) is $560 under ss CQ 1 and CQ 2. The US federal income tax the New Zealand investor paid ($570) on their share of the US LLC’s income in the same year they acquired the investment is creditable against the New Zealand investor’s CFC attributed income tax liability: s LK 1(1)(d). Note that this tax credit only applies to the extent it does not exceed the New Zealand tax BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 56 of 64 payable on the CFC attributed income and it only relates to foreign tax paid in relation to income that is attributed CFC income. The individual New Zealand investor’s net New Zealand tax liability is $660 less $570 (the FTC for US tax paid on their share of the US LLC’s profit), which equals $90 net New Zealand tax payable. Where the New Zealand investor is a company, there is no further New Zealand tax liability as the FTC of $570 exceeds the New Zealand tax liability of $560. The total distribution of $1,870 (the $1,300 distribution and the $570 US federal income tax paid by US LLC on behalf of the New Zealand investor) from the US LLC is a dividend and so it is income under s CD 1 for New Zealand tax purposes. The New Zealand tax consequences of the dividend distribution are as follows: Where the New Zealand investor is a company, any dividends derived by a company from a foreign company are exempt income under s CW 9 (provided the exclusions in s CW 9(2) and (3) do not apply). No FTCs are claimable. If the New Zealand investor is an individual, they may reduce the amount of the dividend they derived from the US LLC ($1,870) by the US federal income tax paid on their distributive share of the US LLC’s income ($570): s CD 18. The New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand tax on the reduced dividend (that is, net of foreign tax they paid in the US, which is $1,300). An individual New Zealand investor can choose to be a BETA person under s OE 1(2). If the individual investor has a net New Zealand tax liability on their attributed FIF income (after claiming FTC), then they may claim a BETA tax credit (for the New Zealand tax they have paid on their attributed CFC income) against the New Zealand tax liability on the reduced dividend (net of foreign tax paid through the application of s CD 18) under s OE 20. The individual New Zealand investor’s net New Zealand tax liability after FTCs is $90 (the FIF income tax liability of $660 ($2,000 FIF income × 33% tax rate) – FTC $570 = $90). The investor may use the $90 as a BETA tax credit to satisfy any New Zealand tax liability on dividends they derived from the CFC. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 57 of 64 Example | Tauira 7: Investment in a US LLC that is a non-attributing active FIF or a non- attributing active CFC Circumstances A New Zealand investor (company or individual) invests in a US LLC that is a non- attributing active FIF or CFC. The US LLC does not hold any FIF interests. The New Zealand investor’s distributive share of the US LLC’s income for federal income tax purposes in their first year of investment is $1,000, and the US federal income tax liability on that income is $300 (30%). The New Zealand investor’s US federal tax liability ($300) is withheld and paid by the US LLC on behalf of the investor and is treated as a distribution by the US LLC (debited against the New Zealand investor’s capital account). The US LLC subsequently distributes $700 to the New Zealand investor. New Zealand tax consequences There is no attributed income for either CFC or FIF purposes under s CQ 2(1), due to s CQ 2(1)(h), or under s CQ 5(1), due to s CQ 5(1)(c)(xv). The total distribution of $1,000 (the $700 distribution and the $300 US federal income tax paid by US LLC on behalf of the New Zealand investor) from the US LLC is a dividend and so it is income under s CD 1 for New Zealand tax purposes. The New Zealand tax consequences of the dividend distribution are as follows: Where the investor is a company, any dividends derived by a company from a foreign company are exempt income under s CW 9 (provided the exclusions in s CW 9(2) and (3) do not apply). No FTCs are claimable. If the investor is an individual, they may reduce the amount of the dividend they derived from the US LLC ($1,000) by the US federal income tax paid on their share of the US LLC’s income ($300): s CD 18. The individual New Zealand investor is subject to New Zealand tax on the reduced dividend (that is, net of foreign tax they paid in the US, which is $700). An individual New Zealand investor can choose to be a BETA person under s OE 1(2). However, as there is no FIF or CFC attributed income for the income year, no BETA credit is available for that year. BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 58 of 64 References | Tohutoro Legislative references | Tohutoro whakatureture 2014 Delaware Code, § 18-503 Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983, arts 1, 22 Income Tax Act 2007, ss BD 3, CB 1, CD 1, CD 3, CD 4 to CD 6, CD 18, CD 36, CQ 1, CQ 2, CQ 4, CQ 5, CQ 6, CW 9, CX 57B, EX 1, EX 14 to EX 17, EX 21B, EX 28 to EX 44, EX 46, EX 50, EX 51, EX 59, subpart FH, HG 2, LJ 1, LJ 2, LJ 4, LK 1, LK 4, LK 5, subpart OE, YA 1 (“company”, “foreign company”, “partnership”, “share”) Internal Revenue Code (US), §§ 701, 703 Limited Liability Company Act (Delaware), §§ 18-201, 18-502, 18-701 Partnership Law Act 2019, s 8 Tax Administration Act 1994, s 93C Case references | Tohutoro kēhi Alliance Group Ltd v CIR \[1995\] 17 NZTC 12,066 (HC) Anson v Commissioners for HMRC \[2015\] UKSC 44 CIR v Albany Food Warehouse \[2009\] 24 NZTC 23,532 (HC) Mills v Dowdall \[1983\] NZLR 154 (CA) Other references | Tohutoro anō IRS, Taxation of Limited Liability Companies (Publication 3402, Internal Revenue Service, Washington, 2016) US Department of the Treasury, Department of the Treasury Technical Explanation of the Protocol Between the United States of America and New Zealand ... signed at Wellington on 23 July 1982 ( US Department of the Treasury, Washington, 2008) S Watson and L Taylor (eds), Corporate Law in New Zealand (online ed, Thomson Reuters, 2019) BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 59 of 64 Appendix | Āpititanga The flowchart and tables in this Appendix are intended to be an indicative tool only to be read in conjunction with the features of the arrangements as outlined in the Rulings. Only the Public Rulings BR Pub 23/09 – 23/13 should be relied on as reflecting the Commissioner’s view on how the taxation laws apply. Abbreviations AFIM attributable FIF income method BETA branch equivalent tax account CFC controlled foreign company FIF foreign investment fund FTC foreign tax credit ITA 07 Income Tax Act 2007 N/A not applicable NZ New Zealand US LLC United States limited liability company BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 60 of 64 Which Ruling may apply to my situation? BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 61 of 64 Tax treatment of income derived by a New Zealand investor from a US LLC BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 62 of 64 FIF table BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 63 of 64 CFC table BR PUB 23/09 – 23/13 | 24 July 2023 \[ UNCLASSIFIED\] Page 64 of 64 About this document | Mō tēnei tuhinga Public Rulings are issued by the Tax Counsel Office. Public Rulings set out the Commissioner’s view on how tax laws apply to a specific set of facts – called an arrangement. Taxpayers whose circumstances match the arrangement described in a Public Ruling may apply the ruling but are not obliged to do so. Public Rulings are binding on the Commissioner. This means that if you are entitled to apply a Public Ruling and you have calculated your tax liability in accordance with the ruling, the Commissioner must accept that assessment. A Public Ruling applies only to the taxation laws and arrangement set out in the ruling, and only for the period specified in the ruling. It is important to note that a general similarity between a taxpayer’s circumstances and the arrangement covered by a Public Ruling will not necessarily lead to the same tax result.