1 BUSINESS TAX U PDAT E Inland Revenue's tax news for businesses BUSINESS TAX U PDAT E Remember that if a due date falls on a weekend or public holiday, we can receive your return and payment on the next working day without a penalty being applied. But for provincial anniversary dates, this only applies if you're in the province celebrating the holiday, and only if you usually make tax payments over-the-counter at Westpac. We have key dates to help you meet your obligations. ird.govt.nz/index/key-dates If you have any suggestions for topics you'd like covered in this newsletter, Email BusinessTax.Update@ird.govt.nz Advanced reminder – GST return and payment due by 28 October Your GST return and payment are due by 28 October for the taxable period ending 30 September. You can file your return online in myIR before 28 October. The earlier you file your return, the earlier we'll be able to finalise your GST assessment. If you're registered for GST, you need to file a GST return by 28 October, even if you haven't collected or paid any GST in the taxable period for example the 1 month, 2 months or 6 months before 30 September. Thank you in advance for filing your return. The information you provide when filing helps the Government continue to respond to what is happening in the economy. If you anticipate any issues paying, there are options available to you. Contact your tax agent or get in touch with us in myIR as soon as you can. Please include details of your circumstances and a payment proposal. Can employees return to work early from parental leave? (Submitted by Employment New Zealand) During COVID-19, some of your employees on parental leave may want to return to work early for financial or other reasons. Employment New Zealand has guidance on the rights and responsibilities of employers and employees in these situations. You and your employee must act in good faith to make sure an early return benefits both parties. As an employer, you must be clear whether an employee's return to work is occasional, temporary or permanent. Occasional return to work If you agree, your employee on parental leave can return to paid work on occasional days, using 'keeping in touch' days. The employee can do a maximum of 64 hours paid work during their parental leave payment period, and cannot work within the first 28 days after their child is born. Recent temporary law changes also allow some employees to return for up to 12 weeks without losing their remaining entitlement to parental leave, and its associated payments and protections. For more information visit employment.govt.nz (search keywords: "Keeping in touch days" and "parental leave and Covid"). Permanent return to work Generally, employees on parental leave can only return to work early if you agree. In some cases, your employee may return early without your agreement if they or their spouse or partner are no longer the primary carer or the child is miscarried, stillborn or dies. Your employee must request in writing at least 21 days before the date they want to return to work. (continued on next page) Issue No 114 • October 2020 • IR381 Business Tax Update comments generally on topical tax issues relevant to businesses. Every attempt is made to ensure the law is correctly interpreted, but articles are intended as a brief overview only. The examples provided are not intended to cover every possible factual situation. ird.govt.nz Email: BusinessTax.Update@ird.govt.nz BUSINESS TAX UPDATE • Issue No 114 • October 2020 2 More information For information about parental leave and associated entitlements such as government-funded parental leave payments, visit the Employment New Zealand website, employment.govt.nz (search words: "Parental leave" and "Returning to work"). We have a new website section for Māori We have a new section on our website to improve access to information for Māori. There are new resources and a link to contact our Kaitakawaenga Māori services. We want this section to be a gateway for Māori to manage their tax. We have clarified the information about koha, taxable and non-taxable payments, and Māori authority distributions. We'll continue to develop more content. Webinars and regular pānui on tax issues relevant to Māori will also feature. To explore the new section go to ird.govt.nz/maori