Transformation Mobilisation Programme Business Transformation Methodology (BTM): Version 1.0 Aligned to MSP, Better Business Case guidance and drawing on existing IRD methodologies. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 2 Version number Amendments made Contact v.02Amendments made by to better align the methodology with the Better Business Case guidance and a public sector context. Amendments also made to reflect IR Style Guide. v.03Amendments made to reflect feedback from IR advisors. v.04Draft amended to incorporate: •Amendments from and . •Principles added •Slide added to show which elements of the methodology are programme related and which relate to stage or work package level. •Updates to explicitly show alignment with Managing Successful Programmes (MSP) methodology. •Outcomes Roadmap added. v.05Draft further amended to incorporate: •The separation of High Level Design and Detailed Design. •Principle added on maintaining agility following feedback from Sponsor Group. •Slide added to illustrate the adoption of different approaches by the Strategic projects and Quick win projects. v.06Draft further amended to incorporate feedback from . Update Log IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 3 Version number Amendments made Contact v.07Draft further amended to incorporate: •Feedback from •Feedback from •Amended slide from •Feedback from , and •Feedback from V.1Document baselined. Update Log IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 4 Principles of the Business Transformation Methodology (BTM) One Business Transformation Methodology •The Business Transformation Methodology will apply to the programme, stage and work package levels. •The methodology will tailored to meet the needs of each specific stage and work package, including the requirements for non-technical workpackages. Any tailoring will be discussed and refined in consultation with the preferred service provider before any variations are made. Aligning to Managing Successful Programmes (MSP™) and Better Business Case guidance. •The methodology has been refined to align with MSP and the Treasury‟s Better Business Case guidance. A glossary is provided to outline differences in terminology. Further detail on programme execution in accordance with these methodologies is provided in the Programme Execution Plan, including the development of business cases throughout the lifetime of the programme. Drawing on existing IR methodologies •Where the BTM can draw on existing IR products and processes these will be used as the starting point, with amendments made where required to support transformation. •Alignment between existing Inland Revenue (IR) methodologies and the BTM will be achieved in the first instance in practical ways by aligning the tools, techniques and templates from existing methods. •The BTM will not add complexity or additional process by duplicating work done in existing methodologies. Maintaining agility •This methodology will be used principally for the Strategic Projects within the programme adopting a waterfall approach. For the Quick wins and Tactical workstream, the intent is to use an agile approach for which an appropriate method will be agreed. It is envisaged that the agile approach will use components of the System Development Lifecycle (SDLC) and Change Initiative Lifecycle (CIL). IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE BT Programme Business Transformation Methodology The diagram below outlines the Business Transformation Methodology (BTM). The methodology is consistent with requirements set by central monitoring agencies and will be applied in a way that is consistent with Managing Successful Programmes (MSP) and the Better Business Case guidance. It will be complemented with the experience and methods of implementation partners where appropriate. 5 = Phase Gates Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Application of the methodology 6 2. Tailored to programme, stage and work package Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design 1. Programme Level 3. Core programme management approaches applied across all stages(in accordance with MSP) The methodology incorporates activities and deliverables at a programme and work package level. The diagram below shows which parts are relevant to the programme level and where the activities and deliverables will be tailored to the programme, stage or work package. Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 7 Outcomes Roadmap for programme stages An outcome roadmap was approved by Ministers in June 2013 and the Programme Business Case outcomes have been grouped in four stages over a 10 year period. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 8 Agile and Waterfall approaches To maintain the appropriate mix of agility and rigour across the whole of the programme, the BTM will be used principally for the Strategic Projects within the Business Transformation Programme. For the Quick wins and Tactical workstream an agile method is being used and the existing System Development Lifecycle (SDLC) and Change Initiative Lifecycle (CIL) will continue to apply. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Application of BTM across programme stages Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement HLD Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design STAGE 1 STAGE 2 STAGE 3 STAGE 4 PBC Approved DBC for Stage 1 Confirm Business Requirement Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Confirm Business Requirement Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Validate HLD. Confirm Business Requirement Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain DBC for Stage 2 BUSINESS CASES PBC Update 2 PBC Update 4 DBC for Stage 3 PBC Update 6 DBC for Stage 4 PBC Update 8 Design BC for Stage 3 PBC Update 5 Design BC for Stage 4 PBC Update 7 Design BC for Stage 2 PBC Update 3 Design BC for Stage 1 PBC Update 1 Transition and Close Detailed design Validate HLD Detailed design Validate HLD Detailed design High level design for work packages in stages 1-4. Detailed design for work packages in stage 1. Validate high level design for stages 2, 3 and 4. Develop high level design into a detailed design for work packages in stage 2. Validate high level design for stages 3 and 4. Develop high level design into a detailed design for work packages in stage 3. Validate high level design for stage 4 and develop this into a detailed design. GOVERNANCE 9 Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Feasibility: Concept 10 Objectives •Agree the concept and the vision that is driving the case for change. •Develop the Strategic Assessment and secure the approvals needed to progress to the Business Case stage. •Investigate alternative options to solve the specific business issues identified and meet the agreed investment objectives. Activities •Agree the programme‟s vision statement. •Undertake ILM (Investment Logic Map) workshops as appropriate to identify problems and benefits. •Define scope of the concept and agree the investment objectives. •Assess and document Current State (this will continue to be refined and developed in subsequent phases). •Assess and document problem statements. •Articulate the high level business requirements. •Investigate alternatives to solve the business issue and/or implement a new business initiative. •Identify the high level costs and benefits of each option. •Identify risks, constraints and dependencies. •Develop a Strategic Assessment to outline the case for change and the need for investment to Ministers, central agencies and other key stakeholders. Deliverables •Current State Assessment – Details organisational outcomes, objectives and organisational context including risks; the scope of the organisation and its services (outputs and metrics), available resources to support transformation, current ways of working and pain points. •High Level Programme Business Requirements Document – Details the future state requirements that will be delivered by the programme , including customer experience artefacts and the process and business rules. •Conceptual Design – Conceptual design of the programme detailing options identified and recommendations made. The Conceptual Design will include relevant planning parameters and assumptions to support the building of a robust business case. •High Level Solution Architecture – Includes a high level overview of the solution, covering proposed applications to be considered, Technology and Data Strategy. •Strategic Assessment – The purpose of the strategic assessment is to agree the need for change. It sets out the programme‟s vision, the problem or business need that is requiring a new investment, the investment objectives and scope of the programme to meet these objectives . This should include an outline of anticipated benefits and initial costs. Other documents developed in this stage will be used as inputs into the Strategic Assessment. Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Feasibility: Business Case 11 Objectives •The agreed concept for the programme is detailed in the following areas: −Scope, approach and timing; dependencies, assumptions and constraints; costs and benefits; risks and Issues. −Alignment with government priorities organisational strategy •Secure internal, central agency and Ministerial approvals as required to proceed to the Mobilisation Phase of the programme. Activities •Define scope of the concept and the investment objectives •Build on work undertaken in the Concept stage to: •Assess and document Current State. •Assess and document problem statements. •Articulate the high level business requirements. •Identify critical success factors. •Undertake Stakeholder Analysis and Change Impact Assessment •Investigate alternatives to solve the business issue and/or implement a new business initiative. •Identify the high level costs and benefits of each option. •Identify risks, constraints and dependencies. •Undertake a long list options and initial options assessment. •Identify a recommended preferred way forward. •Identify indicative view of programme stages and work packages. •Secure early agreement with those reviewing a business case (specifically central agencies) on the type of business case, type and nature of decisions required, scale and risk of proposal etc. •Review and agree/reject recommendation with sponsors. •If approved, prepare and table a decision paper and business case as required board paper for approval/rejection from Ministers. Deliverables •Target Operating Model - The Target Operating Model defines the desired capabilities of the organisation. These are broken down into sub- capabilities; each sub-capability is described in more detail by a set of characteristics. Key Characteristic Changes are grouped by People, Process, Platform and Policy, which provide a detailed description of the desired target state. •High Level Benefits Profile - Builds on analysis in the Strategic Assessment to provide an analysis of programme benefits, including whether or not they are monetary or non-monetary, direct or indirect and quantitative or qualitative. Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 12 Deliverables continued: •Stakeholder Analysis and Change Impact Assessment – Identifies and categorises all of the stakeholders involved in or affected by the programme. Stakeholders are mapped by their degree of influence and on the programme, the level of impact the programme will have on the m and their level of commitment to the programme (actual and desired). The Stakeholder Analysis and Change Impact Assessment can then be used to d evelop a Communications and Stakeholder Engagement Plan during the Mobilisation Phase. •Business Case (Programme or equivalent needed to secure Ministerial approvals) - The primary purpose of the Programme Business Case is to support the decision to invest in a programme of change. The Programme Business Case also has a role in testing the on-going viability of the programme. and will be revisited at the end of each stage, updated to reflect significant changes and updated as other businesses cases are developed within each stage of the programme. •High Level Programme Execution Plan – Details how the programme initiative will be delivered, covering scope, approach, project plan and governance framework required. This will include approaches to risk management, resource management, quality assurance, planning and controls. Note: In some instances, this phase may include a Request for Information (RFI) and/or Request for Proposal (RFP) process to fulfil the requirements of the Business Case. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Design/Blueprint: Mobilisation (1 of 2) 13 Objectives •Confirm programme scope, programme governance structure and management structures and forums (including delegated authorities). •Perform detailed project planning and scoping, establish the programme team, communicate roles and responsibilities and build stakeholder support. •Establish programme methodology, standardised tools and processes, quality assurance approaches and reporting arrangements. •Obtain approval to proceed with subsequent programme phases. Activities •Programme set up (facilities, governance, roles and responsibilities, delegated authorities). •Programme Charter and execution plan developed, summarising: −Project scope, methodology and timing. −Programme governance structure and management forums −High level Programme Plan −Project team roles and responsibilities, training, development, secondment, contractor management etc. −Standards, Risk and Issue management process/templates /reporting. −Quality Assurance approach and reporting arrangements. −Stakeholder analysis and engagement processes/planning. −Approach to resourcing the programme. −Benefits Realisation Strategy. −Communications and Stakeholder Engagement Strategy. −Change Management Strategy. •Develop an integrated programme plan (Master Schedule), including key activities, milestones, dependencies and constraints. •Define and establish project standards and methodologies (standardised tools, templates and techniques across all stages and work packages). •Develop a Benefits Management Plan and Benefits Realisation Strategy •Business Readiness Assessment framework and criteria determined and agreed with Project Sponsor. •Quality Assurance schedule agreed with EPMO and CR&A. •Understand the readiness for change (high level organisational impact and stakeholder assessment). •Conduct team orientation, training & kick-offs. •Define project development and CRP/prototyping environments. •Undertake current phase quality assurance checks, including central agency monitoring and (IQA) as appropriate. Deliverables •Programme Charter - includes overall scope definition, programme governance framework and management forums, resource plan, programme organisation, roles & responsibilities, deliverables, high level programme plan, risk management plan, quality management plan, vendor management plan, release strategy and benefits realisation strategy. •Work Package Roadmap - Provides a detailed view of the work packages that will be delivered and the ordering of these into different „stages‟ within the programme. This Roadmap should align to the Target Operating Model and Programme Business Case. The Roadmap should be affordable, achievable for the organisation and within acceptable risk tolerances. Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Design/Blueprint: Mobilisation (2 of 2) 14 Deliverables continued •Scope Definition: This deliverable will align to the Roadmap and give a detailed overview of the work packages and scope of work for this stage of the programme. •Master Schedule – provides an overview of the key activities, dependencies, milestones and critical path for the programme. The Master Schedule provides a rolled-up view of schedules at the work package level and is in MS Project format. •Benefits Management Strategy – Defines how benefits will be quantified and measured; defines the links between benefits, work packages and outputs and how these will be mapped and monitored; details processes and controls that have been put in place to ensure bene fits are not double- counted. Further work to determine benefits will be undertaken in the High Level Design and Detailed Design phase. •Benefits Management Plan – defines the benefits (at a high level) associated with each of the work packages in the Roadmap and includes the key performance indicators that will be measured in association with each work package and assigns owners to each of the benefits. It also identified the points in the programme where process assessments can be made. •Benefits Realisation Plan - provides a complete view of all the benefits, their dependencies and the expected realisation timescales. This plan is integrated into the Master Schedule (see Planning and Control). •Communications and Stakeholder Engagement Plan – The programme‟s communication strategy, approach to stakeholder engagement, key messages about the programme (in general and for specific stakeholders), communication risks, roles and responsibilities and outcomes and measures. •Deliverables List - a list of the Deliverables to be produced during the programme or stage , including content and acceptance criteria and review and approval processes (including responsibilities for approval identified in a RASCI). •Baselined Work stream Plans - baselined Level 2 Work Stream Plan for Blueprint. •Updated Programme Execution Plan – Includes detailed resource plan, programme organisation, roles and responsibilities, deliverables, detailed programme plan, critical path schedule, list of dependant projects and Programme Office procedures. Identifies the tools that will be used for project management, project planning, developing and storing deliverables. •Conference Room Pilot (CRP) Scope and Approach – Details the scope, approach and timing of each CRP. •Data Cleanse, Migration/Remediation Strategy - Outlines how the data is to be cleaned, prepared, converted and migrated from the old to the new system. Data management and data integration for the solution, includes data structure standards, interfacing and maintenance. Includes Data Cleansing approach, and the tools and environments that will be required. •Data object quality assessment - A list of all data objects in scope of the programme, the source(s) of the data, the outcome of the quality assessment, a plan of action to address the quality deficiencies. (NB: A full list of all Mobilisation Phase deliverables is included in the Programme Execution Plan and supporting documents). IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Design/Blueprint: Business Requirements 15 Objectives •Identify and document the requirements for the solution (this may be at a programme, stage or work package level). •Subject Matter Experts identified and consulted to assist in identification of Business Requirements. •To secure investment to move into the High Level Design Phase. Activities •Identify subject matter experts from the business, other government agencies and other key stakeholder groups to validate business requirements. •Confirm the scope of the programme. •Understand and confirm strategic context; confirm alignment of the proposed investment with wider organisational strategies, national sector priorities and goals, policy decisions and other agency programmes. •Understand process framework and corporate performance framework. •Schedule and conduct structured workshops to identify and document Problem Statements, Future State Definitions, and business requirements and outline non functional requirements using the following types: −People. −Process. −Functional. •Document current state („as is‟) processes to level 3 •Complete customer research to understand and document the current and desired future end to end customer service experience •Complete projections as required of the nature and level of demand for future services and deficiencies in current provision. •Classify requirements in accordance with the MoSCoW framework and as „must haves‟, „should haves‟, „could haves‟ and „won‟t haves‟ to provide optionality to Ministers. •Increase depth of benefits analysis to support investment decision, including if benefits are direct/indirect, monetary/non monetary and beneficiaries. Identify any dis-benefits. •Identify solution options which meet the business requirements to inform the business case. −Interface. −Security. −Metric. −Report. −Integration −Usability. −Performance. −Deployment. −Data. −Transition Activities continued •Validate and achieve sponsor sign-off on business requirements, including CEO Statement if required to support business case. •Develop and agree detailed change management strategy. •Develop and agree detailed communications and engagement strategy. •Develop and agree detailed learning and development strategy. •Develop cost benefit analysis and determine cost and revenue implications for the organisation. •Develop Design Business Case or equivalent paper needed to secure approvals to move into the Design phase. •Update Programme Business Case •Undertake current Phase quality assurance checks, including Gateway Review. Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 16 Deliverables •Business Requirements Document - Details the functional and outlined non-functional requirements of the business. It expands on the High Level Business Requirements in the Concept document and also incorporates the current and desired future end to end customer service experience. •Bus Requirements Traceability Matrix - Organises and tracks the requirements throughout the Solution Delivery Phase, ensuring all approved requirements have been met by the Design Phase. •Change Management Strategy - High level explanation of what the main changes are, who is impacted and how, what major change management activities are required and how the project plans to deliver and communicate them. Includes end state and interim releases. •Design Business Case or equivalent to support decision being requested of Ministers . •Updated Programme Business Case •Learning & Development Strategy - High level definition of the Learning and Development requirements for impacted staff groups and the approach to fulfilling those requirements. High level overview of training and documentation needs, the training approach to be used to meet these needs and how and when this will be delivered. Includes initial forecast of resource required, an organisational impact assessment and a high level role impact assessment. Includes end state and interim releases. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Design/Blueprint: High Level Design 17 Activities •Define BT Solution enterprise organisation hierarchy & process model. •Define BT Future State („to be‟) Processes; including a functional fit gap analysis/resolution and integrated business scenarios, (to three levels of decomposition). •Define at a high level the required application architecture to support the solution. •Conduct conference room pilots (CRP) to refine/confirm the design. •Develop the data migration strategy. •Develop a transition strategy. •Develop test strategy & decommissioning & archiving strategy. •Develop BI/metrics strategy. •Develop the security & authorisations strategy. •Develop the master data & maintenance strategy. •Develop a high level interface and integration strategy including a high level assessment of legacy systems. •Identify 2-3 candidate, application suites of software solutions •Undertake a high level fit/gap assessment of requirements vs these candidate solutions •Develop detailed business requirements (stakeholder requirements) including functional and non-functional requirements and future state („to be‟) process maps to level 3 •Identify high level organisational impacts and high level organisational change strategy. •Assess high level organisational capability, perform a high level training needs analysis and develop a high level people transition plan. •Define at a high level the future state organisation structure and position descriptions. •Undertake a high level change readiness assessment for stakeholders. Deliverables Process and Solution The following artefacts will be started in High Level Design and will be further developed and refined throughout the Design Phase(s): •Solution Architecture & Design- Translates business need into a coherent & feasible architecture spanning the Business, Data, Application, Technology and Security domains that frames the build of the solution. Addresses transitional solution states that reflect each Programme Release. Addresses Legacy System Impact Assessment. Will include a high level fit/gap assessment of the candidate application suite vs requirements. Objectives •Design the Future State solution consistent with the approved business requirements (process, organisation & technology). •Develop key programme strategies around data and information, architectural design principles, strategic test approach and transition principles. Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 18 Deliverables continued Process and Solution - continued •Business Blueprint (to three levels of decomposition) Detailed analysis of business requirements (stakeholder requirements) and the amendments to process and solution to satisfy those requirements. There will be a Business Blueprint document by Process or by Sub-process. Includes a fit gap assessment of the defined business processes to the selected applications. The document will focus on the end state, but will also address the transitional process and solution states required for each of the Programme Releases. There will be two iterations of the document. At High Level Design this will be to three levels of process decomposition and a 1 st iteration of FRICE. •Organisational Elements – Details the Organisational Elements that will be required for the solution. •User Interface Strategy – details user interface tools & design approach •FRICE Log – high level log of identified FRICE, effort estimates and approval status. Architecture •Security & Authorisations Strategy - defining the approach of the BT Programme to Security & Authorisations with reference to the existing footprint and the new functionality. •Decommissioning & Archiving Strategy - decommissioning approach for the solution, includes decommissioning standards and proposed decommissioning options (applications, interfaces and servers). Archiving approach for the solution, includes archiving standards and proposed archiving solution (data). •Principles for Integration - defines the integration principles and approach that will inform Detailed Design across the programme and will establish patterns by which detailed integration architecture can be achieved. This will establish how BT will integrate with legacy systems. Includes Transition & End State. •Technical Infrastructure Strategy & Specification – will validate that the Corporate IS standards for Instances, clients, sizing, Disaster Recovery etc are fit for purpose for the programme. Will include a logical architecture for end state as well as transitional architecture. •System Landscape Document – Details the system landscape that will be required. This will include the instance strategy as well as all environments, clients that will be required for Dev, Test, QA, Integration, Training and Production. Will be produced in 2 iterations, with the second validating sizing requirements. Data and Metrics •High Level Data and Information Design document – this in turn will inform the detailed BI/metrics design artefacts for the work packages . •Programme Data Strategy – describes how all data will be consolidated, managed and maintained over the lifecycle of the programme. Technical •High Level Technical Design for Interfaces (HTD) - documents the agreement between the legacy and Solution teams on how legacy and the Solution will be integrated in terms of data mapping and technology. •High Level Development Environment architecture – Development Environment high level or conceptual level architecture created. •High Level QA Environment architecture– QA Environment high level or conceptual level architecture created. •Software Release, Configuration and Management Strategy – will outline the use of technical environments and how the environments will be configured and managed, including transport management. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 19 Deliverables continued Learning and Development •Learning and Development Strategy including a Capability Analysis - assessment of the Organisational Capability relevant to the BT Programme. •Challenge Model - The Challenge model, developed as part of the Business Case, is to be refreshed and validated with Business Owners. Programme Management •Risk Assessment – Assessment of Risks perceived for the programme at the outset of High Level Design Phase. •Test Strategy - testing approach for the solution, includes testing standards, impacted areas and systems, based on the minimum IR test requirements. Will also detail the testing tools required and outlines any extra requirements for the project. •Release and Deployment Strategy - high level deployment approach for the solution, includes type of rollout (i.e. phased / big bang), standalone or standard release, details of required brown/black outs, release window constraints, communications, resources, use of MGL, contingency and rollbacks, whether pilot transactions are to be used, environments required, signoff processes. Deployment Strategy & Plan will be produced at the end of Core Blueprint, but will be updated for each release at the end of the release specific blueprint. •Blueprint Summary Document - summary Blueprint Document, cross referencing and giving an Executive summary of Business Process Blueprints, Solution Architecture and Design Document, Deployment Strategy & Plan, Test Strategy and Change Readiness Assessment. Also addresses Readiness to exit the Analysis and Design stage and enter Build Phase. Will include an assessment of Risks, issues, Gaps and Dependencies, a summary of the FRICE that we have agreed to develop. •Completed Gateway Review 0/1 •SOW for Detailed Design Organisation •People Transition Strategy •Organisation Design Strategy IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Design/Blueprint: Detailed Design 20 Activities •Define application configuration and development requirements . •Identify any legacy system and interface changes. •Identify organisational impacts / define organisational change management plan and perform detailed job impact assessment. •Assess organisational capability, perform a detailed training needs analysis and develop a high level people transition plan. •Define the future state organisation structure and job descriptions. •Undertake a change readiness assessment for stakeholders. •Develop the roles matrix & deployment strategy. •Develop KPI Framework. •Review and revalidate the High Level Design. •Revisit the strategic deliverables from High Level Design and produce appropriately detailed documents for the work package level. •Make any updates to High Level design documents as a result of work completed in Detailed Design. •Revisit and either confirm or update the strategic case and options recommended. •Confirm procurement approach, risk allocation and contracting approach. •Complete functional specification (requirements) and undertake a detailed fit/gap assessment of requirements vs candidate solutions •Further develop cost benefit analysis and determine cost and revenue implications for the organisation. •Undertake analysis (including options analysis) required to support the development of a Detailed Business Case or equivalent needed to support Ministerial decision making and update Programme Business Case. •Undertake current Phase quality assurance checks, including Gateway Review 0/2. Objectives •Articulate the solution design in enough detail to enable the commencement of the build. •Develop a Transition Plan to move from current to future state. •Define detailed plans and budgets for the remainder of the programme. Ascertain affordability and funding requirements. •Secure investment to enable commencement of the Build and Test Phase. Deliverables •Detailed Business Case of equivalent needed to secure Ministerial decisions. •Updated Programme Business Case Process and Solution •Business Blueprint (to five levels of decomposition) Following on from work undertaken at High Level Design, decomposition of Level 4 and 5 business processes which are to be classified into common processes where possible, to maximise re-usability and the use of common services. Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 21 Deliverables Process and Solution continued •Functional Specification and Fit Gap Assessment – specifies, functionally, how solution gaps will be addressed to satisfy requirements and designed processes. Contains all the information needed for the creation of the technical specification. Work will continue to further develop and define the following artefacts: •Solution Architecture & Design- Translates business need into a coherent & feasible architecture spanning the Business, Data, Application, Technology and Security domains that frames the build of the solution. Addresses transitional solution states that reflect each Programme Release. Addresses Legacy System Impact Assessment. Organisational Elements – Details the Organisational Elements that will be required for the solution. •User Interface Strategy – details user interface tools & design approach •FRICE Log - log of identified FRICE, effort estimates and approval status •Functional Specification – specifies, functionally ,how solution gaps will be addressed to satisfy requirements and designed processes. Contains all the information needed for the creation of the technical specification. Architecture •Revisit and refine the Security & Authorisations Strategy •Archiving Strategy – Leveraging the corporate approach to Solution archiving. •Detailed Solution Architecture – that satisfies the Technical Infrastructure Strategy and Specification. •Detailed System Architecture – continued iteration and refinement of the System Landscape document, including validating sizing requirements. •Decommissioning Execution Plan – execution plan for retirement of applications, infrastructure, licenses etc. Data and Metrics •BI/metrics Strategy - recognising the limitations and opportunities of the established BI/metrics footprint, the end state requirements and the requirements of the Transitional solution during Release roll out, to define the strategy for developing and evolving the BI/metrics solution. •Master Data & Maintenance Solution - master data maintenance procedures. •KPI Framework - consistent documentation for each KPI/Metric detailing its nature, calculation, frequency etc. A BT portfolio of metrics. •Data Object Definition Documents - Detailed definition of each data object, in terms of design and migration considerations. •Data Cleanse, Migration/Remediation Plan – builds on the data migration/remediation strategy to detail the tasks which must be performed to execute the cleansing, preparation and data migration/remediation. Organisation •High Level People Transition Plan - high level view of how people transition will be managed including HR policies, changes to PD's, employee roles and responsibilities. Includes end state and interim releases. •Job Impact Assessment - detailed impact analysis of solution on business resources and support teams - organisation structure, accountabilities, position sizing & descriptions, performance management & KPI. Includes end state and interim releases. •Business Readiness Assessment for Stakeholders - baseline assessment of a cross section of the organisation to establish how much is understood about the BT Programme and the impending changes. •Roles Matrix - used to map roles to positions, and will include the „To Be‟ Role Matrix. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 22 Deliverables continued •Organisation Design & Blueprint - Definition of the new organisation structure, jobs, accountabilities and Solution roles, plus the high level approach for implementing the change. •Position Descriptions - changes to existing PD's and creation of PDs for new jobs. Creation / adjustment of performance measures to fit the role objectives. Learning and Development •Learning & Development Curriculum and Plan - detailed training plan including trainee groups, curriculum / modules, course objectives, timeframes and content, locations and facility requirements, training logistics, technical requirements, training evaluation methods etc. Includes business education plan detailing what business education sessions are required, timing, location and trainers etc. This is started after the training needs analysis is complete and is developed iteratively through the Build & Test phase. •Detailed Training Needs Analysis - detailed definition of the training requirements of each staff group impacted. •Capability Analysis – revisit Capability Analysis completed during High Level Design. Programme Management •Updated PEP for Build Phase – updated detailed resource plan, programme organisation, roles & responsibilities, deliverables, detailed programme plan, critical path schedule, list of dependant projects and Programme Office procedures •Baselined Work stream Plan for Build and Test - baselined Level 2 Work stream plan for Build & Test. •Risk Assessment – Assessment of Risks perceived for the programme during the Detailed Design Phase. •Quality Review – Conduct an independent quality review in line with the Assurance Management Plan and complete Gateway reviews as required. •Business Readiness Assessment – The readiness of the programme to deliver and the Business to receive the solution. Work would continue to develop and refine the following deliverables from the high level design phase in line with new information; •Test Strategy •Release and Deployment Strategy •Blueprint Summary Document. Commercial •Statement of Works for Build Phase – Agreed Statement of Works for Suppliers during Build Phase •Updated Benefits Realisation Plan – Based on the Benefits Realisation Strategy and an update of expected benefits based on the designed processes, solution and organisation, develop a plan to realise the benefits. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Solution Delivery: Build/Acquire and Test (1 of 2) 23 Objectives •Realise the business requirements defined in the Business Blueprint & transform the requirements into an approved working BT Solution which will deliver the benefits case. •Comprehensively test the BT Solution through a series of discrete and complementary test cycles. •Prepare required training materials and begin the people transition. Activities •Solution Build activities including : −Technical specifications. −Application configuration. −Authorisation configuration. −Application development. −Learning & Development schedule. −Learning & Development Materials. −Project team trained in the solution. −Organisation: −People transition planning. −Development of Solution Role Cards. •Test Planning, test script preparation and test reporting for the following test cycles: −Unit testing. −Integration testing. −System Testing −Regression testing. −Stress & performance testing. −User acceptance testing (including security testing) −System testing •Undertake current Phase quality assurance checks. •Data preparation including data cleansing, data load mechanisms, reconciliation procedures and dress rehearsal planning. •Establish system connectivity. •Undertake current Phase quality assurance checks, including Gateway Review 0/3. Deliverables - Build •Detailed People Transition Plan - detailed explanation of the way that organisation structure and role changes will be implemented, including HR policies, changes to PD's, employee roles and responsibilities. •Role Cards - Role Cards for each role and linked to PDs. •Learning & Development Schedule - details training course dates, times, locations, trainers and trainee names. •Learning & Development Material / Documentation - Solution process and capability related documentation available to users following training. Reference material includes processes, procedure, detailed transaction guides, training guides, course workbooks and other reference material. Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Solution Delivery: Build/Acquire and Test (2 of 2) 24 Deliverables – Build Continued •Early Life Support Strategy - covers resources, tools, structures and procedures that govern both project and BAU resources during the provision of support in the Support & Sustain phase. •Technical Specification - detailed technical analysis and the technical modifications required to implement the functional specification. •Data Migration/Remediation Detail Design - document outlining in detail how the data extracts, cleansing and loads etc. will take place. •BI Load schedule - a comprehensive BI load schedule to load BI content. •Configuration Document - describes the Solution configuration decisions and as built configuration. Builds on the Solution Architecture Document. Build Testing •Unit Test Plan – plan outlining test objectives, scope & schedule. •Unit Test Scripts – document test scripts to be used. •Unit Test Exit Report – validate that testing is complete, list any outstanding defects, their impacts and/or work arounds. System Testing •Integration Test Plan – plan outlining test objectives, scope & schedule. •Integration Test Scripts – document test scripts to be used. •Integration Test Exit Report – validate that testing is complete, list any outstanding defects, their impacts and/or work arounds. •Performance and Volume Testing •Regression Test Plan – plan outlining test objectives, scope & schedule. •Regression Test Scripts – document test scripts to be used. •Regression Test Exit Report – validate that testing is complete, list any outstanding defects, their impacts and/or work arounds. •Stress & Performance Test Plan – plan outlining test objectives, scope & schedule. •Stress & Performance Test Scripts – document test scripts to be used. •Stress & Performance Test Exit Report – validate that testing is complete, list any outstanding defects, their impacts and/or work arounds. •User Acceptance Test Plan – plan outlining test objectives, scope & schedule. •User Acceptance Test Scripts – document test scripts to be used. •User Acceptance Test Exit Report – validate that testing is complete list any outstanding defects, their impacts and/or work arounds. Programme •Post Implementation Support Transition & Delivery Plan – Detailed plan, including resourcing, processes and roles and responsibilities, geographic deployment, communications, and the transition plan to progressively shift ownership to BAU during the Support and Transition phase. •Initial Data Load Checklist– Detailed checklist of technical activities that must be undertaken to undertaken to load data. •Initial Deployment & Cutover Plan - Detailed steps of cutover period including go/no go checkpoints, activities, resources, timings, transports, sequencing, scheduling, durations for pilot transactions, code changes, data loads, data conversion, verifications. •Training Environment Built & Ready to use. •Gateway Review – Completion report from Gateway Report 0/3. •Business Readiness Assessment – The readiness of the programme to deliver and the Business to receive the solution. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Solution Delivery: Final Preparation 25 Objectives •Complete preparation of the production system, including end user training, system management, and cut-over activities. •Transition from the solution pre-production environment to a live, stable, productive operation. •Ensure the business is ready to adopt the new solution and the support functions are ready to provide required support. Activities •Conduct a structured cutover test (a Mock Go-Live) – final dress rehearsal of the solution before it goes live. •Develop and issue go-live communications both internal and external to the organisation. •Deliver end user training. •Measure effectiveness of end user training. •Develop and execute cutover plan. •Physically transition to the new processes, organisation and technology – „go-live‟. •Commence handover to BAU support and finalise. •Undertake current Phase quality assurance checks, including „go/no- go‟ gates and Gateway Review 0/4. •Complete Implementation Business Case or equivalent needed to secure investment decisions and update Programme Business Case. Deliverables •Updated Deployment & Cutover Plan – Production - Detailed steps of cutover period including go/no go checkpoints, activities, resources, timings, transports, sequencing, scheduling, durations for pilot transactions, code changes, data loads, data conversion, verifications. There is one plan per release (may contain 1 or multiple projects). •Go Live Communications Plan - plan detailing Communications needed around Cutover and Go Live. •Training Evaluation Report - analysis of training and user attendance and evaluation of understanding from the trainers' perspective. •Post-Go Live End User Learning & Development Schedule - schedule detailing any training required during the sustain period. •Cutover Test Exit Report - provide validation that the testing has been completed, to summarise outstanding defects for resolution, to enable an analysis of the impact of the outstanding defects and how to fix them / work around them. Summarise the results against Test Exit Criteria. •Business Readiness Assessment – Framework that evaluates the readiness of the programme team to deliver and the Business Team to receive the solution. •Implementation Business Case or equivalent needed to secure investment decisions. •Updated Programme Business Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Support and Sustain 26 Objectives •Formal handover of Programme documentation to the BAU organisation. •Ensure that there is a framework in place to sustain and continuously improve performance after go-live. •Resolve „teething‟ issues associated with the new solution •Ensure adoption of the solution by the business through pro-active monitoring and feedback. Activities •Identify scope of documents to be handed over. •Schedule formal handover briefings/meetings. •Execute handover briefings/meetings. •Measure success of handover. •Agree Handover is complete. •Provide intense post go-live production support. •Validate „live‟ business process results. •Undertake ongoing application support and upgrades. •Undertake infrastructure support and upgrades. •Undertake continuous improvement. •Measure benefits. •Undertake current Phase quality assurance checks, including Gateway 0/5. Deliverables •Handover to IS BAU Document (HOTS) - Hand Over To Support (HOTS) processes are performed as part of each IR project. This document provides the information required to achieve a successful outcome when it comes to support of the implemented solution. •Handover to BAU training & documentation - Handover of project information / documentation to the BAU team. This will include : −process overview and definition documents. −training materials. •Gateway Review report 0/5 Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Post Implementation Review 27 Objectives •Formally review implementation success against stated objectives & capture lessons learned for the benefit of future Programmes. •Formally close the Stage or Programme. Activities •Define scope and approach for the PIRs (e.g. areas to be covered and organisations/persons to be interviewed ). •Communicate PIR objectives and timetable. •Conduct PIRs. •Share and agree PIR recommendations with Project Sponsors and Programme Directors. •Communicate PIR out comes for the benefit of other Programmes. •Develop Programme Close Out Report. •Share and agree Programme Close out report with Project Sponsors and Programme Directors. •Ensure any outstanding issues in Close-Out Report are allocated to the relevant person(s) for resolution. •Close contractual agreements with suppliers. •Steering Committee sign off of Programme Close Out Report. Deliverables •Post Implementation Review Report – assesses the success of the implementation against its stated objectives. Captures knowledge gained by the project team and key stakeholders throughout the project in the form of lessons learnt, i.e. what went well and should be repeated / what didn‟t go well and can be improved upon. Used to assist future projects in repeating or avoiding desirable / undesirable outcomes and behaviour. •Change Management Post Implementation Review Report – Specifically reviews the change management outcomes including achievement of the business case benefits and capability building. •Programme Close Out Report - Formal document that is signed off by the Programme Steering Committee and which formally signals the closure of the Programme. PIR Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Planning and Control 28 Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Activities •Development of an Integrated Programme Plan •Progress monitoring •Schedule development and maintenance. •Identifying and monitoring dependencies. •Agreeing monitoring and control activities and performance targets. •Identifying deadlines and constraints and reflecting these in programme plans and schedules. •Building accurate resource forecasts, implementing effective resource management processes and monitoring actual use of resources against forecast. •Planning and controlling transition between stages, in particular development of exit criteria for each phase. •Commence handover to BAU support and finalise. Deliverables •Programme Execution Plan (PEP - also a deliverable in the Mobilisation Phase) – The PEP serves as the key reference point for the scope, approach, governance framework, deliverables, implementation time line, quality procedures, acceptance criteria, key assumptions, risk, dependencies and responsibilities for the programme. •Integrated Programme Plan (Master Schedule) – provides an overview of the key activities, dependencies, milestones and critical path for the programme. The Master Schedule provides a rolled-up view of schedules at the work package level and is in MS Project format. •Programme and Work package Status Updates - provides the templates, guidance and schedule for routine progress monitoring at the work package and programme levels. •Work package Briefs – describes the purpose, anticipated resources and costs, duration, outputs and accountabilities for individual work packages within each of the programme stages. •Dependency register - provides an overview of key dependencies for the programme both internally (between work packages) and externally (between the programme and other projects/programmes within IR and with external programmes). Objectives •For the programme to operate in an environment whish is planned and controlled; where there is a clear understanding of objectives, scope, timescales deliverables , costs, dependencies and risks. •To effectively manage resources, including the accurate forecasting of resource needs and management of resources in accordance with estimates. Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Quality Management 29 Objectives •Structured measurement of quality throughout the Programme. •Deployment of a quality assurance (QA) framework across BT which ensures the project delivers business value and expected outcomes, meets expectations, and remains focused on ensuring the quality of Programme‟s deliverables. Activities •Scope & schedule periodic Programme QA activities; e.g. −Independent Programme Management Reviews. −Benefits Assessment Framework Reviews. −Change Management Assessments. −IR PMO Reviews. −Peer Reviews. −Data Process and Metric Controls Assessments. −Systems Based Controls Assessments. −Internal Controls Adequacy and Effectiveness. −Solution Assurance Services. •Conduct quality assurance reviews and assessments. •Share and agree recommendations with Project Sponsors, Programme Directors and Programme Manager. •Ensure any actions identified during QA reviews are allocated to the relevant person(s) and are resolved. •Programme Director and/or Steering Committee sign off of Programme QA Reports. •Complete Gateway Reviews in accordance with central agency guidance Deliverables •Audit Reports – specific audit reports detailing the findings and recommendations of Programme QA activities . •Business Readiness Checks - by major Programme Phase & Release, these checks determine the readiness of the Programme Team to deliver and the Business Teams to receive the BT solution by: •Defining all conditions required to be met for successful business deployment of BT Initiatives. •Ensuring all critical tasks are monitored on a regular basis. •Identifying critical activities and conditions at risk and ensuring mitigation actions are put in place to resolve them. •Providing the project and the business teams with the information to enable informed Go / No-Go decisions. Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Risk & Issues Management 30 Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Objectives •To support effective decision making by providing decision makers with a good understanding of risks and their likely impact and likelihood. •To effective identify, assess and mitigate risks using a consistent and robust methodology across the programme. •To identify risks early so that effective mitigations can be built into programme planning •To prevent issues and risks from threatening the likelihood of the programme achieving its objectives. Activities •Develop the programme‟s risks management approach. •Develop risk registers at a programme and work package level and establish procedures to review registers and escalate risks to programme level in accordance with agreed criteria. •Confirm alignment of the programme‟s risk management approach to the IR Enterprise Risk Management Framework (ERMF). •Consistently monitor risks and issues through Programme and Work package Status Updates (see Planning and Control). •Establish a review cycle for programme risks •Regularly review the risk register with programme leadership and governance groups to ensure awareness ad understanding of the programme‟s risk profile and to identify new risks. •Review and update the programme‟s risk management approach for each stage of work. Deliverables •Risk Management Plan –Provides a robust and consistent approach to managing risks across the programme, including tools and techniques (risk matrix, assessment criteria, definitions etc) reporting requirements, roles and responsibilities, standard risk processes, risk tolerances and escalation criteria. •Risk Register – Provides an overview of all risks relating to the programme, including assessment of all risks at inherent, current and residual level and a breakdown of all controls and treatments. •Risk Profile – A forward projection of the agreed programme risks in relation to identified programme milestones. Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 31 Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Benefits Realisation Management Objectives •To ensure benefits are identified early, defined clearly and linked to agreed outcomes and investment objectives •To align benefits with individual work packages and to identify roles and responsibilities for achieving benefits as part of effectively managing work packages. •To undertake the level of benefits analysis needed to effectively inform each stage of the Better Business Case process. •To drive the process of realising benefits, including benefit measurement, tracking and recording as they are realised. •Communicate expected benefits to all programme stakeholders. Activities •Identify, define and categorise benefits as appropriate to each stage of the programme. •Engage with stakeholders to agree that anticipated benefits are advantageous and align with key stakeholder interests. •Agree key performance indicators (KPIs) for each benefit and confirm that a robust baseline is in place to allow the aggregation of benefits to be effectively managed. •Identify risks and issues that may affect the programme‟s ability to realise the intended benefits •Allocate identified benefits to work packages within the Roadmap initiatives and relate these back to agreed investment objectives, stage outcomes and Target Operating Model. •Undertake the benefit analysis needed to inform each Business Case in accordance with the Better Business Case guidance. •Develop and embed the process of undertaking regular Benefit Reviews. •Provide Post Implementation support to the business after each „go live‟ to help the business to realise all benefits associated with the outputs from each stage of work. Deliverables •High level Benefits Profile (included in the Business Case Phase) - Builds on analysis in the Strategic Assessment to provide an analysis of programme benefits, including whether or not they are monetary or non-monetary, direct or indirect and quantitative or qualitative. •Benefits Management Strategy – Defines how benefits will be quantified and measured; defines the links between benefits, work packages and outputs and how these will be mapped and monitored; details processes and controls that have been put in place to ensure benefits are not double-counted. •Benefits Realisation Plan - provides a complete view of all the benefits, their dependencies and the expected realisation timescales. This plan is integrated into the Master Schedule (see Planning and Control). Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 32 Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Communications and Stakeholder Management Objectives •To ensure consistency of messaging within the programme and outside of the programme •To support the effective mitigation of risks and management of issues which may otherwise delay or derail the programme. •To achieve influence and positive outcomes through effective management of relationships. Deliverables •Conference Room Pilot (CRP) Scope and Approach – Details the scope, approach and timing of each Conference Room Pilot, which are used to bring together key stakeholders at stage gates within the programme to evaluate the progress made in one stage and to inform the ne xt stage of work. This includes a re-confirmation of objectives, scope and anticipated benefits to ensure continued alignment with key stakeholders and understanding. Any updates will be incorporated into the Programme Business Case. Attendees will reflect stakeholders from other government agencies and the tax policy work programme to encourage alignment. •Stakeholder Analysis and Change Impact Assessment – Identifies and categorises all of the stakeholders involved in or affected by the programme. Stakeholders are mapped by their degree of influence and on the programme, the level of impact the programme will have on the m and their level of commitment to the programme (actual and desired). The Stakeholder Analysis and Change Impact Assessment can then be used to d evelop a Communications and Stakeholder Engagement Plan during the Mobilisation Phase. •Communications and Stakeholder Engagement Plan – The programme‟s communication strategy, approach to stakeholder engagement, key messages about the programme (in general and for specific stakeholders), communication risks, roles and responsibilities and outcomes and measures. •Go Live Communications Plan - plan detailing Communications needed around Cutover and Go Live. Activities •Undertake Stakeholder Analysis and Change Impact Assessment •Agree key messages (for the overall programme) and for specific stakeholder groups. •Agree lead responsibilities for engagement with particular stakeholders. •Undertake planning for Stakeholder Engagement and review the effectiveness of this regularly. •Develop standard processes for receiving and reviewing stakeholder feedback and for communicating back to stakeholders on changes made. •Undertake monitoring and evaluation of communication and stakeholder activities at key points within the programme and identify opportunities for continuous improvement. •Identify, define and categorise benefits as appropriate to each stage of the programme. Training and Organisational Change Management IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 33 Training and Organisational Change Management Deliverables During Business Case •Stakeholder Analysis and Change Impact Assessment – This deliverable is relevant to both Communications and Stakeholder Management and to Training and Organisational Change. This deliverable identifies and categorises all of the stakeholders involved in or affected by the programme. Stakeholders are mapped by their degree of influence and on the programme, the level of impact the programme will have on them and their level of commitment to the programme (actual and desired). The Stakeholder Analysis and Change Impact Assessment can then be used to develop a Communications and Stakeholder Engagement Plan during the Mobilisation Phase. Concept Business Case Mobilisation Business Requirement High Level Design Build/Acquire & Test Final Preparation Go-Live Support & Sustain Feasibility Phase Design / Blueprint Phase Solution Delivery Phase Deploy Phase Support & Sustain Detailed design Benefits Realisation Management Planning and Control Communications and Stakeholder Management Quality Management and Risk and Issues Management Training and Organisational Change Management Objectives •To understand the organisation‟s readiness for change, to identify any issues or risks and to inform effective implementation planning. •To identify the organisation‟s learning and development needs to support the implementation of the identified solution and realise expected benefits. •To inform organisational change, including changes to resourcing requirements, organisational structures and roles and responsibilities needed to effectively support change. Activities •Undertake assessments of readiness for change, organisational capability and training requirements. Revisit and further develop these throughout the programme to inform effective implementation planning and to identify issues and risks. •Develop a Learning and Development Strategy for the programme and further develop and refine this, and related deliverables, as required to meet the training needs of each phase. •Understand programme stakeholders, the impact of change on those stakeholders and develop plans to manage and effectively communicate change. •Develop strategies and execution plans to effectively manage organisational change and work with business groups to ensure that the identified benefits are realised in the implementation. •Further develop and refine the programme and organisational design needed to effectively support the delivery of change, including revised structures, job impact assessments, role descriptions and transition plans. •Review and adapt the Organisational Impact Assessment methodology for the Programme. •Undertake and refresh organisation impact assessments (people and organisation, process and policies and technology) at each phase of the Transformation initiatives. •Ensure alignment of the workforce plan with the overarching IR workforce and capability plan. •Develop multi-year change management frameworks and strategies that build organisational understanding, readiness and capability for Transformation. •Develop innovative change approaches that minimises the risks (productivity and capability) as a result of long term change development and implementation. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Training and Organisational Change Management 34 During Mobilisation •Change Management Strategy - High level explanation of what the main changes are, who is impacted and how, what major change management activities are required and how the project plans to deliver and communicate them. Includes end state and interim releases. •Learning & Development Strategy - High level definition of the Learning & Development requirements for impacted staff groups and the approach to fulfilling those requirements. High level overview of training and documentation needs, the training approach to be used to meet these needs and how and when this will be delivered. Includes initial forecast of resource required, an organisational impact assessment and a high level role impact assessment. Includes end state and interim releases. This is developed into a Learning & Development Curriculum and Plan during Detailed Design. •People Transition Strategy •Organisation Design Strategy During Detailed Design •Detailed Training Needs Analysis - detailed definition of the training requirements of each staff group impacted. •High Level People Transition Plan - high level view of how people transition will be managed including HR policies, changes to PD's, employee roles and responsibilities. Includes end state and interim releases. •Job Impact Assessment - detailed impact analysis of solution on business resources and support teams - organisation structure, accountabilities, position sizing & descriptions, performance management & KPI. Includes end state and interim releases. •Business Readiness Assessment for Stakeholders - baseline assessment of a cross section of the organisation to establish how much is understood about the BT Programme and the impending changes. •Roles Matrix - used to map roles to positions. First draft will be the As Is Role Matrix, which will be the point of departure for the BT project. •Organisation Design & Blueprint - Definition of the new organisation structure, jobs, accountabilities and Solution roles, plus the high level approach for implementing the change. •Position Descriptions - changes to existing PD's and creation of PDs for new jobs. Creation / adjustment of performance measures to fit the role objectives. Deliverables continued During Build/Acquire and Test •Detailed People Transition Plan - detailed explanation of the way that organisation structure and role changes will be implemented, including HR policies, changes to PD's, employee roles and responsibilities. •Role Cards - Role Cards for each role and linked to PDs. •Learning & Development Schedule - details training course dates, times, locations, trainers and trainee names. •Learning & Development Material / Documentation - Solution process and capability related documentation available to users following training. Reference material includes processes, procedure, detailed transaction guides, training guides, course workbooks and other reference material. During Final Preparation •Go Live Communications Plan - plan detailing Communications needed around Cutover and Go Live. •Training Evaluation Report - analysis of training and user attendance and evaluation of understanding from the trainers' perspective. •Post-Go Live End User Learning & Development Schedule - schedule detailing any training required during the sustain period. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 35 Term Definition Better Business Case Better Business Case refers to a set of guidance developed by NZ Treasury and other central agencies to provide a structured and standardised approach to the development of business cases in the New Zealand public sector. CR&A Corporate Risk and Assurance Cost and Benefit Analysis Cost and Benefits Analysis involves the definition of the expected costs of the Programme over its duration. The benefits will be highlighted as expected values over a period of time. Benefits will include owners of those benefits. Current State Assessment and Definition Assessment of the current state of a number of attributes of Inland Revenue‟s current environment, including data, people, policy, process and technology. Current State Processes Also known as “as is” processes. The current state processes represent what happens, not what should happen, or could happen. They are used as the baseline for gap analysis. Detailed Design Is the elaboration of the high level design to provide a detailed understanding of the future state processes, requirements (functional, non-functional and integration) and organisational impacts of the change. The Detailed Design will include a review of the costs and benefits to provide a greater level of delivery certainty. EPMO Enterprise Portfolio Management Office FRICE F.R.I.C.E stands for Forms, Reports, Interfaces, Conversions and Enhancements. Future State Processes Also known as “to be” processes. The future state processes define how the business wants to complete a business function or activity in the future. High Level Design The activity to define the current and future state of the changes down to 3 levels of business process composition which will include the definition of the Scope of Work, the business pain points and business requirements Glossary (1/3) IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 36 Term Definition Investment Objectives The Investment Objectives articulate the desired investment outcomes of the Programme. They were used to inform an assessment of options within the Programme Business Case, which was agreed by Cabinet. Investment Objectives are supported by appropriate metrics and targets, which will be used to evaluate the success of the Programme. Levels of decomposition Level 0: Business Function (Organisational Grouping) – includes Strategy and Policy, Delivery, Service and Support. Level 1: Mega Process (Process Grouping) - defines different views of how processes are structured to deliver the business focus at Level 1. Level 2: Major Process (Core Process) - comprises of process groups that are defined in detail in the business process flows at Level 3. Level 3: Process (Business Process Flow) - contains process flows and describes the sequence or flow between sub-processes. Each process at this level must add value to the business or be an essential requirement. Level 4: Sub-Process (Operational Process Flow) - defines in more detail the business process flows defined at Level 3. It includes detailed sub-process design with links to written procedures, business rules, application functions and technology. Level 5: Activity (Detailed Process Flow) - provides further detail for the operational process flows and is specific to an individual operational role. Detail will be described in a procedure document or workflow. Managing Successful Programmes (MSP) MSP is a recognised programme management methodology developed by the Office of Government Commerce, which is part of the UK Cabinet Office. The methodology is now a recognised standard for public sector programme management internationally. Outcomes Roadmap The Outcomes Roadmap identifies key outcomes and themes for Transformation across 4 stages, over a 10- year period. The Outcomes Roadmap has been presented and finalised by IR and authorised by the Ministers (in July 2012). Glossary (2/3) IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 37 Term Definition Package Fit/Gap Analysis Involves the detailed analysis of software packages/solutions identified in the initial solution options paper developed as a part of the Detailed Design. The detailed fit/gap analysis evaluates, based on an agreed criteria, the extent to which the software package/solution options meets the business and technical requirements. Roadmap The Roadmap defines and sequences the work packages that constitute the Programme and break these down into Stages. This is equivalent to a „Project Dossier‟ in MSP. Scope Definition The work that must be performed to deliver a product, service, or result with the specified features and functions. Defines the initial high-level parameters for design and includes the definition of scope across process, organisation, country, language, time, organisational change management, technology and data. Stage The programme will be split into four stages. Each stage will consist of a number of work packages. This is equivalent to a „Tranche‟ in the MSP methodology. Stage One Scope Definition This document specifies the scope of work packages within Stage One. It details the scope in more detail than in the Roadmap and includes process scope, organisational scope, technology scope, data scope, country scope, language scope, time zone scope and currency scope. Stakeholder Requirements These are statements of the requirements of a particular stakeholder or class of stakeholders. They describe the stakeholder "wants" and how that stakeholder will interact with the change. Target Operating Model The The Target Operating Model defines the desired capabilities of the organisation. These are broken down into sub-capabilities; each sub-capability is described in more detail by a set of characteristics. Key Characteristic changes are grouped by People, Process, Platform and Policy, which provide a detailed description of the desired target state. This is the equivalent to the „Blueprint‟ in MSP. Work package IR‟s Business Transformation will be delivered through a number of work packages. Each work package will have a well-defined scope clearly articulating the start and end of the work to be performed, the pain points that the work package will resolve, the linked benefits and the outputs and capability improvements that it will deliver. This is equivalent to a „project‟ in the MSP methodology. Glossary (3/3) IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE