1 # Change Challenges Internal 1. Business disruption 2. Absorbing change 3. Creating a positive experience 4. Getting the change strategies right 5. Coverage of all impacted areas 6. Consistent and sustainable leadership 7. Change take up inside Inland Revenue External 8. a)Customer and community take up b) Intermediaries and third party take up c) Government agency take up and support 9. Unknown external environment impacts are managed Challenges Impacts Architecture Delivery Model WHAT HOW The BT Change Management Strategy v2.0 sets out the approach and architecture by which Inland Revenue will manage and implement Business Transformation changes. The strategy recognises that: a)that BT is a long term complex programme that through stages of development and implementation will fundamentally change Inland Revenue’s business operations, customer services, processes, policies, technology, structure and capabilities. b)that Inland Revenue will need to manage significant change over an extended period of time to almost every aspect of IR’s business while continuing to deliver today’s business. With this backdrop, the BT Change Management Strategy V2.0 covers wide reaching and necessary ground starting with a strong foundational base required to manage the scale, complexity and extended timeframe of Business Transformation. The BT’s Change Management strategy will ensure: •On-going focus will be required with regard to the nine key change challenges that we must manage with precision and endurance and some through a stringent risk based approach. •The establishment of an industrial strength change management architecture with four multifaceted and dynamic layers across the enterprise, across all stakeholders and inside each of the delivery work packages. •BT continues to invest in a delivery model that ‘pushes’ change from the centre and is ‘pulled’ and led by the business. •BT continues to undertake organisation impact assessments to ensure that the scale and size of change is well understood and the change narrative is active for our customers, external groups and stakeholder. Change Foundations The challenges and impact assessments tell us what needs to be managed and what is changing, such as: •Responding to and mitigating the nine BT change challenges and risks •Identifying and understanding the scale, magnitude, complexity of the impact of BT changes. The architecture and delivery model are how we will be managing the transformation change, by: •Establishing a robust and industrial strength architecture and delivery model to manage the high risk profile of the change for internal and external stakeholders. Change Foundations BT Change Management Strategy 2.0 WHY IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 2 The BT’s Change Management Strategy uses the change architecture as a framework and comprises 4 layers and 16 components. Each layer is a specific aspect of change that needs to be considered, managed and delivered in BTs Change Management strategy to ensure that Inland Revenue has a structured and comprehensive change response to BT. The activities and key deliverables in each component are focussed primarily on the Design phase in 2015/16 and will endure through build and deploy. Moving forward, a detailed roadmap of deliverables and activities has been designed to deliver the change management strategy and the integrated components of the architecture BT Change Management Strategy 2.0 Measurement A form of measurement will be reported on quarterly and applied to help us adjust and fine tune BT’s change management strategy over time. In Summary: The BT Change Management strategy addresses the top of mind question of ‘how’ Inland Revenue will manage the scale and size of the change being delivered by Business Transformation. This will be through strategies, specialists, initiatives and investment to: •Retain and grow our leaders who are committed to transforming, leading and supporting our people, customers and external groups through the change. •Communicate consistently and regularly to our people and all of our stakeholders. •Preserve the best of our current culture while shifting to new ways of working that support the transformation changes and new operating models. •Establish change thresholds to safeguard our organisational capacity and to provide an early warning system to manage key risks around business disruption, change absorption and take up. •Firmly stand up a change management strategy that is anchored by an industrial strength architecture that consistently addresses and responds to the nine (9) BT change challenges. •Invest in up-skilling and retraining our people for positive and quality results but also recognise the need to balance long term employment sustainability with business needs. •Commence dedicated change management work in the highly impacted areas of TS&O and Service Delivery in 2014. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE