Business Transformation Change management framework and change approach to business and customer readiness December 2021 V1.00 FINAL IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 2 Contents ItemDescriptionSlide 1Change Methodology and Toolkit Our change management methodology isunderpinned by the change management architecture. This was developed as part of theBusiness Transformation programme and provides awell-tested, structured approach to managing changeat IR. The focus is on internal/organisation change and includes examples. 03 -26 2 Customer Change –Impacts & Readiness Provides a summary of the Customer Change Management approach and timeline (closely aligned to the organisation change methodology).Covers impact assessment detail, customer change plan, customer readiness phases and approach.Includes examples. 27 -35 3Readiness Assessment Framework The Readiness Framework is a decision support tool designed to provide status and visibility that the release is “where we planned to be” at a particular Checkpoint. Includes overview, timeline and reporting detail. 36 -66 4Readiness Checkpoint ReportExample report including RAG status.67 -99 5 Programme Readiness Assessment Checklist Template Master view -449 questions, provides ratings description. Please refer separate excel workbook 6 Initiative Readiness Assessment Checklist Template Specific assessment for customer change/readiness. Please refer separate excel workbook 7 Master Scope Level Heatmap Template Produces heatmap based on scope and features. Includes impact rating scale. Please refer separate excel workbook IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Change Management Methodology & Toolkit Domain Pri ncipal – Change Management, ED&I 1/10/2021 3 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Introduction Our change management methodology isunderpinned by the change management architecture(shown left). This was developed as part of theBusiness Transformation programme and provides awell-tested, structure approach to managing changeat IR.​ We use a set of tools to understand what the changeimpacts are for our people and customers across thedimensions in the architecture. These tools include achange impact assessment and change managementplan covering communications, training, user support requirements and transition approach. This approachenables leaders, ourpeople and customers tounderstand what the change means for them, whataction they need to take and how they will besupported through the change. 4 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Foundations for Leading Change •Business and leaderled changemanagement •Methodical andstructure d (hard andsoft balance) •Strong focus oncustomer •C hange is pushed fromthe cen tre and pulledby the business andstakeholders •Solid construct bywhich changechallenges will bemitigated and managed •The ‘4 layers, 16 cells’are no t discreet. Theyare a dynamic set of forces in a changemanagement eco-system. Cut a cornerin one and the riskprofile across all willgo up. •Sets the stage fordeter mining levels of investment tosuccessfully manage change. •A strong team ofexper ienced anddedicated changepractitioners attached to businessgroup/externalstakeholders to deliveron this model. Enterprise Change Strategic Change Enabling Change •Customer and organisation •Change depth and breadth •Executive messaging •Change curve profiling •Change threshold planning Change Impact Assessment Culture & Leadership •Building sustainable leadership •A key contributor to achieving change and desired culture •Strategy to drive culture change agenda •Current and future state analysis Employment Relations •Communications •Staff involvement •Union engagement & involvement •Transition planning and processes Organisation Design •Future design options •Organisation blueprint (structure, size, skills, capability and facilities) •Strategic job change and design Workforce Design •Workforce planning •Future workforce design •Future capability, maturity gaps and uplift Change Challenges/Risk Profiling •Big Ticket challenges (testing,validation,scale) •Risk profiling for all stakeholders •Creating levers and strategies for mitigation •Active release and implementation management Communications & Stakeholder •Journey management (telling the story, change narrative & momentum) •Internal & external stakeholder management •Engagement, involvement, events Strategic Customer Change •Inside-out customer changestrategies (programme driven) •Outside in (dynamic) customer change strategies (strategy driven) Managing Change Business Integration & Readiness •Managing full scale of business impacts with affected areas, leaders and our people •Spotlight on digital change •Creating change networks Customer Readiness •Managing full scale of impacts (programme led and inside out) •Spotlight on digital change •Promotion and education •Targeted communications and testing Third Parties /Intermediaries •Manage full scale of impacts •Co-design is key •Spotlight on digital change •Promotion and education •Targeted communications and testing Central & Cross Agency Readiness •Manage full scale of impacts •Readiness for changes to data/information sharing formats, security and systems •Promotion, education and communications Capability Uplift •Detailed development and training requirements •Training planning and logistics •Delivering innovative and scaleable solutions Project Delivery Change •Detailed change tasks inside project/initiatives and in project lifecycle– detailed impacts, training needs and development, user support and procedures, communications Job Analysis & Transition •Detailed job expectation analysis and changes •New ways of working design •Specific (by change) transition planning and preparation User adoption & embedding •Project lifecycle readiness checklists •Post-implementation support and change warranty •Take up metrics •Embedding the change 5 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Scale of change Transformational •Impacts are internaland ex ternal, widelyapplied and significant(positive or negative) •Change will cause ahigh level of disruption •Multi-year, multi-staged •Re -platforming technology, bu s inessprocesses and ways of working •Critical drivers forchange – business can’tsurvive or sustaincurrent state •Business led only •Future stateorgan isation andworkforce will be‘different’ •‘Once in a generation’ Increm ental •Impacts may beinter nal and/orexternal, narrowlyapplied (positiveor negative) •Low level ofdisru ption and riskprofile is contained •Prescriptive/standard process •Short term •Software replacement/upgrades, continuous improvement •Non-critical driversfor change – business cansurvive or sustaincurrent state •Business led ortech nology led •Departmentrestructure 6 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Design AGILE Create, design, build. Deploy Pilot Rollout/Release Adopt Prove Take up the new and cease the old Embed Scale Has become default and business as usual Leverage & Optimise Innovate & get more value Embedded in Business BT/Project Primary Responsibility Milestones Go-Live Change Activity What it looks like New products or services being delivered. Step-change performance improvement. Utilisation, behaviour change, benefits to customers and IR. Our people using tools and processes and exploring functionality. Design Completed •Accessibility •Pre-deployment communications •Leader engagement •Pilot/test •Specialist/key users identified •Deployment Communications •Education/learning/training •Early life support •Specialist/key user support •Leader engagement •People readiness •Establish communities of practice and change champions. •Adoption/ behavioural change work, including supporting communications. •Focus on ‘early adopters’ •Specialist/key user support •Leader engagement •Post Go live assessment & Lessons learned •Adoption/ behavioural change work, including supporting communications •Focus on ‘late adopters/laggards’ •Specialist/key user support •Leader engagement •Adoption/ behavioural change work, including supporting communications •Specialist/key user support •Leader engagement •Specialists/key users developing skill and knowledge in preparation for go- live. •Leaders understand change and can bring their people on board. •Separate projects currently at different stages of design, deploy, adopt. •Joined up messaging about the change, go-live and support to be provided. •Appropriate education/training delivered. •Specialists/key users providing support to users. •Principles, policies, procedures etc. are in place. •Early life support processes and systems in place and operating. •Leaders and their people are ready, willing and able. •User uptake is increasing •User feedback is being captured and acted on •Impacts and issues continue to be managed and resolved in BAU. •Specialists/key users continue to provide support to users. •Our leaders are actively supporting our people to use tools and ways of working •The new way of working are promoted as part of ‘what we do’ •Our people understand which tools/policies/processes to use when, and how they can assist with their work. •Collaboration is evident. •Information is easy to find, accurate, tailored . •Efficiencies and ease of use are evident. •Principles, policies, procedures etc. are being followed. •New way or working is ‘what we do’ •Continuous improvement is a focus. •Demonstrated engagement, combined with a sense of collective ownership of the change. •Ongoing support is resourced to enable future improvements. Measure •Scopes, plans, design and test completion. •Deployment stats, training completion. •Initial usage, training completion•Utilisation, behaviour change, benefits to customers and IR. •Effectiveness, productivity. The Change Management Lifecycle 7 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Design AGILE Create, design, build. Deploy Pilot Rollout/Release Adopt Prove Take up the new and cease the old Embed Scale Has become default and business as usual Leverage & Optimise Innovate & get more value Embedded in Business BT/Project Primary Responsibility Milestone Go-Live Change Activity Tools & Templates New products or services being delivered. Step-change performance improvement. Utilisation, behaviour change, benefits to customers and IR. Our people using tools and processes and exploring functionality. Design Completed •Accessibility •Pre-deployment communications •Leader engagement •Pilot/test •Specialist/key users identified •Deployment Communications •Education/learning/training •Early life support •Specialist/key user support •Leader engagement •People readiness •Establish communities of practice and change champions. •Adoption/ behavioural change work, including supporting communications. •Focus on ‘early adopters’ •Specialist/key user support •Leader engagement •Post Go live assessment & Lessons learned •Adoption/ behavioural change work, including supporting communications •Focus on ‘late adopters/laggards’ •Specialist/key user support •Leader engagement •Adoption/ behavioural change work, including supporting communications •Specialist/key user support •Leader engagement Accessibility guidelines Communications & Stakeholder Engagement Plan Impact Assessment •Training needs analysis & Training Plan Change Management Plan Communications & Stakeholder Engagement Plan Impact Assessment •Training needs analysis & Training Plan •Change Management Plan •People Readiness Assessment •Early Life Support plan Communications & Stakeholder Engagement Plan Impact Assessment •Learning & Development plan for BAU •Change Management Plan •Post-go live People Readiness Assessment •Early Life Support plan Communications & Stakeholder Engagement Plan Impact Assessment •Learning & Development plan for BAU •Change Management Plan •Post-go live People Readiness Assessment •Embed & Transition to BAU Plan Communications & Stakeholder Engagement Plan •Training needs analysis & Training Plan •Learning & Development plan for BAU •Post-go live People Readiness Assessment The Change Management Toolkit Minimum requirement/core component •Optional depending on scale/type of change 8 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Assessing Impacts Organisation Impact Assessment Change or Scope Business Process Business Group or User Type What is the change? Sometimes described as a feature or scope item. What are the associated business processes? Each change may have one or more business processes. Who is impacted by the change? May be a business group, team, role or user group/type Assessment What is the impact rating? This helps to understand the size and extent of the change. How many people are impacted? The number of people in each impacted group. Use the same list of changes/features/scope items for the Customer Impact Assessment to provide line of sight across the change Workforce Planning can tag their capacity impact assessment to business processes as well, ensuring impacts on our contact centres are identified. Training Needs Analysis will drive the next level of detail based on the specific work of teams roles, and individuals where appropriate. Use the impact assessment rating scale and questions on Slide 8 9 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] For every change, teams and/or user type within each business group or customer segment are identified. An impact rating is applied according to the scale. The ratings and description of the impacts are then extensively tested and validated within the project and with business stakeholders. Information on changes for our people are gathered from a wide variety of sources, including working groups, design workshops and definition sessions. The impacts are captured in purpose-built tools e.g. sharepointor excel spreadsheets, or START FCR. Organisation Impact Assessment Rating Scale Organisation Impact Rating Scale Very High The cumulative effect of changes already rated as high impact represents a very high or extreme risk according to the Enterprise Risk Rating Tool. High Introduction of completely new: • Policy (legislative), business processes and policies, tax & social policy products, procedures, systems and/or; • Working environment including location, tools, technology, user support & procedures, organisation structure & team composition and/or: • Capabilities and skills, ways of working, culture shift. Med Many changes to existing: • Policy (legislative), business processes and policies, tax & social policy products, procedures, systems and/or; • Working environment including location, tools, technology, user support & procedures, organisation structure & team composition and/or: • Capabilities and skills, ways of working, culture shift. Low Some changes to existing: • Policy (legislative), business processes and policies, tax & social policy products, procedures, systems and/or; • Working environment including location, tools, technology, user support & procedures, organisation structure & team composition and/or: • Capabilities and skills, ways of working, culture shift. Neg. Negligibleor No Change 10 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Direct People & Organisation Will the change require any changes to roles or the scope of tasks undertaken, role accountabilities and responsibilities, changes to organisation structure or performance measures for teams or individuals? If so, a job impact assessment may be required. Will there be any changes to capabilities or skills that people require to carry out their role, impacts to organisation culture, decision making or ways of working? Is there likely to be any impact on the physical or psychological wellbeing of staff/contractors/visitors? Policy & Process Is there change to legislation? Will there be changes to IR policies, procedures or business rules? Will there be changes to processes or services, team interdependencies, co-existence, or the way IR’s services are delivered to customers (internal and external)? Will there be changes to the products or outputs for services or the way IR works with or utilise third parties and business partners? Will there be changes to the amount of work that teams carry out ? Are there any changes to operational budgets or delegations? Technology Will there be changes to the technology, applications, systems or software people use? Will there be changes to technology infrastructure? Will there be changes to the capabilities or processes required for IT Support and Operations Management? Indirect Involve d To what extent will people and teams be involved in supporting the delivery of the change (prior to, at go- live or after go-live)? Will there be additional or different support required from shared services or teams outside of the programme (dependencies)? Detailed Impact Assessment Questions •These questions are used to help guide the identification of impacts. •They are not rated separa tely in the assessment. •Indirect impacts may also be considered i.e. where there is no change for a team/group, but they are providing resource to the project or initiative. 11 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] START Release 3 example A more detailed heat-map showing the assessment of key features within each scope item is provided in the appendix. Direct Impact of landing the change Indirect Impact of delivering the change Organisation impact rating scale Very High High risk results from the cumulative effect of high impact change The cumulative effect of changes already rated as high impact representsa very high or extreme risk according to the Enterprise Risk Rating Tool. High Introductionof completely new: •Policy (legislative) •Business processes and policies •Tax and social policyproducts •Systems and applications •Working environment including location, tools, user support and procedures •Organisation structure and team composition •Capabilities and skills •Ways of working and culture Medium Major changes to existing: Low Some changes to existing: Negligible No change to: Indirectimpacts The extent people are involved in the change prior to or at go-live, for example, supporting implementation by providing people or services for the programme. CCS-Individuals CCS- BusinessIISPFFITCOCTCCI&AP&CPAS Scope Item Individuals Families Micro Business Community Compliance Capability & Outcomes SME Significant Enterprises Legal Services International Revenue Strategy External Relationships IIS PFF ITC OCTC CI&A P&C PAS Income Tax -IndividualsHighHigh Very h Mediu m MediumLowLowNil Mediu m Mediu m High Mediu m LowLowNilNil Income Tax -Non-IndividualsHighLowHighHigh Mediu m High Hig h LowLowLowLow Mediu m Mediu m NilNilNilNil Investment IncomeLowNilNilNilLowNil Hig h NilNil Mediu m LowLowNilNilNilNilNil Employer Information Mediu m Nil Mediu m Mediu m LowMedium Hig h NilNil Mediu m LowLow Mediu m NilNilNilNil Working for Families Tax CreditsHighHigh Mediu m Mediu m LowMediumNilNilNil Mediu m Mediu m HighNilNilLowNilNil Tax Intermediaries Mediu m LowLowHighLowLowLowLowNilLowLowLowNilNilLowNilNil Customer Master Mediu m Mediu m Mediu m Mediu m LowMedium Med ium NilLowLowLowNilNilNilNilNilNil Digital EcosystemsHighLowLowHighLowLowLowNilNil Mediu m Lo w NilLowNilNilNilNil Tax Administration ActLowLowLow Mediu m LowMediumLow Mediu m Nil Mediu m LowLowNil Mediu m LowNilLow 12 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Example START Release 3: CCS-I Individuals Segment Information & Knowledge Management Principles There is a natural home for all types of information. Information is stored once and shared many times. Information is open by default; closed by exception. Information is protected and preserved. Information management is seamless to the user. Information is easy to access and knowledge is easy to obtain. Knowledge is easy to share. Impact Description •Customer Service Officers managing the voice channel and correspondence will need to support individuals, families, businesses, employers and intermediaries through a significant transition period with changes to individual income tax, rebates, Working for Families Tax Credits, non-individual income tax, employment information, myIRand other channels. •Customer Service Officers will need a thorough understanding of the changes to individual income tax legislation and processes including the new end-of-year assessment replacing the PTS and IR3 returns, and how resulting credits and debits will be handled. •Customer Service Officers will need a thorough understanding of the changes to processes to non-individual income tax including how provisional tax, imputation and tax pooling will be handled. •All Customer Support Administrators and Customer Service Officers will need to understand the implications of moving the customer master into START including the new income profile and how to maintain relationships information. •Customer Service Officers who carry out registrations, bankruptcies and cessations will need to know how these processes have changed. •Customer Services Officers working in the contact centre will be able to approve urgent disbursements including for Working for Families, and these will be processed two-hourly. Prioritised Change Groups Estimated Headcount A CustomerService Officers who manage individual and non-individual income tax end of year assessments, account reviews, correspondence, registrations, bankruptcies and cessations. Customer Service Officers who manage contacts with individual, business and WFFTC customers. ≈ 1,063 B Customer Support Administrators and Customer Support Officers who manage student loans, payments, paper and imaging, customer details and employers. Team Leads ≈ 513 C All other Customer Support Administrators andCustomer Service Officers Analysts, Management ≈ 139 DSupport Staff≈ 6 TOTAL SEGMENT HEADCOUNT ≈ 1,721 A B C D 13 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Example: Intelligent Information Hub/Haukāinga Information & Knowledge Management Principles There is a natural home for all types of information. Information is stored once and shared many times. Information is open by default; closed by exception. Information is protected and preserved. Information management is seamless to the user. Information is easy to access and knowledge is easy to obtain. Knowledge is easy to share. All of our people will be impacted by the change, with a Low-Medium impact for most. Change considerations take into account user behaviour, trust and confidence. Change Considerations: •Important to build trust and confidence in new tool(s) as a fast, authoritative, accurate source of information. •Encourage view of IKM as an ‘ecosystem’ that everyone is part of. Need to provide a closed feedback loop with consumers. •Visible support will be required by leaders to assist with adoption/embedding. •Focus on required behaviour and culture change to embed and realise benefits. •Utilise specialist users to support behaviour change for new search functionality •Give consideration to implementation plan, taking into account other changes underway that impact on our people. •Put in place clear process and expectations for resolving errors and gaps in content. •Consider how to build trust in content creators – show they understand needs of consumers. •Need to establish accessibility of content and implementation support for people with a disability. •Need to give further consideration to how IRKB team in C&O/START Help in BT are impacted •Transition to BAU and ongoing content management, support, embedding. •Consider potential for change challenges: - On top of other recent new information systems this is another change, which could be beneficial or seen another thing to learn. - Could return too much information/make it harder for people - Too many different tools to choose from. 14 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] The Organisation Change Management Plan •Sets out the overall approach to implementing the change and supports decision making about the project implementation •Considers how to best implement the change so as to minimise disruption for our business, customers and people and mitigate any change considerations or risks identified. •Builds on the impact assessment to consider the best way to support our people through the change, enable to them to feel capable of working in the new environment or with new systems/tools and consider accessibility. •May include or link to sub-plans – stakeholder & communications, learning, early life support •Will likely include a timeline or phases aligned to the project delivery, and look at what change management activities are needed at each phase •Also considers what support is needed after implementation and how this will be managed in BAU. 15 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Developing the Change Management Plan Using the impact assessment and what you know about each impacted area of the business to consider: •A rule of thumb is the more highly impacted, the more care and effort will be required to provide change support •Also think about how critical the area is for change takeup, and how well they are likely to adapt to the change •Use this information to form the 'change groups’ or to segment users according to criteria such as ‘Complex user’, ‘standard user’, ‘occasional user’. Then consider: •How many people are in each group and where are they located? •Are there any significant changes to roles/duties identified – contact HR to confirm. •What support is this group likely to need to be able take up the change and minimise disruption? What will their managers/leaders need? What will specialists/key users need? •What is the best channel(s) for communications for this group? It may be through leaders, through formal channels, through change champions – what will they need to be able to communicate effectively? How specific/targeted do the communications needs to be? •Is there a requirement for learning/training? What is the best approach for learning (a training needs analysis will support this) – e.g. classroom training, on-line modules, written instructions, on-the-job learning supported by knowledge articles? Consider how many people require learning/training, geographic spread, delivery method, complexity of the learning required, accessibilityand cost. •How will we know people are ready for the change? Could be assessed using survey's, interviews, check-ins with key people/change champions. •What support will be needed after go-live? Consider how intensive this support should be, who is best placed to provide it and for how long. Will the Support Portal be used? How will issues be triaged and managed? 16 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Change Group Definitions Change Group Group A Assessedashighlyto very highly impacted. These teams are critical for change up-take and need to be ready for go-live so they can continue to do their work. They need close change management, communicationsand a high level of training and user support, including time, coaching and support from their leaders so they can apply their learning on the job. Group B Assessed as moderately to highly impacted. These teams are important for change up-take and need to be ready for go-live. Their work would be disrupted if they are not informed and trained.They need change management, communications and a medium to high level of training and user support, including time, coaching and support from their leaders so they can apply their learning on the job. Group C Assessed as low to moderately impacted. These teams are important for change up-take and their work could be disrupted if they are not informed and trained. They need some change management, communications and a low to medium level of training and user support, including time, coaching and support from their leaders so they can apply their learning on the job. Group D Need awareness and communications but not critical to enable them to continue their work or for change up-take. No training or user support required. Change groups put together those teams which are similarly impacted by the change. Support activities will be tailored by change group - and even within each change group - so that the right type and amount of support is given. 17 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Change Management Approach 18 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Example: Change Plan START Release 3 The 6 part change plan has been adapted to a 6 + 1 change plan for START release 3.0. We’ve added Post ELS Support, recognising the complexity of this release and the need for support beyond June 2019. •Communications includes both general and targeted communications. •Training includes facilitated learning (classroom or other), online learning, and on-the-job learning. •Post ELS Support is likely to include training and other support. CCS-I Individuals -CustomerService Officers who manage individual and non-individual income tax end of year assessments, account reviews, correspondence, registrations and cessations and contacts with individual, business and WFFTC customers. CCS-I Families -Customer Service Officers who manage WFFTC and Customer Service Officers who manage contacts with families. CSS-IMicro- Customer Service Officers who undertake early debt management. CCS-I Community Compliance -Customer Service Officers and Community Compliance Officers who manage front-of-house, customer education and compliance and tax preparer account management. CCS-B Small & Medium Enterprises- Customer Service Officers and Business Lifecycle Managers who undertake outstanding returns collection, debt management, account management and/or provide inbound contact centre support. CCS-B Significant Enterprises – Customer Service Officers and Business Lifecycle Managers who account manage High Wealth Individuals and Significant Enterprises. PFF -Crown CCS-I Individuals - Customer Support Administrators and Customer Support Officers who manage student loans, payments, paper and imaging, customer details and employers, and Team Leads. CCS-I Families - Customer Service Officers who manage child support, and Team Leads. CSS-I Micro - Customer Compliance Specialists who undertake hidden economy, fraud and property audits. CCS-I Community Compliance –Team Leads. CCS-I Capability & Outcomes –Technical Specialists, Analysts. CCS-B Small & Medium Enterprises - Customer Compliance Specialists who undertake hidden economy, fraud and property audits. CCS-B Significant Enterprises – Customer Compliance Specialists who manage compliance for Significant Enterprises, Crown Entities and undertake Special Audits. CCS-B External Relations - Complaints Management Team. CCS-B Legal Services in respect of proposed legislative change to income tax and the Tax Administration Act. IIS- Intelligence & Insight Specialists PFF -Business Partners, Analysts Corporate Integrity & Assurance -Stakeholder Relations CCS-I -Analysts, Team Leads (except Individuals and Community Compliance), Management , Management Support and all other Customer Support Administrators and Customer Service Officers. CCS-B – All other Customer Services Officers, Analysts, Team Leads, Managers and Management Support. CCS-I Capability & Outcomes –Customer Experience Designers, Capability & Outcomes Specialists, Process Integrity Team, Managers and Team Leads. CCS-B –Legal Services, External Relationships, International Revenue Strategy. PFF -Finance Business Partners, Analysts, FM Operations (Te Rapa). Office of the Tax Counsel IT&C– Operations, New Services Platform CCS-I and CCS-B –Support staff and Management in Legal Services, International Revenue Strategy and External Relationships. Policy and Strategy People & Culture Corporate Integrity & Assurance The rest of Information & Intelligence Services, Corporate Integrity & Assurance, PFF and Information Technology & Change 19 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Stakeholder Engagement & Communications Plan •May be a separate stakeholder engagement and communications plan depending on the project •Consider who needs to know about the change, what they need to know, when and •segment according to their needs •Not all will be 'impacted' by the change, but have influence over decision making or be influencers that could affect the level of change take-up. Internal stakeholder management principles •Start fromthe top.We know that the more engaged and informed our leaders are, the more engaged and informed their people will be. •Focus on ourend-goal.We will always come back to the core of our transformation, why we’re doing this—we’re making tax simpler for New Zealanders. •Give our people a voice.We will offer interactive communication formats to give groups most impacted by change a chance to share their opinions, ask questions and raise concerns, at specific times through the communications and change process. •Be mindful of the volume and impact of our communications.We will have a view across all streams of BT communications to minimise the risk of overwhelming people with information on the changes taking place. 20 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Stakeholder Engagement & Communications Plan 21 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Training Needs Analysis and Training Plan ●Consider what people need to know to continue to do their role with the new tool/process etc. Is there a learning need or is it communications that are required? ●If the change is being delivered by an external vendor (usually technology related) what training/learning do they provide, and does it need to be adapted to suit IR? What training environments are provided? ●Consider who needs what level of training – usually according to role or user categories – and how many people, in what businessgroup(s) and where they are based (the impact assessment will help with this) ●Break learning/training into components. These may be based around a topic, product, process or system functionality. ●Consider the best mechanism for delivery– On the job, classroom, on-line modules or self study guides, supporting material e.g. FAQ’s, guides. Think about how users will best access learning, particularly in the contact centres, and for those with accessibility requirements. ●The training plan may also estimate costs e.g. trainer time/travel/ time required/any special equipment or learning environmentsrequired. Is instructional design capability required to develop materials? ●Also consider logistics e.g. if classroom training, what equipment/set up is needed, does everyone have access to a laptop, roomavailability etc, on-line booking, recording completion etc. Note: ●The approach for learning/training for change management differs from that used to address a performance issue –our focus is onwhat people need to learn as a result of a change being delivered to continue do their job and feel capable. It is usually aimed at groups of peopleand assumes competence in their current role. Individual performance is the responsibility of the people manager/HR, not the project. 22 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Training & Learning Delivery Plan –STAX example 23 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Training Needs Analysis FATCA/AEOI example 24 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE \[UNCLASSIFIED\] People Readiness 25 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Thank you. 26 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Customer Change –Impacts & Readiness Business Transformation Date: November 2021 27 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE -2- JulAugSepOctNovDecJanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDec S4-1-R1 (and Other) Impact Assessment and Change Management Plan Deliverable: •Based on detailed design •To Segment or Business Unit Level (e.g. CCS-I Families, CCS-B Micro, PF&F) •Tested with S4.1 Delivery Leads, Product Owners, BTMs, SMEs, and business leadership teams. •Validated through engagement with business representatives S4-1-R1 (and Other) Training and User Support Plan Deliverable High- Level Scope Drop 1 Impact Assessment: •Based on scope (R1, R2 and Other)\* •To Segment or Business Unit level (e.g. CCS-I Families, PF&F) •Tested with S4.1 Delivery Leads and Product Owners Summary of OCMT Approach and Timeline -example S4-1-R1 (and Other) Customer Communications and Marketing Plan Deliverable START Delivery Stakeholder Management Plan Deliverable START Delivery Internal Communications Plan S4-1-R2 (and Other) Impact Assessment and Change Management Plan Deliverable: •Based on detailed design •To Segment or Business Unit Level (e.g. CCS-I Families, CCS-B Micro, PF&F) •Tested with S4.1 Delivery Leads, Product Owners, BTMs, SMEs, and business leadership teams. •Validated through engagement with business representatives S4-1-R1 (and Other) Training and User Support Plan Deliverable S4-1-R1 (and Other) Customer Communications and Marketing Plan Deliverable 2020 2021 Stakeholder Management Plan S4-1-R1 (and Other) Impact Assessment & Change Management Plan S4-1-R1 (and Other) Training and User Support Plan S4-1-R1 (and Other) Customer Communications & Marketing Plan S4-1-R1 Go-Live R- Other Deployment Legislative Change S4-1-R2 Go-Live S4-1-R2 (and Other) Impact Assessment & Change Management Plan S4-1-R2 (and Other) Training and User Support Plan S4-1-R2 (and Other) Customer Communications & Marketing Plan \* Optimisation impacts/change plans documented separately Drop 2 Impact Assessments: •Based on scope and design decisions made to- date\* •To Segment or Business Unit level (e.g. CCS-I Families, PF&F) •Tested with S4.1 Delivery Leads and Product Owners •Used for engagement with leadership teams and our people. - 2 - 28 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE -3- Customer Change –what are the impacts Impact Assessment Five W’s and one H (who, what, when, where, why, how) •Who is impacted •What are the changes •When will customers be impacted •Where is the impact •Why •How are customers impacted oDo they need to prepare (egc hang e systems/business processes etc) Individuals FamiliesHigh Wealth IndividualsMicroNot for ProfitsSmall-Medium EnterprisesSignificant EnterprisesTax AgentsBookkeepersNominated PersonsPayroll IntermediariesTax Pool IntermediariesAdvocacy GroupsKiwiSaver ProvidersOther Gov't AgenciesOverseas AgenciesService Providers / Financial InstitutionsSoftware Developers PPL Administer in START Me d Me dMe d Customer on-boarding (education & registration) LowLowLow Enha nc ed s el f-s er vi c e / di gi ta l exper i enc eMe d Me dNegLowNeg Compliance activitiesNegNeg Pa ymentsNegNeg DisbursementsLowLowLow Cross-agency info sharing / exchangeNegNegNeg ReportingNeg Unclaimed Monies Administer in STARTMe d Me d Me d Me d Me d Me d Me dLowLowLow Customer on-boarding (education & registration)LowLowLowMe d Me d Me d Me dLowLowLowNegNeg Enha nc ed s el f-s er vi c e / di gi ta l exper i enc eMe d Me d Me d Me d Me d Me d Me dLowLowLowNegNeg Compliance activitiesNegNegNegNegNegNegNegNegNegNeg Pa yments NegNegNegLowLowLowLowNegNegNeg DisbursementsLowLowLowLowLowLowLowNegNegNeg Cross-agency info sharing / exchange Di s c over i es Ga tewa y Ser vi c es NegNegNeg Duties Administer in STARTMe dNegNegNeg Customer on-boarding (education & registration)Neg Enha nc ed s el f-s er vi c e / di gi ta l exper i enc eMe dNegNegNeg Compliance activitiesLow Pa yments Low DisbursementsLowNegNegNeg Cross-agency info sharing / exchange Ga tewa y Ser vi c es NegNegNegNeg Reporting NegNegNeg Foreign Trusts Administer in STARTLowLowMe dLowLow Customer on-boarding (education & registration)Me d Me dLowLowLow Enha nc ed s el f-s er vi c e / di gi ta l exper i enc eMe d Me d Me d Me d Me d Compliance activities LowLowLowNeg Pa ymentsMe d Me d DisbursementsNegNeg Cross-agency info sharing / exchangeNeg Ga tewa y Ser vi c es Reporting IndividualsBusinessIntermediariesBusiness Partners Customer SegmentSTART Delivery Stage 4.1.R1 & Other Business: Micro-businessLow - Med Business: Not for ProfitsLow - Med Business: Small-medium EnterpriseLow - Med Business: Significant Enterprise Low - Med Individuals: FamiliesLow – Med Individuals: High Net Worth IndividualsLow – Med Individuals: IndividualsLow - Med Intermediaries: BookkeepersLow - Med Intermediaries: Nominated Persons/Alternative Contact Person/Other Representatives Low Intermediaries: Payroll Intermediary/Payroll BureauxNegligible Intermediaries: Tax Agents Medium (includes E-File decommission) Intermediaries: Tax Pool IntermediaryNegligible Business Partners: Advocacy GroupsNegligible - Low Business Partners: KiwiSaverProviders High (transition to new GWS) Business Partners: Government Agencies impacted by S4-1-R1 & OtherLow - Medium Business Partners: Other Government Agencies Low Business Partners: Overseas AgenciesNegligible Business Partners: Service Providers/Financial InstitutionsLow Business Partners: Software Developers High (includes E-File decommission and new KS Provider GWS ) Business Partners: Payroll Developers Medium (includes v2 employment information and service upgrade) 29 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE -4- Customer Change Plan - example Business- Led Tactics Account Managemen t Customer Education Via third party Advertising, Social Media Direct Marketing Website, myIR & online services Voice Channel Individuals─ ── √ ─ ─ √ √ Individuals: Families ── √ √ √ √ √ √ Individuals: High Wealth ── √ ── ─ √ √ Businesses: micro and SME √ √ √ ──√ √ √ Business: Significant Enterprises √ √ √ √ ─√ √ √ Intermediaries: Tax Agents, Bookkeepers √ √ √ ──√ √ ─ Business Partners: Other Government Agencies ─ √ ── ── √ ─ Business Partners: Financial Institutions ─ √ ── ── √ ─ Business Partner: Software Developers ─√ ── ── √ ─ Website, myIRand online services Content on IR website, news items, campaign pages, promotional and instructional videos, banner messaging and new functionality, services and B2B channels. Voice Channel IVR messaging and functionality, dedicated 0800 lines, call-flow enhancements. Business-led Tactics Outbound calling, inserts with forms and returns, compliance campaigns, tactical planning. Account Management Via BT Account Managers, CCS External Relationships, Significant Enterprises and Community Compliance. Customer Education Webinars, seminars, Community Compliance visits. Via Third Party Information received from a tax agent, bookkeeper, software, service or other provider, or other influencer such as industry associations, Chambers of Commerce, CAB. Advertising, Social Media Google search, online, print and radio advertising, social media Proactively provided articles educational content. Direct Marketing Personalised and targeted emails, texts and letters. 30 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE -5- Customer readiness Readiness phases: •Awareness and understanding •Understanding and readiness •Readiness and support Customer SegmentWhat stage we are measuring Businesses/EmployersUnderstanding and Readiness Intermediaries/Tax Agents Understanding and Readiness KiwisaverScheme Providers Understanding and Readiness Software DevelopersUnderstanding and Readiness Investment Income Payers Understanding and Readiness Government Agencies impacted by R4 Understanding and Readiness IndividualsAwareness, Understanding and Readiness Readiness Assessment Approach Five W’s and one H (who, what, when, where, why, how) 1.Readiness criteria –“where we want customers to be” at specific points in time (specific, measurable and trackable) 2.Collect evidence oMetrics and data from marketing/communications activities (eg DM, social media) and other sources oResearch findings (eg customer interaction testing) oCustomer engagement teams (egaccount managers) oMarket research 3.Assess evidence against criteria 4.Report Note: Test/validate your findings with the stakeholders 31 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE -6- AssessmentRisks & Mitigations Readi ness Enviro nment Child Support Low (>20%) level of awareness across Families customers about the changes. •More detailed information has been updated online in August. •Customer testing found that the new functionality in myIR provided better visibility for complex child support customers, with some minor tweaks requested to terminology. •Direct marketing was issued in September with a net open rate of 56.35% Customer’s ability to absorb information about the changes may be limited due to uncertainty around COVID and lock down –continue to provide support to our customers during this time Light Green Light Amber Low (>20%) level of awareness across Advocacy groups about the changes. •An Introduction to S4.1.R2 has been distributed to 652 organisations including Industry Associations, Community groups, sports bodies, and Māori Authorities. Discussions continue to be held as required to ensure questions/concerns raised are being addressed. These groups will be focussed more on ensuring their members are receiving the COVID support they need, therefore it is highly likely they are not be taking on board the information about the changes -continue to provide support to our customers during this time Light Green Light Amber Low to medium (<30%) level of awareness for employers that child support deductions for newly liable parents will become compulsory. •Engagement continues for these customers with further detail about the changes added to online landing pages, and a more in-depth webinar to become available in September. •Direct marketing was issued to business/employers in September with a net open rate of 60.48% With ongoing uncertainty around COVID, the current focus for employers will be on supporting their business and employees. This may reduce their ability to understand any impacts these changes may have on employment activities -continue to provide clear messaging around obligations that will support to our customers during this time, with the aim to provide additional support/education after go-live when this is needed. Light Amber Amber Low (<20%) level of awareness across intermediaries that child support deductions for newly liable parents will become compulsory. •Further promotion of external webinars has been included in Agents Answers, Business Tax Update, and Transformation News which are issued to intermediaries and professional bodies. There are no current risks for this customer group across this change. Light Green Amber Version 12 Upgrade Medium to High (65%) levels of awareness with Low (<20%) levels of understanding across intermediaries that myIR is being upgraded to version 12. •A wide range of engagement activity continues for this customer group including direct marketing, account management, and external webinars. •The outbound campaign for intermediaries impacted by the cap on subscriptions is going well and provides further opportunity for education on version12 upgrade changes. •Customer testing indicated that across a range of tasks version 12 was considered an improvement over version 11. Of those who showed a preference for version 11, some comments suggested their experience was coloured by unfamiliarity. •Intermediaries received a further round of direct marketing in September, with a net open rate of 49.14% Tax Intermediaries have turned their focus to supporting their clients during the latest lock down, and therefore the changes will not be front of mind at this stage. –additional support is being provided, from now until post go-live. There is concern around meeting the GST filing date on 28 October due to their increased workload from COVID and the timing for IR’s close down. –clear messaging is currently being developed about the GST due date to provide further certainty to these customers. Light Green Amber Low (>20%) levels of awareness across other customer groups •Further information has been included on relevant online landing pages and external webinars for Individuals, Families, and Business customers; which currently have over 800 unique views across customer groups. Customer’s ability to absorb information about the changes may be limited due to uncertainty around COVID and lock down -continue to provide support to our customers during this time Light Green Amber R2 Other Medium (30%) levels of awareness for tax intermediaries that customers will no longer be issued a new IRD number after bankruptcy •Intermediaries only require an awareness of this change and messaging has been included within direct marketing, online, in external webinars, and high level presentations to professional bodies. There are no current risks for this customer group across this change. Light Green Light Amber Medium (30%) levels of awareness across tax intermediaries that historical audit correspondence will become visible within myIR. •General information is available online and has been included in direct marketing. More detail will be included in the Subscriptions and Correspondence webinar to be available in September There are no current risks for this customer group across this change Light Green Light Amber Customer Readiness - example This assessment provided by BT Account Management , Community Compliance and Marketing 32 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE -7- Change treatments - example The table below is a summary of key activities to get our customers ready for Stage 4 – Release 2 & “other” scope: Product and Customer Jun 2021Jul 2021Aug 2021Sep 2021Oct 2021Nov 2021 Child Support (Families, Employers, Intermediaries) Website – landing page Webinar – introducing Stage 4 Release 2 Account Management Account Management Transformation News Bookkeepers conference 30- 31 July Agents Answers Website – landing page updated Account Management Transformation News CP 2b customer readiness assessment Fact sheet - Child Support Agents Answers Account Management Transformation News Webinar - Child Support legislation Direct Marketing Social Media Digital and traditional Advertising How to video CP 3 customer readiness assessment Account Management Transformation News Direct Marketing Social Media Digital and traditional Advertising Account Management Direct Marketing Version 12 Upgrade (Individuals, Families, Businesses, Intermediaries) Website – landing page Webinar – introducing Stage 4 Release 2 Account Management Webinars – introducing V12 Account Management Direct Marketing Transformation News Bookkeepers conference 30- 31 July Agents Answers Transformation News Website – landing page Account Management Webinars – V12 detail CP 2b customer readiness assessment Agents Answers Transformation News Account Management Webinars – V12 detail Direct Marketing Social Media Digital Advertising How to Videos – V12 CP 3 customer readiness assessment myIR login intercept Account Management Transformation News Direct Marketing Social Media Digital Advertising myIR login intercept Account Management Direct Marketing myIR login intercept Release 2 Other (Individuals, Families, Businesses, Intermediaries) Website – landing page Webinar – introducing Stage 4 Release 2 Account Management Account Management Transformation News Bookkeepers conference 30- 31 July Agents Answers Websi te – landing page Account Management CP 2b customer readiness assessment Agents Answers Account Management Webinar - Tax on income and other EMP (tbc) Direct Marketing CP 3 customer readiness assessment Account Management Direct Marketing Social Media Digital Advertising Account Management Direct Marketing 33 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Appendix 34 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE -9- Customer Readiness RAG ratings KeyRed Light Red Amber Light AmberLight Green Green Headline Highly problematic ProblematicProblematic Problematic in defined areas Not problematicNot problematic Readiness Assessment On critical path and currently predicted that it is not possible to recover to be ready on time. It will almost certainly lead to missing the go-live date and in the most serious case influence a decision to postpone the go- live. Risks and Issues are generally Extremewith escalation to the highest level: Programme Sponsor (PGC) Currently not on target to succeed and is on the critical path. It needs focussed attention and active management to ensure that the due date is met. Risks and Issues are generally Very High to Extremewith escalation to the PLT and Programme Director Currently not on target to succeed andrequires active management to get back on track. Withsupport, focus and the appropriate mitigation this will not impact the critical path. Risks and Issues are generally Very High to Highwith escalation to the PLT and Programme Manager Is deviating from target in some specific but non- critical areas, is under active management and is showing signs of improvement. Risks and Issues are generally Medium to Low with escalation to the Release Lead Generally on target but needs some minor management attention and/or assistance to be completed by the due date. Risks and Issues are generally Low to Negligiblewith NO escalation required above the Workstream On track and likely to be delivered on time. Can be managed without intervention and or day to day management attention. Risksand Issues are generally Negligible with NO escalation required above the Workstream 35 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 1 V1:00 BT Readiness Framework D-4186 (forMain Releases and Other Initiatives) 36 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 2 Readiness Framework Readiness forms part of the BT Deployment Strategy. The Readiness Framework has been developed to provide a singular approach and framework for stakeholders contributing to readiness assessment and release decision making. TheReadiness Framework is a decision support tool designed to provide status & visibility that the release is “where we planned to be” at a particular Checkpoint. Checkpoints 37 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 3 •The Readiness Framework provides the structure and purpose for the readiness checklists, assessments and reports used at key checkpoints leading up to and during deployment for the main/major releases of the BT Programme •The Framework enables the release to assess progress and readiness to move from one stage of the deployment lifecycle to the next. •Re adiness is assessed at each of the checkpoints against a specific set of criteria, with residual risk visible throughout.The size , reach, functional spread and complexityof a releaseinfluences thebreadth and coverage of thecriteria assessed. •These criteria (or questions) are specific to a checkpoint and release,collectively reflecting the readiness of our Customers,Service Providers, People, Business Units and the Release Delivery team. •The cumulative impact of prior Releases, other business activity and environmental conditions is assessed. •The assessment allows for the exception reporting to be tailored for Business Unit, Programme and Customer. •An Executive Summary is prepared which reports on an exception basis only.Criteri a rated red, light red or amber are included, providing information to decision makers on the potential business and/or implementation risk, with visibility of the “go to green” plans and residual risk these hold for the business. Light Amber rated criteria may also be included should these be assessed as required, discretion will be applied. •There will be an agreed checkpoint timeline and additional checkpoints will be added as required to provide both additional assessme nt and certainty for decision makers. •The Enterprise Risk Framework and RAG status definitions are used to provide a consistent, familiar and standard reference. •Checkpoint dates are aligned with delivery phase gates,schedule d governance meetings, channel shutdown requirements, etc and the method will allow for additional decision meetings to be scheduled as required based on the programme status at the time. •Note: Readiness for smaller / shorter running initiatives will complete an initiative readiness assessmentas par t of theirgo-l ive preparation which will not include a separate Business, Customer and People readiness component. These assessments will be covered by specific criteria within the Initiative checklist. START Delivery – Main Releases Readiness Framework Overview 38 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 4 •The framework provides the structure and purpose for the readiness assessment and reports used at checkpoints during the delivery lifecycle. •Readiness is assessed against a specific set of criteria (contained in a “master” initiatives readiness checklist), at agreeddates or che ckpoints, with both plans to green if applicable and residual risk captured throughout. •The size, complexity and functional spread of an initiative influencesthecriteria assessed and the number of checks completed.The checklist is adapted to suit. Criteria are never deleted, rather a column is provided for initiative specific positioning of the criteria – how it applies or does not apply, to the specific initiative. •Criteria (or questions) are specific to a checkpoint and initiative, collectively reflecting the readiness of the initiative to either commence the deployment (the go/no-go) or proceed from a key stage/control gate to the next. •The number of checks may vary from the minimum of one (1) check immediately preceding the go-live (th e go/no-go) as part of the deployment preparation, to multiple checks leading up to the go-live (the go/no-go) check. The initiative charter will define the approach to be used. •The cumulative impact of business-as-usual a ctivity, other initiatives, prior initiatives andenvironmental conditions (e.g., an election, holidays, etc) is also assessed. •The initiative readiness checklist does not include a separate Business, Customer and People readiness component.These asses sments are be covered by specific criteria within the initiative readiness checklist. •There will be an agreed checkpoint timeline, checkpoint dates will be aligned with delivery phase gates,schedu led governance meetings, channel shutdown requirements, etc and the method will allow for additional decision meetings to be scheduled as required based on the initiative status at the time and to provide certainty for decision makers. •An Executive Summary is prepared which reports on an exception basis only.Criteri a rated red, light red or amber are included, providing information to decision makers on the potential business and/or implementation risk, with visibility of the “go to green” plans and residual risk these hold for the business.Light Amber (LA) rated criteria may also be included should these be assessed as required, discretion will be applied. •The Enterprise Risk Framework and RAG status definitions are used to provide a consistent, familiar and standard reference. START Delivery – Other Initiatives Readiness Framework Overview 39 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE DatePurposeWhat do we check? Checkpoint 0 Are we ALIGNED? •Scope Confirmed •Framework Aligned •Checkpoints Agreed •Policy Contingency Planning Underway •Deployment Strategy to PGC •Cut-Over Weekend confirmed Checkpoint 1 Is everyone AWARE? •Final Scope Baselined •Design and Business Function Definitions have been completed •Build & BST On track, •2 Full Mock Conversions Completed •Readiness & Performance Metrics in progress •People Capacity Planning underway, •Partners Aware Checkpoint 2 Are we ON TRACK? •Base Build Completed / Base BST on track •MGL-1Completed successfully / Ready to COMMENCESBS Testing •Change Controls agreed and communicated •Deployment Contingency Plan Accepted •Training Planning, Train the Trainer and Training Pilot Successful •Customers AWARE and are beginning to UNDERSTAND the change •IR People Planning and Preparation ON TRACK •Delivery status of PCR’s to be priority assessed for go live criticality Checkpoint 3 Are we READY? •Confirmed Go-Live Sequence and Timing / Silent Pre-Deployments can Commence (if required) •Permission to Commence Transition / Deployment Communications Issued •MGL-2 Ready to Commence / Final BST Completed / Training Underway •Operational Performance Metrics agreed •IR People Capacity & Business Continuity Plans in Place •Customers and IR PeopleUNDERSTAND and are GETTING READY for the change •Delegate 4a & 4b to Go Live Committee •Customers and IR Staff are READY •Invoke CHANGE FREEZE Checkpoint 4a Can we COMMENCE? •Ready to commence Shutdown and Initiate Cutover •All checks successful and we understand residual risks Checkpoint 4b Can we PROCEED? •Cut-Over completed •BPIV completed •Business and Technical Support teams and processes in place •Ready to GO/ Go-No-Go Decision •We can Open the Channels Checkpoint 5 Are we ON TRACK? •ELS Progress Check •Customers & Business Adoption Check •Executive Dashboard Report Checkpoint 6 Can we EXIT Hyper Care? START Delivery – Readiness Checkpoints 40 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 6 Checkpoint 2: Are we ON TRACK 10 December (MGL-1 Completed) 4a: Mon 22Feb Go-Live Committee Can we COMMENCE (Deployment Central) Checkpoint 5: Are we ON TRACK 18 March Checkpoint 1: AWARE 22 October Checkpoint 6: Can we EXIT Hyper Care 22 April 1 2 4a 5 FEB‘21 6 4b: Sun 28 Feb Go-Live Committee Can we PROCEED (Deployment Central) Jan’ 21 Feb’ 21 Dec 20 Mar‘ 21 Apr‘ 21 Nov’ 20 3 Key Dates –START Delivery – Release 1 Sept’ 20 Checkpoint 0: ALIGNED Stage 0 (Baseline Scope) 13 August S0 Heightened CHANGE CONTROL Stage 2 (Soft Freeze) 7 December CHANGE CONTROL Stage 3 (Change Freeze) 1 February 4b Classroom Training & SBS Commences 11 January Checkpoint 3: Are we READY 18 February Final BST Completed 1 February 23/12 Baseline BST Completed S3 Aug’ 20 CHANGE RESTRICTION Stage 1(Design Completed) (Brown-Out) 23 October S1 S2 Oct’ 20 CHANGE BLACK-OUT Stage 4 (Black-Out) 15 February 0 S4 26/10 FULL Mock Conversions Completed 41 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 7 Checkpoint 2: Are we ON TRACK 10 December 4a: Mon 22Feb Go-Live Committee Can we COMMENCE (Deployment Central) Checkpoint 5: Are we ON TRACK 18 March Checkpoint 1: AWARE 22 October Checkpoint 6: Can we EXIT Hyper Care 22 April 1 2 4a 5 FEB‘21 6 4b: Sun 28 Feb Go-Live Committee Can we PROCEED (Deployment Central) Jan’ 21 Feb’ 21 Dec 20 Mar‘ 21 Apr‘ 21 Nov’ 20 3 Key Dates & Check Detail – START Delivery – Release 1 Sept’ 20 Checkpoint 0: ALIGNED Stage 0 (Baseline Scope) 13 August S0 Heightened CHANGE CONTROL Stage 2 (Soft Freeze) 7 December CHANGE CONTROL Stage 3 (Change Freeze) 1 February 4b Classroom Training & SBS Commences 11 January Checkpoint 3: Are we READY 18 February Final BST Completed 1 February 23/12 Base BST Completed S3 Aug’ 20 CHANGE RESTRICTION Stage 1(Design Completed) (Brown-Out) 23 October S1 S2 Oct’ 20 CHANGE BLACK-OUT Stage 4 (Black-Out) 15 February 0 S4 •Final Scope baselined •Design a nd Business Function Definitions have been completed •Build & BST On track, •2 Full Mock Conversions Completed (26/10) •Readiness & Performance Metrics in progress •People Capacity Planning underway, •Partners Aware •Scope Confirmed •Frame work Aligned, •Checkpoints Agreed •Policy Contingency Planning Underway •Deployment Strategy to PGC •Cut-Over Weekend confirmed •Base Build Completed / Base BST on track •MGL-1Completed successfully / Ready to COMMENCESBS Testing •Change Controls agreed and communicated •Deployment Contingency Plan Accepted •Training Planning, Train the Trainer and Training Pilot Successful •Customers AWARE and are beginning to UNDERSTAND the change •IR People Planning and Preparation ON TRACK •Delivery status of PCR’s to be priority assessed for go live criticality. •Confirmed Go-Live Sequence and Timing / Silent Pre-Deployments can Commence (if required) •Permission to Commence Transition / Deployment Communications Issued •MGL-2 Ready to Commence / Final BST Completed / Training Underway •Operational Performance Metrics agreed •IR People Capacity & Business Continuity Plans in Place •Customers and IR PeopleUNDERSTAND and are GETTING READY for the change •Delegate 4a & 4b to Go Live Committee •Customers and IR Staff are READY •Invoke CHANGE FREEZE •Ready to commence Shutdown a nd Initiate Cutover •All checks successful and we understand residual risks •ELS Progress Check •Custome rs & Business Adoption Check •Executive Dashboard Report •ELS Progress Check •Custome rs & Business Adoption Check •Executive Dashboard Report •Cut-Over completed •BPIV c ompleted •Business and Technical Support teams and processes in place •Ready to GO •Go-No-Go Decision •Can we Open the Channels (4B) 42 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 8 19 August Checkpoint 2b: Are we ON TRACK MGL-2Completed(27/08) 4a: Mon 18 Oct Go-Live Committee Can we COMMENCE (Deployment Central) Cut-Over Commences – 21 October Checkpoint 5:Are we ON TRACK 18 November(PGC date) Pou Whirinaki Reporting Checkpoint 1: AWARE 17/06 Checkpoint 6: Can we EXIT Hyper Care 16 December (PGC date) Pou Whirinaki Reporting Exit planned for the 03/12/21 Pou WhirinakiELT & EPPC approve 2 2 4a 5 OCT’21 6 4b: Wed 27OCT Go-Live Committee Can we PROCEED (Deployment Central) Go-Live 8am 28 February Aug’ 21 Sep’ 21 July’ 21 Nov’ 21 Dec’ 21 June’ 21 3 Key Dates –START Delivery – Release 2 Mar’ 21 Checkpoint 0: ALIGNED 18 February Heightened CHANGE CONTROL Stage 2 (Soft Freeze) 23 July CHANGE CONTROL Stage 3 (Change Freeze) 10 September Final BST Completed SBS-2Completed 4b Classroom Training underway MGL-3 Commences 16 September Checkpoint 3: Are we READY 23 September 23 July Baseline BST Completed MGL-1Completed (16/07) Ready for SBS-1 S3 Feb’ 21 CHANGE CONTROL Stage 0(Baseline Scope Controlled / BST Commences) 1 March S2 Apr’ 21 CHANGE BLACK-OUT Stage 4 (Black-Out) SBS-3 Completed Contingency BST Completed 8 October 0 S4 18 June FULL Mock Conversions Completed SBS-0 Commences S0 14 May Design Completed S1 CHANGE CONTROL Stage 1(Design /BFD’s Completed) 14 May 22 July Checkpoint2a: Are we ON TRACK 1 43 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 9 Change Control START Delivery – Release 1 and 2 (S4.1.R1 and S4.1.R2) 44 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE DateStagePurposeWhat does this mean? The Change Restriction Period is the period where any new change introduced to the IR Enterprise Controls List and to the Non-Production and Production Environments must follow the defined process. For the avoidance of doubt this Change Restriction relates to any/all change being introduced to the test (non-production) and live(production) environments. 13/08/2020Stage 0 Scope Controlled BASELINE SCOPEunder CHANGE CONTROL, changes to scope require a PCR 23/10/2020Stage 1 Change Restriction CHANGE VISIBILITY IN PLACE (CHANGE BROWN OUT) Design under Change Control: • Design and Business Function Definitions have been completed • Design Authoritynow endorses any design change • All design decisions are now also assessed for impact and feasibility to be delivered (designed, built and tested) by the (10/12),if not a PCR is required 07/12/2020Stage 2 Heightened Change (CHANGE SOFT FREEZE) APPROVED ChangeONLY: Enterprise-Wide Change Awareness– ONLYthe followingprogressed: •Inflight Major Change and Releases as per the Enterprise Release Schedule •Standard (pre-approved) Change, Service Requests and Cyclic Calendar Events •Pre-approved Planned Maintenance and Major incident •BT Deployment review ALL change to ensure no contention •NO further BSI Cases unless legislative or business urgent •Commences once MGL-1Completed successfully / Ready to COMMENCESBS Testing 10/12/2019 Health Check ARE WE ON TRACK? Are we where we expect to be? BST and Development Verification Testing (DVT) 80% complete for Duties and Foreign Trusts and 60% complete for Unclaimed Monies (UCM)and Paid Parental Leave (PPL) •100%for all products by 29/01/21 01/02/21 (subject to change) Stage 3 Change Control (CHANGE FREEZE) NO CHANGEto the QUAL & PROD environments with exclusion of : •BT Prioritised issues remediation resulting from SBS and PROD Major Incident/s •Enterprise-Wide Prioritised Change by exception only •DAILY NPE CAB –ongoing untilend of ELS Hyper-Care / CAB membership extended to includeBT Deployment and Test Leads. •Commences as MGL-2 commences / Final BST Completed 15/02/2021 (subject to change) Stage 4 Change Black-Out (CHANGE BLACK-OUT) NO CHANGE progressed to QUAL or PROD- QUAL HARD Freeze, with the exclusion of: •P1/P2 START and Major Incident fixes •Letters and Reports Defect fixes •All changes to the Production andNon-Production environments reviewed by the NPE CAB. •BT Architecture Leadand BT Release Delivery Manager join NPE CAB •Commences AFTERSBS-2 COMPLETED START Delivery - Workstream 1 - Release 1 (S4.1.R1) 45 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE DateStagePurposeWhat does this mean? The Change Restriction Period is the period where any new change introduced to the IR Enterprise Controls List and to the Non-Production and Production Environments must follow the defined process. For the avoidance of doubt this Change Restriction relates to any/all change being introduced to the test (non-production) and live(production) environments. 01/03/2021Stage 0 Scope Controlled BASELINE SCOPEunder CHANGE CONTROL, changes to scope require a PCR 14/05/2021Stage 1 Change Restriction CHANGE VISIBILITY IN PLACE (CHANGE BROWN OUT) Design under Change Control: • Design and Business Function Definitions have been completed • Design Authoritynow endorses any design change • All design decisions are now also assessed for impact and feasibility to be delivered (designed, built and tested) by the (dd/mm),if not a PCR is required 23/07/2021Stage 2 Heightened Change (CHANGE SOFT FREEZE) APPROVED ChangeONLY: Enterprise-Wide Change Awareness– ONLYthe followingprogressed: •Inflight Major Change and Releases as per the Enterprise Release Schedule •Standard (pre-approved) Change, Service Requests and Cyclic Calendar Events •Pre-approved Planned Maintenance and Major incident •BT Deployment review ALL change to ensure no contention •NO further BSI Cases unless legislative or business urgent •Commences once MGL-1 is COMPLETED/ Ready to COMMENCESBS Testing 19/08/2021 Health Check ARE WE ON TRACK? Are we where we expect to be? •BST and Development Verification Testing 100%for all products by 03/09/21 03/09/2021 (subject to change) Stage 3 Change Control (CHANGE FREEZE) NO CHANGEto the QUAL & PROD environments with exclusion of : •BT Prioritised issues remediation resulting from SBS and PROD Major Incident/s •Enterprise-Wide Prioritised Change by exception only •DAILY NPE CAB –ongoing untilend of ELS Hyper-Care / CAB membership extended to includeBT Deployment and Test Leads. •Commences as SBS-2 COMPLETED /MGL-3 ready to commence / Final BST Completed 01/10/2021 (subject to change) Stage 4 Change Black-Out (CHANGE BLACK-OUT) NO CHANGE progressed to QUAL or PROD- QUAL HARD Freeze, with the exclusion of: •P1/P2 START and Major Incident fixes •Letters and Reports Defect fixes •All changes to the Production andNon-Production environments reviewed by the NPE CAB. •BT Architecture Leadand BT Release Delivery Manager join NPE CAB •Commences AFTERSBS-3 COMPLETED START Delivery - Workstream 1 - Release 2 (S4.1.R2) 46 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 12 Assessment & Reporting Schedule 47 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 13 S4.1.R1 Checkpoints Timeframes Checkpoint Issue Checklist (Start review) AssessmentCompleted (Start to build report) Draft Report (Assessment completed) Submit Report (Post leads review) Present Report (PGC) MondayWednesdayFridayMondayThursday 0 13 August 20 No Report – Internal Release check based on release reporting 1 12 October 2014/10/2016/10/2019/10/2022/10/20 2 30 November 2002/12/2005/12/2007/12/2010/12/20 3 9 February 2110/02/2112/02/2115/02/2118/02/21 4a 22 February Meetings Run by Deployment Team, attended by Go-Live Committee 4b 28 February 5 18 MarchPou Whirinaki/ Early Life Support team reporting used 6 22 AprilPou Whirinaki/ Early Life Support team reporting used 48 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 14 S4.1.R2 Checkpoints Timeframes Checkpoint Issue Checklist (Start review) AssessmentCompleted (Start to build report) Draft Report (Assessment completed) Submit Report (Post leads review) Present Report (PGC) MondayWednesdayFridayMondayThursday 0 18 February 2021 No Report – Internal Release check based on release reporting 1 8 June 20219 June 202111 June 202114 June 2021 17 June 21 2a 12 July 202114 July 202116 July 202119 July 2021 22 July 21 2b 9 August 202111 August 202113 August 202116 Aug 2021 19 Aug 21 3 13 September 202115 September 202117 September 202120 Sept 2021 23 Sept 21 4a 18 October Date's tbc Meetings Run by Deployment Team, attended by Go-Live Committee 4b 27 October 5 18 November 2021Handed over to BAU -Pou Whirinaki Support team reporting used 6 16 December 2021Handed over to BAU -Pou Whirinaki Support team reporting used 49 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 15 Readiness Reporting 50 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 16 Does the solution meet the agreed scope, design requirements and quality standards? Are we ready to support the change? Can the transition /deployment be achieved within the agreed window at an acceptable level of quality and certainty? Are our people and business units ready to receive and deliver the service changes? Can we measure & report business performance post go-live? Do we have the people we need to manage the transition? Do our service providers understand the changes? Are our service providers ready to use the new services? Are our service providers ready to support the service changes? (Tax Agents, Bookkeepers, Service Providers, Software Developers, Government Departments) Do our customers know what is changing? Do our customers understand the changes? Do our customers understand the new services? Are our customers ready to use the service changes? (Individuals, Corporates, Small and Medium Enterprises (SME' , Not for Profits) What needs to ready? -People Capability, Operational Readiness, Performance, Planning, Work on hand, Co- existence,Business Continuity (BCP),Crown Accounting andBusiness Risk,People Readiness surveys and pulse checks. What needs to ready? –START, START reporting andHeritage Coexistence Solutions, Digital Ecosystem and Customer Services solutions, Content, Data Cleansing & Conversion, Tax Policy, New Services Platform and Environments, Testing Services,Customer Contact Centre, Release OCMT, Deployment and Early Life Support Supported by: Stakeholder Management Plan & Communications Plans, Surveys, Risk Registers, Operational Plans, Training Attendance, Coexistence Plans Supported by: Workstream Schedules, Block Plans, Detailed Tracking Registers, Testing Strategy & Plan, Enterprise Change Management Strategy & Plan, Certification and Assurance, BPIV, Release Exit Processes Four Major Areas of Readiness Reporting Impact Build a quantifiable understanding of change •Understand scope and features •Conduct initial assessment •Gather metrics and volumes •Perform detailed impact assessment •Communicate and test with key stakeholders Readiness Prioritise and deliver focused engagement based upon the service each customer utilises •Identify priorities •Define success factors and key measures •Develop readiness approach •Execute engagement approach •Communicate and test with key stakeholders Notify / Promote / Educate / Manage •DISCOVER: What is considered an acceptable sample size of customers? •DESCRIBE: What does good look like for the customer? •MEASURE: How do we measure the success? •What is the minimum target for success? •SUSTAIN: When do track each measure and what are the incremental targets? READINESS AREA SUPPORTING INTERACTIONS Supported by: Customer & Service Provider Awareness , Customer & Service Readiness Framework Customer Impact Assessment & Change Approach WHAT DOES READY LOOK LIKE? Customer Business Unit Programme Intermediaries Partner \* As applied to all readiness areas: What is the cumulative impact of prior Releases, other business activity and environmental conditions? 51 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 17 Checkpoint 1 •Programme(workstream) and •Business Unit Checkp oint 2a •Programme(workstream) •Business Unit, •People and Customer readiness approach i.e., what’s planned Checkp oint 2b •Programme(workstream), •Business Unit, •People, and •Customer Checkp oint 3- •Programme(workstream), •Business Unit, •People, and •Customer Checkp oint 4a •Programme(workstre am), •Business Unit, •People, and •Customer Contributing tocheckpoint assessments 52 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 18 Solution Readiness Cutover Readiness Support Readiness Purpose of Release Readiness Checkpoints: Programme READY Commence Transition •Trigger Contingency •Commence Pre- Deployments •SBS & Performance & Regression testing on track •MGL status check •Training delivery status check •Commence channel closures •Customer communications •ELS teams in place •Customer / Business unit / People / Intermediary / Service Provider readiness assessment APPROVE Commencement of Cutover & Go Live •Commence systems & channel shut down as per cutover schedule •Deploy all components and elements as per cutover schedule •Application code deployment as per cutover schedule •Data conversion as per cutover schedule •Production Verification Testing and data ReconciliationRe sults. •Ready to for business go live or make roll back decision AWARE •Readiness framework communicated and agreed •Readiness and performance metrics agreed •Scope freeze agreed •Design exit agreed •BST Underway •Customer / Business unit / People / Intermediary / Service Provider awareness assessment UNDERSTAND •Design is under change control, primary build completed •Assembly, system and verification testing on track •SBS preparation underway •People Readiness has been assessed and Training Preparation is well progressed •Deployment planson track for MGL’s •Ready to enter QUALITY environment •Partners are aware of the upcoming change READY •Solution Built •BST completed •Ready to commence SBS •Ready to commence technical testing •Ready to deliver training •Early Life Support plan completed •Change Restriction in place •Ready for MGL’s •Ready to start final regression & performance testing •Commence silent deployments •Customer / Business unit / People / Intermediary / Service Provider readiness assessment Checkpoint5 CHECK •Check: Business performance & productivity, •Check Customer experience •Check major incidents, impact and resolution rates •Check critical products and services performance •Check Production Quality assurance Checkpoint 6 EXIT •Exit ELS and readiness to hand over toSupport. •Support readiness to receive. CP1 CP2 CP4 CP5 CP0 CP6 CP3 53 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 19 Planning Cutover Readiness Support Readiness Purpose of Business Readiness Checkpoints: Business Units READY Commence Transition •Readiness and performance metrics in place •People Capacity ready or in place •Operational Planning Readiness •Performance Planning •Work on Hand (WIP) •Co-existence •Business Continuity Plans APPROVE Commencement of Cutover & Go Live •Commence systems & channel shut down as per cutover schedule •Deploy all components and elements as per cutover schedule •Data conversion as per cutover schedule •Production Verification Testing and •Data ReconciliationRe sults •Ready to for Business Go Live or make Roll Back decision AWARE & UNDERSTAND •Readiness and performance metrics agreed •People Capacity Planning •Operational Planning Readiness •Performance Planning •Work on Hand (WIP) •Co-existence •Business Continuity Plans Checkpoint 5 HYPERCARE EXIT •Check: Business performance & productivity, •Check Customer experience •Check major incidents, impact and resolution rates •Check critical products and services performance •Check Production Quality assurance Checkpoint 6 ELS EXIT •Exit ELS and readiness to hand over toSupport. •Support readiness to receive. CP2 CP4 CP5 CP5 CP3 CP1 54 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 20 Customer Readiness Summary - 20- •The Customer Readiness Assessment is one component of the overall Readiness Framework and has been updated to reflect lessons from prior releases and scaled to reflect the requirements of the current stage andscope. •Customer readiness determines “where we expect customers and third parties to be” measured via readiness criteria at each checkpoint. Readiness will vary by product and customer segment to recognise when the change needs to land with the customer, i.e., some readiness criteria extend beyond go-live. •Members of the External Stakeholder Engagement working group will review and endorse the assessment for each checkpoint, including go to green plans where required. Customer segment leads will also review and provide feedback of the high-level assessment against criteria based on “where we expect to be” for each checkpoint. What’s different this release? Given the targeted customer groups impacted and smaller scale of the releases and initiatives in Stage 4: •No customer insight research is being conducted to inform the readiness assessment or marketing effectiveness, although this will be conductedfor S4-1-R2 (child support and upgrading myIRto version 12). •Customer interaction testing of myIRwill be reviewed and considered. •Customer readiness will be assessed against agreed criteria as reported by Community Compliance, Account Managers, Product Owners, Digital Ecosystem Team and others based on their interactions with customers and stakeholders using the risk RAG ratings detailed overleaf. Components of the Customer Readiness Assessment •Utilise metrics and data already collected including those relating to marketing & communications activities, for example, reach of direct mail, social media and advertising. •Reports via Account Managers (Account Managers, External Relationship Managers, Community Compliance and Significant Enterprises) against specific criteria on the readiness status of the customers, intermediaries and service partners they engage with. •Insights from Customer Design Validation into customers’ expectations of e-Services, including ease of use. •Assessment of known risks and issues. 55 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 21 Customer Readiness Reporting At checkpoint 2 and 3, customer readiness reporting provides the information required to satisfy the needs of the target audience to enable decision making e.g., customer readiness will be assessed by product and defined customer sub-segment. Checklist > Specific readiness criteria relevant for each checkpoint, agreed by the External Stakeholder Engagement working group. Enterprise Risk Framework Frameworksare used to define Current Status and Residual Risk Assess > Conduct assessment of evidence against the criteria for each Product before each checkpoint, including reasons if not green and go-to-green plan. Confirm assessment with the External Stakeholder Engagement working group and relevant Segment Leads. Report Summarise the point-in-time customer readiness assessment for each product, showing the RAG status, rationale and residual risk. It is important that to identify the “so what”.Thisallows the time to rectify prior to GoLive, or toensure that we “know what we areup against”should it be ahigh-risk area.This information alsofeeds intocontingency and Early Life Support planning. For any criteria indicating Light Amber to Redreport on: •Reason for not being Green •The Go to Green plan i.e., what activities are under way or planned to address reasons for not being green •The residual risk if the status does n ot change, or deteriorates(using the Enterprise Risk Framework) 56 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 22 People Readiness Summary - 22- •The People Readiness Assessment is one component of the Readiness Framework.It assessessentiment and the comfort levelsof our people about the change coming i.e., "their hearts and minds".It is a component of business readiness which includes criteria about howpeople are feeling in general, with business readiness also including environmental criteria such as work on hand levels, burndown work, planning activities,prioritisation, recruitment activities, contingency plans and so forth. •Using lessons learned from previous releases, people readiness will still be assessed through in-person discussions and team surveys which enable valuable insight to be gathered from those directly impacted and allow themes to emerge quickly. •The assessment will be scaledto reflect the requirements of Stage 4, release 1, release 2 and other scope. •CCS Segment leads will review and provide feedback ofthe high-level assessment as part of the people and business readiness criteria for each checkpoint. •In addition to the report that goes to PGC, the results of the people readiness assessment will be shared with CCS Segment, Group and Team Leads to assist with their implementation planning. Components of the People Readiness Assessment Approach •“Close up” team interviews which are 30 minute discussions with the highly impacted teams using open ended questions to tease out themes and insights. Utilised mainly for those in Change Group A. •Team Surveys which are 6-7 minute surveys completed by the Team Lead following a team discussion based on a set of provided questions to assess the team's current level of awareness, understanding and readiness. Utilised for those in Change Group A and B). •Pulse Check Surveys which takes 1-2 minutes completed by a random sample of people from across the organisation to assess levels of awareness and understanding before go-live. Utilised for those in Change Group B andC). •Training uptake and insights (when training has commenced). 57 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 23 Business Readiness Exception Reporting At each Checkpoint Business Readiness reporting provides the information required to satisfy the needs of the target audience to enable decision making. Det ail Checklist - containing specific readiness criteria relevant for each checkpoint Executive Summary Executive Exceptions detail •Reason not Green •Go to Green Plan •Business / Customer Risk at Go Live •Residual Risk Enterprise Risk Framework A “point in time” assessment is made for each criteria at each Checkpoint. For those criteria indicating Light Amber – Red status “exceptions’ the following details are collected: •Reason for not being Green •The “go to green” plan (i.e. what activ ities are planned / underway to address reasons for not being Green) •The risk to the organisation (business, customer s etc) if status does not change (using the Enterprise Risk Framework) It is important that to identify the “so what”. This allows the time to rectify prior to Go Live, or to ensure that we “know what we are up against” should it be a high-risk area.This information also feeds into our contingency planning – so where possible high-risk areas have a contingency plan developed well ahead of Go Live. Frameworksare used to define Current Status and Residual Risk 58 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 24 The Readiness Process Readiness Process Preparation Checkpoint Process ADMINISTRATION Prior to each Checkpoint •Validate with Criteria Owners that the criteria (questions) are correct •Should be specific criteria to meet at each checkpoint – rather than status or tracking of future checkpoint criteria •Review criteria with Reporter to validate for completeness. •Submit to Readiness Manager for review PREPARATION •Meeting booked with PGC (Governance) •Meeting booked with PLT (if required) •Meetings booked with Reporters •Meetings booked with Assessors CRITERIA •Readiness owners identify criteria owners •Identify criteria for each checkpoint working with criteria owners FRAMEWORK •Confirm readiness areas & owners •Confirm dates and purpose of checkpoints Week prior to Checkpoint (Monday) •Criteria rated by Reporters •Roll up criteria (where applicable) into categories and submit to Assessors Week prior to Checkpoint (Wednesday) •Ensure Reporters have reported, and assessors have moderated •For Criteria NOT Green provide: •Commentary (easy to understand) on why it is not green •What is the “go to green” plan •Business / Customer risk at go live •Overall Residual Risk rating (using Enterprise Risk Matrix) DRAFT Exception Report (Friday) •Review Draft Exceptions report with Assessors (group meeting if possible) •Review with Programme Manager •Review with PLT Submit Exception Report (Monday) •To PMO •Review with key Stakeholders PGC Meeting (Thursday) •Programme Manager and representatives from other major reporting areas present exception report to PGC members 59 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 25 Readiness Review Preparation (Monday / Tuesday) Reporters •Commence assessment •Rate each criteria •Check the “consequence if not ready” and update if necessary •If assessment notG or LG •Provide reason why •Provide go to green plan •Provide residual risk (using Enterprise Risk matrix) •Provide action owner/s (Wednesday) Reporters & Assessors •Review and if needed update: •Assessments, •Go to green plans •Residual risk •Consequence •Action Owner •Attend review meeting if any criteria are not Gor LG (Thursday) Review Leads •Prepare draft exception report (Friday) Review Leads •Complete DRAFT exceptions report •Circulate report to Reporters for final review Reporters / Leads •Attend Review Meeting Review Lead/s •Submit Report to PMO (Monday) •Release Programme Manager review with Programme Director (Tuesday) •PMO Submit report •Present Report to PLT (Wednesday) •PLT Leads review with key PGC stakeholders (Thursday) PGC Meeting •Programme Manager and representatives from other major reporting areas present report to PGC members Thurs Mon Fri Thurs Week of the check point Week before of the check point Wed Mon Tues Wed 60 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 26 Roles and Responsibilities in the Readiness Process Criteria Owners Responsible for achieving the criteria they are owners of (i.e. completing the work associated with the criteria). Provides updated to the readiness owners on progress against their criteria along with risks to achievements and mitigations being put in place. Readiness Owners Responsible for providing an integrated view of the readiness of their area and an overall assessment of the fundamental question – is their area ready? Work with the criteria owners to manage risks to achievement of their criteria. Readiness Manager Responsible for managing the readiness framework including getting the criteria defined and agreed, collecting status information from the readiness owners, co-ordinating the checkpoint meetings and reporting on the overall readiness status to the Programme Manager Programme Director & Programme Manager Accountable for presenting the PGC an integrated view of deployment readiness with sufficient explanation and detail to allow them to make an informed decision at the readiness checkpoints. Customer Readiness OCMT (Customer Change Lead) People and Business Readiness OCMT (Organisation Change and Business Deployment Leads) Programme Readiness Release Delivery Support Lead Portfolio Governance Board Accountable for making the decision to whether to proceed through a checkpoint based on the readiness assessment presented to them by the Programme Manager. 61 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE 27 KeyRed Light Red Amber Light AmberLight Green Green Headline Highly problematic ProblematicProblematic Problematic in defined areas Not problematicNot problematic Readiness Assessment On critical path and currently predicted that it is not possible to recover to be ready on time. It will almost certainly lead to missing the go-live date and in the most serious case influence a decision to postpone the go- live. Risks and Issues are generally Extremewith escalation to the highest level: Programme Sponsor (PGC) Currently not on target to succeed and is on the critical path. It needs focussed attention and active management to ensure that the due date is met. Risks and Issues are generally Very High toExtreme with escalation to the PLT and Programme Director Currently not on target to succeed andrequires active management to get back on track. Withsupport, focus and the appropriate mitigation this will not impact the critical path. Risks and Issues are generally Very High toHighwith escalation to the PLT and Programme Manager Is deviating from target in some specific but non- critical areas, is under active management and is showing signs of improvement. Risks and Issues are generally Medium toLow with escalation to the Release Lead Generally on target but needs some minor management attention and/or assistance to be completed by the due date. Risks and Issues are generally Low toNegligiblewith NO escalation required above the Workstream On track and likely to be delivered on time. Can be managed without intervention and or day to day management attention. Risksand Issues are generally Negligiblewith NO escalation required above the Workstream RAG Definitions 62 IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE