1 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Commercial Off-the-Shelf Software Sourcing Strategy Errors and omissions excepted 2 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] NoDateChange DescriptionContact V0.1 – v0.10 26/9/14 Draft completed and reviewed and submitted to PGA for feedback V0.1117/10/14 PGA feedback incorporated, and draft submittedto BT PMO for quality check Document control Document Sign Off (Notes: refer to the PEP for the RASCI) Formal Review AreaNameSignature Date AccountablePerson Responsible Person The following have supported the developmentof this document: The following have been consulted: DocumentReview History FileName and Path M:\\Business Transformation\\Programme Office\\04 Standards\\Programme Templates\\Communication and Presentations\\Programme Report Template May 2014.docx Contact Person StatusFINAL TemplateVersion0.05 BT UiD10825 Errors and omissions excepted 3 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] COTS Sourcing Strategy Summary – Approvals Scope of Requirements ►A primary provider of Commercial Off The Shelf software and associated services for the duration of the programme Delivery Model ►Service Aggregator delivery model for Design Phase Commercial Approach The assessment and recommended approach for contracting with the COTS provider Appendices ►Market Analysis ►Commercial Model Analysis Procurement Process ►The recommended procurement approach and high level timeline Contract Management ►The established contract management controls Sourcing Strategy Drivers ►Procurement Objectives Sourcing Strategy The strategy is combines a number of sections which together form a complete strategy to sourcing, selecting, contracting and managing a COTS provider for delivery of the Business Transformation objectives. Scope of Requirements Approved by PGA on 21.8.2014 Delivery Model Approved by PGA on 21.8.2014 Commercial Approach Approved by PGA on 22.10.2014 Procurement Process Approved by PGA on 21.8.2014 Contract Management Noted by PGA on 22.10.2014 Some key icons are used throughout this document, they mean; Recommend IR should consider Not recommended at this stage Errors and omissions excepted 4 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] CHANGE CONTROL Ver.Changesmade by:CommentsReleased 0.4First versionreleased to GCIO for input11.08.14 0.5Updates to table of contents and slide 2, 15,16,18,23. Scope of Requirements,Delivery Model Procurement Process submitted to PGA for approvalin order to craft the EOI for COTS Software Provider selection. 21.08.14 0.6Feedback from GCIO as the ICT Functional Lead.22.08.14 0.7Updatesmade to consistency and market analysis based upon IR education visits. 01.09.14 0.8Feedback from MBIE as Procurement Functional Lead. 02.09.14 0.9Feedback fromProgramme Director08.09.14 0.10Commercial Approach and Contract Management submitted to PGAfor approved and noting respectively 24.09.14 0.11Revisionsfollowing EWC30.09.14 Errors and omissions excepted 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Purpose and Contents The purpose of this document is to outline the Sourcing Strategy for the next major procurement for the Business Transformation programme, Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS), application suite of software and associated services. Numbering excludes section titles pages. Sourcing Strategy DriversSlides 7-12 Scope of RequirementsSlides 13-23 Delivery ModelSlides 24-30 Commercial ApproachSlides 32-43 Procurement ProcessSlides 44-48 Contract ManagementSlides 50-53 AppendicesSlides 55-75 Introduction Slides 5 and 6 Errors and omissions excepted 6 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 1.IR have made significant advancements in understanding of commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) solution(s) that exist in the market since the Sourcing Strategy v3.8 was built in February 2013; 2.IR has conducted a 12 week competitive dialogue process with two service providers. 3.IR has informed itself by targeting leading\* COTS suppliers of tax and social policy application suite of s oftware and visiting their global research and development facilities; 4.Much of the uncertainty that existed in the first market sounding has now matured to a point we IR have c larity; 5.On 7 th October 2014, after an exhaustive 12 month supplier selection process IR selected XXto be a primary Service Provider for design services to the Business Transformation Programme; 6.Lessons learnt were derived from the trip undertaken by DC Change and the Chief Technology Officer to o ther tax jurisdictions; 7.Expression of Interest (EOI) reference checks for the EOI for Business Transformation Services; 8.Request for Proposal (RFP) for Business Transformation Services reference visits have been completed with publ ic and private sector organisations who have successfully implemented significant business transformation; 9.Movement of Foundation and Tactical projects into the scope of Business Transformation –c reating a multi supplier environment; 10.IR now has the ability to support additional delivery models such as Service Aggregation through the Resources which have been attained with industry experience in complex transformation projects (Programme Director) and multi-supplier management (2x Commercial Directors); 11.A primary function of the design scope is to select a COTS software provider to assist the Business T ransformation service Provider with the detailed design; 12.Once the COTS supplier has been selected the three organisations are expected to operate in unison to assist IR to deliver IR for the Future. \*Source: Gartner Critical Capabilities for Integrated Tax System COTS Products, December 2010. Introduction Errors and omissions excepted 7 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Sourcing Strategy – Decision Tree Programme Objectives Government Drivers Programme Business Case Market Analysis Contract Management Procurement Plan Commercial Approach Delivery Model Scope of Requirements Sourcing Strategy Drivers Programme Objectives Government Drivers COTs Strategy Programme Business Case BT Service Provider Delivery Model Programme Execution Plan Programme Charter Programme Commercial Strategy Commercial Governance model Government Rules of Sourcing IR Procurement Policy Quality Outcome Value For Money Supplier Relationship Speed to Contract Programme plan COTS Strategy Market Engagement Open and Transparent Relationship Model Options Design and Imp Services SoftwareLicences Support and Maintenance Model Analysis Recommend DeliverablesPricing Performance Mgmt. Sanctions/Incentive Contract Period ImpactsRecommend Options Analysis Approve the Procurement Objectives Approve Delivery Model Approve key elements of the commercial approach Approve procurement approach and high level plan Note the approach to contract management Approve high level scope and minimum thresholds Governance ManagementDelivery Contractual Agreement Programme Execution Plan Governance models INPUTS – CONSIDERATIONS -OUTPUTS Errors and omissions excepted 8 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Sourcing Strategy Drivers In developing the Sourcing Strategy for the COTS application suite of software, the following principles have been incorporated Errors and omissions excepted 9 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Driving Principles – Procurement The Sourcing Strategy and Procurement Plan are consistent with the guiding Principles of NZ Government Procurement. NZ Government Procurement is based on principles, rules and good practice guidance. Collectively, these provide a broad framework that supports accountability for spending, sound business practice and value for money. Driving Principles – ICT Strategy and Action Plan to 2017 •Support end-to-end business processes rather than stopping at agency boundaries •Use transparent and contestable sourcing models •Adopt ‘as-a-service’ models and only invest in assets that support unique agency functions •Assemble and integrate solutions rather than build bespoke solutions •Use ICT common capabilities and re-u se existing functionality •Use open standards and industry-standard platforms. Inputs to the Sourcing Strategy -In developing the sourcing strategy for the COTS application suite of software, the following principles have been incorporated Errors and omissions excepted 10 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] BT Alignment to ICT Strategy and Action Plan to 2017 ICT DirectionIR ConsiderationProsCons Support end-to-end business processes rather than stopping at agency boundaries IR active works with other agencies across product lines such as student loans and child support (Ministries of Social Development and Education) •Closer workingrelationships across business processes allow for greater collaboration and optimisation which drive a better experience for the customer. •Differentagencies can have different drivers which may not align to those of IR and its Business Transformation programme Use transparent and contestable sourcing models •IRapproved sourcing process is a multi-step process covering an Expression of Interest and using a predefined evaluation process to shortlist down to those participants who will be invited to the RFP stage. •This approach aligns to the Government Rules of Sourcing. •Complieswith Government Rules of Sourcing and various acts •IR must disclose a reasonable amount of sensitive information for anysupplier who wants to participate in a sourcing process to be able determine their own suitability to meet the requirements. Adopt ‘as-a-service’ models and only invest in assets that support unique agency functions •Inland Revenue’s core tax and social policy requirements are unique compared with other agencies. •The ease of which information can be shared with other agencies will need to be evaluated •Software-a-as -Service (SaaS) will be tested as part of the EOI process. •SaaS will be an option considered as part of the pricing evaluation of RFP. •It’s not clear from IR’s current analysis of the market that any of the leading COTS providers sell their product(s) via SaaS. •IR have had no detailed exposure to the AOG Software Acquisition Strategy so that detailed requirements can be produced. Assemble and integrate solutions rather than build bespoke solutions For each implementation reference identified the supplier will be asked to confirm that the final solution will meet the following (example) criteria: •At least ~85% of the installed functionality must have been delivered via standard features, with minimum and/or moderate amounts of configuration. •At least ~95% of the installed functionality must have been delivered via standard features, with minimum and/or moderate amounts of configuration, and with minimum and/or moderate amounts of customisation, where such customisation is non- intrusive, ie, will be fully compatible with upgrades. •No more than ~5% of installed functionality must have been delivered via non-standard or complex customisation, and/or product enhancements . Application suite of software must be able to be configured to integrate with other applications suites of software •Thedefinition used in the Consideration will help IR to determine the level of integration required. •This definition will have the most relevance at the RFP stage when the detailed requirements can be provided to participants and responses assessed. •The level of business change impact may be higher with an “off the shelf” solution. Although this will vary depending on the level of fit of the COTS solution to IR requirements and NZ tax requirements. Use ICT common capabilities and re-use existing functionality Commoncapabilities must be fit for purpose •IR will assess common capabilities •Inland Revenue will be authoritative source of information on income •IR will not break a fullyintegrated application to take up common capabilities. Use open standards and industry-standard platforms. The ease of which information can be shared with other agencies will need to be evaluated •IR has a varied technology infrastructure which is capable of support most industry standards Errors and omissions excepted 11 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Background The Design Phase plan assumes the following sequence of events for the Design Phase of the programme : •That a Design partner would be selected for the Design Phase, ie, following the Competitive Dialogue phase completed in April, 2014, and the RFP phase scheduled for completion by October, 2014. •That the Design Phase would incorporate three phases, as follows : D1: T he development of a High Level Design for Stages 1, 2, 3 and 4, suitable for the selection of the COTS Core Solution Application Suite of Software. COTS Selection : T he selection of the COTS Core Solution Application Suite of Software, ie, via a structured multi-stage EOI then RFP process. D2: T he completion of the High Level Design for Stages 2, 3 and 4, and a Detailed Design for Stage 1, based on the selected COTS Core Solution Application Suite of Software. It is planned that the provider of the COTS Core Solution Application Suite of Software would participate in this phase of the Design process. This plan summarises the plan for activities that are required to prepare for the selection of the COTS supplier for the coreTax and Social Policy components of the Programme, as well as the high level plan for the Design Phase. It is anticipated that the time line for the D2 component of the Design process will require re-planning once the COTS supplier(s) have been selected. Any non-core COTS gaps in functionality will be identified during the selection process and additional procurements will be established to select any additional technology to support business functions. A separate procurement has already been established to establish an integration (data arbitration) layer between the legacy environment and new COTS worlds. This procurement for Foundation activity is being covered by the foundation work stream which is outside the scope of this strategy. Errors and omissions excepted 12 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Design Phase High Level Plan 2014 JJASOND 2015 JFMAMJJASOND 2016 JFMAMJJ Bus Case –Design Phase Pre-Design Prep Design Phase – Stage 1 to 4 High Level Design –Stages 1 to 4 (D1) Detailed Design Core – Stage 1 (D2) – Based on selected COTS Bus Case – Stage 1 Implementation Update to High-Level Design – St 2 to 4 (D2) –Based on selected COTS RFP and/or RFQ for Services - Stage 1 Implementation SOW - Stage 1 Implementation Stage 1 Implementation Design Partner selected, and SOW for Design Phase signed. Shortlisted COTS software providers finalised. Core COTS EoI Development EoI Development EoI Resp. EoI Evaluation Core COTS RFP Development and Selection RFP Development RFP Resp. RFP Evaluation Negotia tions Design Partner (SOW 1)Design Partner (SOW 2) COTS Provider (SOW 1) (SOW 0) Core COTS Application Suite of Software Selected, and Option for Purchase Approved. Pre Design Mob Non-COTS Procurement SOW – D2 SOW – D1 Approval Stage Eval Product Demos (3w) Referenc es (2w) Report incl Approvals ( 2w) Apvl. Approval Stage Detailed Design Enterprise Support Solutions – Stage 1 (D2) Approval Stage Errors and omissions excepted 13 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Scope of Requirements The scope of requirements describe what IR will go to market for. Errors and omissions excepted 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Scope of EOI and RFP Requirements In approaching the market for Inland Revenue’s Application suite of Software, the scope for the COTS providers will potentially cover a range of requirements over the life of the programme •Proven capability in developing (and commit to providing all required services) a High Level and Detailed design for an end-to-end solution incorporating core tax and social policy modules, based on a pre-configured set of routines that can be used to run Conference Room Pilots and Prototyping sessions. •Proven capability of designing, configuring, and deploying an end-to-end solution incorporating all core tax and social policy modules, either via their own professional services resources, or via preferred implementation partner(s). Design Services Implementation Services •The Supplier must provide the application suite of software on a fully licensed basis, ie, which will allow IR a perpetual right to use all software detailed. •The COTS Supplier licensing arrangement must allow an option for purchase/and or licensing to be agreed, with an option to draw down licenses as required at the time of usage, and for payment to be structures accordingly, ie, payment for licenses and/or support will be aligned to when they are used in production. Software Licences •Product support must be provided with acceptable Service Level Agreements for resolving defects. •A capability must be provided for Application Management Support. Support Services Maintenance Errors and omissions excepted 15 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] •Participants will be asked to provide one or more client reference sites and a list of customer reference sites: •the purpose of the client reference site/s is to substantiate the Participant’s response to the E OI key requirements •the purpose of the customer reference site list is for IR information, and should include si tes where the COTS solution may not have been implemented fully for a variety of reasons •The customer reference site list is expected to capture customers from 2000 onwards. This is to e nsure that IR has enough information for an informed view of the Participant’s history, while at the same time limiting the history to a relatively modern view. Reference Site Requirements - EOI Errors and omissions excepted 16 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Minimum Pre-Qualification Questions for Consideration ThresholdDescriptionProsCons Software Supplier rather than reseller Proprietary ownership of the COTS software solution(s): Confirm (Yes/No) that your organisation owns the development lifecycle process for the COTS solution and holds the proprietary rights to the source code of those solutions referred to in other pre-qualification questions. •Confirms that the participant manufacturers COTS software •Limited amount of possible responses (~20) rather than unlimited. •Will remove Solution Integrators from responding to EOI (but not from supporting a response). COTS Scope – Collections (Taxes and Duties) COTS Scope –Collections (Taxes, Levies and Duties) Confirm (Yes/No) that your proposed COTS solution has been implemented to deliver a Core tax solution in a minimum ofone client site references in the past ten years. This includes functionality such as: -Individual income tax (including related taxes such as PAYE, PAYG, fringe benefits and withholding tax); -Business income tax (including related taxes such as withholding tax); -Consumption tax (GST/VAT) or equivalent; -Duties (for example casino duty and lottery duty ); -Levies (for example problem gambling levy); or -Asset taxes (for example Land tax). This should include supporting functions such as customer management (CRM), case management (including debt management, investigations/audit and litigation management), multi-channel (web, mobile and contact centre), and analytics (for example in process risk management and fraud detection). The following attributes must be met for each implementation: the number of tax types in use must be at least 15; the number of active individual and/or business customers must be at least 1 million; and the overall annual tax revenue collected must be the equivalent of at least NZ$15 billion per annum. Each implementation client site included in your response must be willing to act as a reference. •Thresholds determines who has implemented a COTS application suite of software and therefore has the expertise and experience to do it again, rather than organisations which would describe howthey would propose to implement a COTS application suite of software. •Resellers are discouraged from applying and would not be progressed to RFP phase. •Thresholds have been set to roughly 25% of IRD current state as per of the 2013 annual report. •This will help ensure that the COTS application suite of software can demonstrate the ability to support reasonable volume and complexity, without unduly limiting the range of providers who might respond. •Perception may be that this criteria would shut out potential hopefuls •Broad spectrum of requirements, possibility that this criteria would remove every contender. •Would close out resellers from responding. A number of approaches were considered for the sourcing of the COTS application suite of software and the minimum threshold that are set in order to ensure a quality of supplier based upon IR’s Market Analysis that is most likely to meet IR’s requirements. Errors and omissions excepted 17 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Minimum Pre-Qualification Questions for Consideration ThresholdDescriptionProsCons COTS Scope – Social Disbursements Confirm (Yes/No) that your application suite of software proposed has been has implemented to deliver a Disbursements solution in a minimum of 2 client sites in the past 10 years. This includes functionality such as: -Working for families (family and work related benefits); -Paid parental leave; -Child support (facilitated payment) and; -Unemployment benefit This should include supporting functions such as customer management (CRM), case management (such as debt management, investigations/audit and litigation management), , multi-channel (web, mobile, call centre etc.), and analytics (eg, in process risk management, fraud detection etc.). The following attributes must be met for each implementation: •number of active individual customers must be at least 100,000; •Overall disbursements through the software must be the equivalent of at least NZ$200m per annum. Each implementation client site included in your response must be willing to act as a reference. •Thresholds determines who has implemented a COTS application suite of software and therefore has the expertise and experience to do it again, rather than organisations which would describe howthey would propose to implement a COTS application suite of software. •May be more useful to evaluate this a part of the EOI requirements section rather than as a prequalification question •Perception may be that this criteria would shut out organisations who were light on proven delivery of disbursements •Broad spectrum of requirements, possibility that this criteria would remove every contender. COTS participants rather than Solution Integrators Participants must confirm whether they meet the minimum capability and experience pre-conditions listed below. The Participants are required to “confirm” that they meet : A.Own the software; and B.Have a tax solution; •This variablethreshold confirm to IR that the participant is a manufacturer of software rather than an SI and they have substance to their capabilities. •In depth Fit gap analysis will need to be undertaken as part of the EOI response will confirm what further solutions are required from the market in order to provide the end to end experience for the customer. Integration The COTS service provider must have integrated all of the “core” modules into a fully integrated end-to-end solution within the past 10 years. Core modules must cover collect, assessments, disbursements, compliance, customer management. •Thresholds determines who has implemented a COTS application suite of software and therefore has the expertise and experience to do it again, rather than organisations which would describe howthey would propose to implement a COTS application suite of software. •Perception may be that this criteria would shut out potential hopefuls •Broad spectrum of requirements, possibility that this criteria would remove every contender. A number of approaches were considered for the sourcing of the COTS application suite of software and the minimum threshold that are set in order to ensure a quality of supplier based upon IR’s Market Analysis that is most likely to meet IR’s requirements. Errors and omissions excepted 18 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Minimum Pre-Qualification Questions ThresholdDescriptionProsCons COTS Scope – Savings and Loans COTS Scope –Savings and Loans Confirm (Yes/No) that your application suite of software proposed has been implemented to deliver a savings, loans, and/or facilitated payments solutions in a minimum of 2 client sites in the past 10 years. This includes: -Superannuation facilitated payment, (Kiwisaver); -Unemployment Insurance; -Student Loans or similar; and -Savings such as environmental restoration account. This should include supporting functions such as customer management (CRM), case management (such as debt management, investigations/audit and litigation management), , channel (web, mobile, call centre etc.), and analytics (eg, in process risk management, fraud detection etc.). The following attributes must be met for each implementation: number of Savings, loans and/or facilitated payment products must be at least 5; number of active individual customers must be at least 500,000; overall value of loans under management must be the equivalent of at least NZ$7b per annum. overall value of savings under management must be the equivalent of at least NZ$500m per annum. Each implementation client site included in your response must be willing to act as a reference. •Thresholds determines who has implemented a COTS application suite of software and therefore has the expertise and experience to do it again, rather than organisations which would describe howthey would propose to implement a COTS application suite of software. •May be more useful to evaluate this a part of the EOI requirements section rather than as a prequalification question •Perception may be that this criteria would shut out potential hopefuls •Broad spectrum of requirements, possibility that this criteria would remove every contender. Transactions Implementation references must meet minimum volume criteria, ie, as follows : •number of core tax and social services products must be at least 50, •number of return types must be at least 80, •number of customer accounts must be at least 4m, •number of internal users must be at least 3,500. •revenue collected must be at least NZ$20b p.a., •Alignswith New Zealand's taxation and social policy population and level of complexity. •Thresholds determines who has implemented a CTOS application suite of software with same complexity as New Zealand and therefore has the expertise and experience to do it again, rather than organisations which would describe howthey would propose to implement a COTS application suite of software. •Perception is that thiscriteria would shut out potential hopefuls looking to grow from an IR implementation. •Risk from not having this threshold is that IR is inundated with software providers expending time, effort and energy for limited ability to meet the detailed requirements in the RFP. •Thresholds are likely to be too high for most participants. A number of approaches were considered for the sourcing of the COTS application suite of software and the minimum threshold that are set in order to ensure a quality of supplier based upon IR’s Market Analysis that is most likely to meet IR’s requirements. 18 Errors and omissions excepted 19 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Minimum Pre-Qualification Questions for Consideration ThresholdDescriptionProsCons Configurability For each implementation reference client site identified, the service provider must confirm that the final solution matched the following criteria: At least 85% of the installed functionality must have been delivered via standard features, with minimum and/or moderate amounts of configuration; At least 95% of the installed functionality must have been delivered via standard features, with minimum and/or moderate amounts of configuration, and with minimum and/or moderate amounts of customisation, where such customisation is non-intrusive, ie, will be fully compatible with upgrades; and No more than 5% of installed functionality must have been delivered via non-standard or complex customisation, and/or product enhancements. The application suite of software must be able to be configured to integrate with other applications suites of software. •Targets an application suite of software that align to the principles of COTS. •Threshold would remove application builders from being able to bid. •Considerfor use in the RFP as more information can be made available to participants. •In the event that IR internal business process is ‘unchangeable’ then this limit might be arbitrary and this wont be known until IR are well into the deployment of the software. On that basis it may not be fair to have this at the EOI stage. •The level of information required for a potential supplier to inform themselves is extremely high •Installed functionally would need to be defined and referenced. •Difficult for IR or the Participant to assess at the EOI stage without a detailed explanation of requirements. Maximum Participants Thetop scoring (as evaluated by the evaluation panel), maximum 4\*, respondents would be taken through to the RFP stage. \*Four makes allowances for market shift since 2010 when Garter market research was completed which identified three ‘Excellent’ COTS providers. •Limited and knownamount of participants resulting from the EOI which provides predictability on IR and Service Provider resource to support the RFP phase. •Sets a threshold for participants who have a limited likelihood of success for them to decide their odds of success and allows them to bid accordingly. •MBIE supported the approach to set this type of threshold at the Central Agencies meeting in May 2014. •IRD own market education and research supported by Gartner (summarised in Appendix) suggests that there are three COTS providers that scored an Excellent in •Taxpayer Filing •Tax Assessment •Delinquent Collection •Revenue Administration •Product Viability •According to Gartner in 2010 there were at least three providers who would be able to demonstrate capability to meet IRs requirements. •Market perception of shuttingout potential niche providers Errors and omissions excepted 20 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Minimum Pre-Qualification Questions for Consideration ThresholdDescriptionProsCons Social Policy Capability COTS Scope –Social Policy Capability Confirm (YES/NO) that; (a)your organisation’s proposed COTS solution has the capability to be configured to deliver the social policy related functionality detailed below, and (b)(b) that you are able to demonstrate this functionality. Regarding both of these elements the social policy functionality includes, but is not limited to, the following: collection and/or disbursement of funds; complex multi-party relationships; facilitated payments; and income related benefits to enable Inland Revenue to deliver the social policy services described in section 6.1 (Inland Revenue at a glance). In a New Zealand context, social policy products include: Family and work related benefits (Working for families); Paid parental leave; Child support (facilitated payment); Superannuation facilitated payment (Kiwisaver); Student Loans (or similar); or Savings such as environmental restoration account. •Set a threshold that represents a high proportion of IRD effort (as high as 50% of the workload). •Allows participants to only ‘demonstrate functionality’ rather than have it site references. This mitigates the low likelihood that a participant has a solution to match New Zealand exact legislation. •No other tax and revenue authority has the same type of social policy disbursements as New Zealand and therefore the likelihood of someone having a solution to meet our requirements may be limited. Errors and omissions excepted 21 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] •A “Fully Integrated Solution” will mean that all data and business processes that will be required will reside within one system, and be accessible by all modules within the system, without the need to develop any specific integration custom code to convert or interface such data and/or business processes. •“COTS” will mean a “Commercially Off The Shelf” Application Suite of Software, that will contain all of the essential software for the specified functions, and which will allow key functionality to be enabled and/or suppressed via configuration, with flexibility to augment such configuration via routines that can be customised as “add-ons”. All configurations and customisations must be non-intrusive, ie, will be fully compatible with system version upgrades. •“Pre-Configured” will mean that solutions within the COTS Application Suite of Software will be pre-configured and/or have customised routines, supported by the required master and transactional data, to allow the majority of the proposed business processes to be demonstrated via a fully functional demonstration system. The pre-configured scenarios will be based on industry best practice. •“Core” are software packages that automate parts or all the transactional processes that a government revenue agency typically handles: •Party relationship management: This includes multichannel interaction management, correspondence management, contact management, marketing and education; •Revenue and disbursement management: This includes taxpayer identification, return intake, return processing, taxpayer accounting, billing and collection, and revenue accounting; •Case management (incl. Analytics): This includes both generic case management capabilities, such as creating, updating, cancelling, holding, reactivating, approving, closing and auditing cases, as well as specific types of cases, such as collection, audit, delinquency and bankruptcy. •“Configuration” is undertaken by changing dip-switch settings, interface settings, jumper settings, hardware drivers, software options, etc.. Configuration determines what the system will do and how its parts will interact. •“Customisation” is undertaken using changes to programming code that changes the nature of how the components of the solution interact. This may include core code modifications, specifically defined “coding exits”, interfaces, custom reports etc. •A “facilitated payment” is a payment received from a 3rd party, and passed on to an unrelated 3rd party. Inland Revenue acts as the facilitator of this payment. It is essentially a combination of a collection and a disbursement managed by Inland Revenue. Minimum Threshold definitions Errors and omissions excepted 22 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] •The percentage of customisationin an application should be measured by the costs of the customisation compared to the other costs of owning the application. •Customisation costs during the initial implementation are only a fraction of the overall cost of customisation. On ce customisation has been started, it becomes addictive and more customisation will follow. The downstream impact is on supportability and cost to upgrade which can become prohibitive. •First, it is necessary to re cognisethat most COTS applications require a range of configuration techniques, many of which cannot be characterisedas "customisation.“ •Secondly, it is necessary to recognisethat for certain classes of application — especially large, mission-critical systems — some degree of real customisation is likely to be necessary (see "Manage ERP customisations, Don't Avoid Them"). •In order to understand how much time and effort the customisation will represent, the starting point is to have a s imple mechanism for measuring the fit of an application. •During application selection, project teams should establish the likely initial costs for customisation and then show the impact of those initial costs in all subsequent years. The COTS fit-gap analysis, which will be completed as part of the evaluation will achieve the following: •Ensure that the requirements are correct, unambiguous, complete, consistent , ranked for importance, testable and trac eable; •Determine all gaps between the capabilities provided by the COTS components and our requirements as detailed in the R TM. The resulting COTS Fit-Gap Analysis document must identify requirements that: •Exist in the COTS with no change required •Exist in the COTS but require configuration •Need to be added to the COTS product/ Need to be removed from the COTS product •Need changes in our business process •Identify in the COTS Fit-Gap Analysis how each validated requirement will be achieved by the COTS solution (ie, through configuration, customisation, or business process change); •Integration with the Foundation work stream for integration in to the data arbitration layer with the legacy applications. S ource: Gartner 2014 Configuration versus Customisation Errors and omissions excepted 23 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Fit to Business Requirements Level of Effort – Configuration Level of Effort - Customisation 1 = Good (High) fit to stated business requirements 1 = Existin the COTS with no change required A = No customisation required 2 = Moderate (Medium) fit to stated requirements 2 = Exist in the COTS but requires moderate configuration B = Exist in the COTS but requires Simple customisation such a simple codes changes, interface development, forms,reports etc. 3 = Poor (Low) fit to stated business requirements 3 = Exist in the COTS but requires complex configuration and/or specialist skills C = Exists in the COTS but requires moderate customisation such a moderate codes changes, interface development, forms,reports etc. D = Exists in the COTS but requires high customisation including complex codes changes, interface development, forms, reports etc. E = Poorfit and as a result the functionality needs to be added to or removed from the COTS Product F = Core code modification required, third party solution required or change BusinessRequirement/Policy Fit -gap Assessment Guidelines Errors and omissions excepted 24 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Sourcing Approach–Possible Options ScopeDescriptionProsCons 1: Stage1 Design ►ProcurementofCOTS supplier(s) for detailed design of stage 1 ►Separate process for engagement of suppliers at each stage ►Abilityto select the best supplier to fit the requirements at each stage of the programme ►IR management of each stage of the BT Programme ►Fits into Government’s procurement and funding model ►Possibility to engage large number of suppliers ►Engaginga separate supplier in the configure phase is likely to result in significant rework ►Going to market at end of each phase creates breaks in programme momentum and increases the timeline ►Significant costs incurred by suppliers to participate in several different procurement processes 2: Design Phase of all Stages ►Engagement of COTS supplier(s) for the design phase of the entire BT Programme (stages 1,2 and 3) ►The Design stage is where the architecture of the systems is developed to define the systems’ components, how they interface, and their behaviours ►Ability to source the best supplier for design only ►A single supplier has oversight of the whole system and delivers a consistent design across all stages ►IR has control over the management of each stage of the programme ►Engaging a separate supplier at configure phase is likely to result in significant rework and duplication of effort ►Programme timeframe spans several years with significant gaps between stages ►Due to the timeline of the programme and changes in scope as part of the BT Programme lifecycle agreeing appropriate risks and incentives with supplier is difficult 3: COTS Provider for the Duration of the Programme ►Procuring a long term strategic COTS partner, responsible for delivering stage 1 Design, high- level designof all other stages, and the build and implementation of all stages ►The contract may include the Run Phase, though can be separate from the above bundle ►A single supplier has oversight of the whole system and delivers a consistent design across all stages ►Retains the option to contract for each stage ►Supplier knowledge is maintained over the duration of the BT Programme lifecycle ►Engaging a separate supplier in at configuration phase for stages 2 and 3 is likely to result in significant rework ►Project timeframe spans several years with significant gaps between phases ►Due to the project timeline and changes in scope agreeing appropriate risks and incentives with suppliers is difficult 4: End-to-End Transformation ►A single COTS partner is engaged from the Design to the Run Phase of the entire BT Programme ►All four stages included in scope of engagement ►Relationship with the partner will span many years ►Supplier knowledge is maintained over the course of the programme ►Ensures steady project momentum between phases ►Reduced total project timeframe ►Less specific requirements driving increased market competition ►High reliance on a single key supplier ►The timeframe and magnitude of the project limit the ability to effectively contract suppliers for the entire transformation ►Not aligned with Government’s current project procurement funding model A number of approaches were considered for the sourcing of the COTS application suite of software together with associated services Errors and omissions excepted 25 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Sourcing Scope of Requirements – PreferredOption 3 A provider of Commercial Off-The-Shelf Software and associated services for the duration of the programme Procuring a COTS Provider who is accountable for undertaking the detailed design phase of all stages and for the oversight ofth e configuration and implement stages (which may be sub-contracted). -This option is the engagement of a supplier(s) to support the end to end detailed design phases (Solution and Process) of theentire Future Transformation. This supplier provides end-to-end thought leadership over technology change and will support the business changeand Business Transformation Services Provider. -The delivery of both the detailed design and build/implement bundles may be completed by different suppliers – which can be managed through the Service Aggregation model. Under this scope, the COTSProvider would be required to provide the following supplierrequirements: -How the supplier will undertake the programme -How the supplier would integrate high-leveldesign delivery across, potentially, multiple detailed design and implementation partners -Evidence of working in a multi-supplier eco-system -Information about the supplier (scale, complexity, experience, expertise) -Evidence of relevant programmelife-cyclephase experience Under this scope, IR would be expected to inform respondents on the following: -What systems and what functionality is requiredin each stage and the linkagesbetween them -How each system is expected to be operated within IR -Current and expected end state after stage 1 -What systems are included in stage 1 -Required functionality of each system in stage Strategic Partner must be able to ‘do’ this work Strategic Partner must be able to lead this work A strategic partner would participate in a service aggregation model across the whole of the programme. A strategic partner would initially be contracted for the detailed design phase of Stage1. Errors and omissions excepted 26 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Delivery Model A delivery model defines the relationship between the programme, it’s a supplier(s) and any sub-contractors. The programme delivery model can have significant impacts on the overall cost and quality of the programme. This section outlines a range of delivery models available to IR and how the recommended option will effect the programme. Errors and omissions excepted 27 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Delivery Model – A range of delivery model options are available to IR DescriptionProsCons Prime•Prime holds the commercial relationship with the sub- contractors •Oneor twosupplier(s) engaged to deliver theoutcome •May use multiple third parties to deliver •Build‘best-of-breed’ with each supplier playing to their strengths •Can leverage established partnerships both reducing cost and mobilisation time •Broad market input •Highercost due to Prime passing through a management margin and risk contingency •IR may have less control over sub-contractor selection •Dependency on the Prime integrator for technology stack and subject to their preferences and capabilities •Innovation is one step removed. •Intellectual Property tie-in makes it difficult and costly to adapt to other models. •Doesn’t fully eliminate risk Consortium•Each party can havea contract with IR •Multiple parties engaged to deliver design and implementation in collaboration •Requirementto present a consolidated management layer with collective responsibility •Build‘best-of-breed’ with each supplier playing to their strengths •Can form quickly in the market in the right conditions •Can give more direct control over the top-to-bottom supplier mix in the eco- system •Difficult to manage lines ofresponsibility •Can take time to form in the market if the market is not already primed •Consortium parties can have conflicting objectives •A bidder who would be preferred if they were independent may rule themselves out as part of an unsuccessful consortium •Doesn’t fully eliminate risk Service Aggregation •Multiple suppliers engagedto various parts of the overall solution •Each party has a separate contract with IR •IR maintains direct controlof Risk and accountability over each aspect of a deliverable •Competitivetension remains as any one of the supplier(s) in the model already has knowledge of IR’s requirements and can pick up if another supplier falters •Mitigate commercial and delivery risk through the flexibility of two or more suppliers with specialist skills. •Complex management environment •Require significant IR resources to manage •Has failed before in Government (ref: GSN) •Doesn’t fully eliminate risk Selective Sourcing •Multiple parties engaged to deliver design and implementation •Each party hasa contract with IR •Allows directcontrol over all participants in the eco-system •Multiple contracts to manage •Multipleparties to be managed and co-ordinated towards a single outcome •Requires significant IR resources to manage •Doesn’t fully eliminate risk Single Source •One supplieris engaged to deliver design and implementation without the use of third parties •Single point ofresponsibility •Possible to develop a close partnership •Limited selection of suppliers capableof supplying these services in the NZ market •Doesn’t fully eliminate risk In-House •IR completes the end-to-end Tranche 1 activities themselves •Tailoredsolution designed by the organisation, for the organisation •Huge resourcerequirement •Skills and capability gap in both management Below is a range of common delivery models used in customer-supplier relationships, a description of each option as well as the pros and cons are listed below. 28 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Key IR CapabilityRequirements Supplier management oflarge scale commercial contract Commitment to a strategic partnership Consider/Recommend? Consider – Perceived single point of control in reality risk and contingency embedded in price. IR will ultimately be accountable for success of failure and this isn’t able to be delegated away. Key IR CapabilityRequirements Extensiveevaluation criteria to evaluate a capable partner Consider/Recommend? No– Giventhe scale and scope of the programme, there is unlikely to be a vertically integrated supplier capable of delivering it Service Aggregator In-House IR V1 V2 V3 V2 V1 V3 V2 V1 IR Managemen t IR V1 V2 V3 IR V1 Prime Consortium Selective Sourcing Single Source Key IR CapabilityRequirements Supplier management of complex multisource commercial environment, multiple large scale contracts Consider/Recommend? No– Review the failing of the consortium model when used by HMRC. Although the COTS providers may require an SI to implement their product Key IR CapabilityRequirements Management ofmultiple contracts in a complex environment Arbitration in supplier disputes Consider/Recommend? Recommend – Would help engage the market, however unpopular with many suppliers due to blurred lines of responsibility and control Key IR CapabilityRequirements Supplier management ofmultiple commercial contracts Overall system integration done by IR Consider/Recommend? No – Supplier and system integration management is considerable, would require a large IR management team. Breaches rules of Sourcing Key IR CapabilityRequirements Design,Build, Implement, management skills required, which would need to be resourced by IR Consider/Recommend? No– Resourcerequirement is beyond what could conceivably be built given the market and timescale constraints Delivery Model – Potential Delivery models Management Direction Contractual Control IR IR V3 Errors and omissions excepted 29 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Through an assessment of the potential supplier models the Service Aggregation model was identified as the best fit for IR’s BT Programme. This is a non-exhaustive list of some of the higher priority risks in comparison with the Service Aggregation Model (recommend) and with the Prime Model (consider): RiskTreatmentunder Service AggregationTreatment under Prime IRdoesn’t have suitable resources to manage multiple suppliers •Recruithighly experienced commercial managers which have managed long term complex supplier agreements. •Vacancies for the management of the agreements of the Services Provider and the selection COTS supplier have been recruited. •Recruithighly experienced commercial managers which have managed long term complex supplier agreements. •Vacancies for the management of the agreements of the Services Provider and the selection COTS supplier have been recruited. Suppliers will not work collaboratively with each other and seekto constantly undermine each other in order to get a greater share of spend to the determent of delivery. •Suppliers participating in the Service Aggregation model have operational level (non-legal, non binding) agreements (OLAs) with each other in place to establish demarcation points •Joint governance model in place with all suppliers participating and therefore share success and failures. •Assess the cultural fit of any potential organisation to work within a service aggregation model Primemanages all suppliers within their scope Supplier suppresses innovation and promotes and approach that aligns to their sales agenda The service aggregation modelhas inherent competitive tension built in therefore if this were to occur another member of the model could replace the problematic supplier. NO TREATMENT Government tried Service Aggregation with the Government Shared Network and failed, what has changed •IR is not reliant on sellinga product(s) to other agencies to realise the benefits of the programme, therefore the two approaches are vastly different ie,: unsuccessful suppliers will not be incentivised to undercut the model. •IR will aggregate the services itself rather than outsourcing this function. Governmenttried Prime model with Novapay and INCIS and failed, what has changed. Distributethe risk by utilising a service aggregation model across a few but substantial suppliers Delivery Model for Design Phase –the Service Aggregation model (Risks) Errors and omissions excepted 30 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Role of the Solutions Integrator (Services Provider) IR will require the core tax and social policy COTS solution to integrate with legacy and non-ore COTS applications as part of the end to end business transformation. Under IR’s proposed service aggregation model the role of the Solution Integrator (SI) will be required to ensure end-to-end integration of a multi solution. The SI will be required to warrant the solution that they have accountability for integrating. To enable this accountability the SI will have a lead role in the selection of the COTS provider(s). Having the same SI performing the services from the commencement of the programme can mitigate some of the grey area that will exist between business processes and the underlying technology that enable business continuity. Errors and omissions excepted 31 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Design Approach 31 The High Level and Detailed Designs to be produced during the Design Phase would be jointly produced by IR, the Services Partner, and the COTS supplier, with responsibilities as follows : BT Services Provider Scope : •Working Relationships. •Project management of all Design Partner services that are in-scope. •High Level Design for Enterprise Support Solutions for Stages 2, 3 and 4. •Detailed Design of Systems Integration elements. •Detailed Design of all changes to and/or new Enterprise Support systems for Stage 1. •Detailed Design of all business partner co- designs for the External Integration system. •Assistance with Organisational Change Management. •Assistance with benefits estimation. •Provision of End to End Integration Advisory Services to ensure that all elements of the Design are integrated, fit for purpose, and aligned with the Business Strategy. •Specification of all non-Core application software required for Stage 1. •Support for COTS provider as required. IR Scope : •Working Relationships. •Overall Governance. •Programme Management. •Project management of all IR services that are in-scope. •Feasibility and Funding Requests. •Current State Definition. •Ratification of Future State Designs. •Benefits Realisation. •Organisational Change Management. •Stakeholder Management & Communications. •Organisational Design. •Policy Simplification and Alignment. •Data Preparation. •Process Mapping. •Coordination of co-design activities. •All procurement activities. COTS Provider Scope : •Working Relationships. •Project management of all COTS Provider services that are in-scope. •Detailed Design of all Core solutions required for Stage 1. •High Level Design of all Core solutions for Stages 2, 3 and 4, based on the selected COTS Core package. •Inter-module integration within the Core COTS package, and integration with the Enterprise Integration layer. •Detailed Design of all associated CRM and embedded analytics and metrics and reporting solutions. •Detailed Design of all customer facing digital solutions for the Core system for Stage 1. •Detailed Design of all business partner co-designs for the Core system. •Assistance with benefits estimation. •Support for the Design Partner as required. Provision of End to End Integration Advisory Services to ensure that all elements of the Design are integrated, fit for purpose,and aligned with the Business Strategy. IR Errors and omissions excepted 32 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Through an assessment of the potential supplier models the Service Aggregation model was identified as the best fit for IR’s BT Programme. The significant advantages, the opportunities this presents for IR and the actions IR will be required to undertake have been listed below: AdvantageOpportunity for IRRequirements for IR •Direct commercial risk on successful delivery to IR is concentrated with a small number of suppliers •All suppliersin the model have consistent terms and conditions. •IR has simpler contractual and commercial control over the delivery of services and can focus on effectively managing the risk of successful delivery •Need to ensure that sub-contracts are structured (ie, back-to-back, pro-forma) only where appropriate •Consider information disclosure requirement for effective subcontracting •IR using sub-contractors allows us to: •Bring in key specialist or international resources •Diversify delivery risk through the engagement of niche suppliers •Leverage economies of scale when engaging third parties •Useestablished partnerships which have been successful in the past •More than just “task outsourcing”, sub- contractors can add value by: •Leveraging subject matter expertise at the right point in the transformation •Utilising suppliers and resources who have domain or functional knowledge •Utilising existing commercial relationships •Accelerating through cultural and organisational challenges •Need to ensure the areas where the supplier and sub-contractorsadd value are understood: •Clear expectations on capability, visibility over sub-contractor engagement and competent supplier management Identify where third party resources can be supplemented by IR staff •IR needs to maintain close control over the level of internal input and involvement. •IR has complete control and leverage over third-party suppliers •IR may not need to get involved in managing multiple parties to delivery •IR must decide whether it wants to include rights to control the sub-contractor environment (“step- in” or novation) should the need arise •Joint work stream management can be implemented, and shared objectives can be engineered through appropriate pricing and commercial constructs •IR will require a suppliermanagement overhead, it will not need to retain a significant delivery resource overhead which could be up to 300FTE •Internal IR competency can be developed in strategic supplier management •If IR should wish to take on run responsibility, then appropriate service introduction planning is essential Delivery Model for Design Phase – the Service Aggregation model and what it means for IR Errors and omissions excepted 33 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Delivery Model for Design Phase The preferred delivery model is the Service Aggregation Model The effect of engaging a COTS Provider for the long-term under the Service Aggregation model Effect on Sourcing: •As with all the models considered Service Aggregation does not fully eliminate risk, the service aggregation model was not successful with the Government Shared Network mainly due inherent competition of parties who were not selected to run the GSN (which IR will not face) and undercut GSN pricing. •The capabilities required to act with in a Service Aggregation model will need to be included in the sourcing requirements (RFx) and the COTS provider’s ability to be lead by the Business Transformation Service Provider for aspects of delivery which are outside the COTS provider’s scope and remit. •The evaluation criteria will need to focus on the supplier’s ability to carry out IT, business change and the ability to manage a programme of this scale over an extended timeframe •The design of the commercial arrangements and contracting will need to be tailored to suit this type of relationship between IR and the successful suppliers, and the IR management over the parties will need to be •IR will need to decide what degree of control it wants to have over the selection of 2nd tier suppliers in the BT Programme and to ensure that good procurement practise is being adhered to, commensurate with the Government Rules of Sourcing. •Note that it’s possible to move from Service Aggregation to other models, including Prime if needs arise, but it’s almost impossible to move from Prime to other models due to the inherent lock in of intellectual property which makes unpicking this a transformation of significant complexity on its own. Service Aggregation Model Sourcing Scope Errors and omissions excepted 34 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Commercial Approach The preferred commercial approach will determine how IR construct the contract and interact with the preferred COTS supplier(s) (when selected) for the Design Phase. Errors and omissions excepted 35 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Contracting Approach – Relationship The type of relationship that IR is seeking with the supplier should be determined early and communicated to the market as part of the supplier selection process. Key considerations in determining the most suitable relationship approach include: •The duration of the expected engagement, whether the focus of the relationship is short-term or long-term •How the culture of the supplier needs to fit with IR and other supplier(s) within a Service Aggregation model •Transparency of the supplier and their activities •How the supplier complements IR’s internal capabilities •The costs associated with different relationship types •The amount of risk IR wants to transfer to the supplier •How the supplier reacts to disputes (building of trust and credibility) •Slide 35 covers the capabilities being sought as part of the COTS design phase. •It’s expected that the supplier(s) will mature during the life of the agreement. Active manipulation Self-Interest Adversarial relationship Based on attack Lack of trust Adversarial relationship Based on defence Arm’s length Many short-term relationships Lack of loyalty Reactive relationship Low trust Basic quality Reactive improvements Long-Term Value for Money Shared values Greater trust Interdependence Builds on collaborative relationship Greater social responsibility Sustainability Successful relationships are generated through effective programme governance. As such, the relationship needs to be aligned to the programme governance structure Increasing Value Community centred Pioneering Partnering Key Major Basic Transactional Trading Tribal Combative Errors and omissions excepted 36 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Relationship Type and Characteristics Matrix TransactionalKey/CoreStrategic CombativeTribalTradingTransactionalBasicMajorKeyPartnering (Alliancing) PioneeringCommunity CultureMaster/Slave Adversarial Control and compliance Defend and Protect (internal and/or external) Risk adverse Secretive Opportunistic Deal “ doing” Deal “making” Arms length Impersonal Reactive Inputs focus Client Focus Outputs focus Quality and Cont. Improvement Based Values Open Proactive Outcomes Focus Based on Total Trust and Transparency Principle centered Collaborative ‘Who dares wins’ Mindset / attitudes Selfless Inclusive Outward looking Strategy“Offensive” Win/Lose Profit focus Tough and Hard nosed contract focus Defensive Protective Self interest Based - WIIFM Deal based Little loyalty Low margins and/or Little Differentiatio n Best of 3 quotes Technology Driven Systems based STD T&C’s Low cost Do and Charge Tender Based Cost Plus Prescriptive Focus Do and Improve Best of Breed “Outsourcing” focus on reducing cost base Do and Add Value Exploiting synergies Preferred Supplier Win/Win Interdepende nt Shared risk / reward and common goals, joint plans Brave, Bold and Different Leveraging core competencies Paradigm shifting Triple bottom line and Legacy focus Trust based joint Business Plan StructureBureaucratic Hierarchical Hostile interfaces Parochial Silos, Fiefdoms Clans, Tribes, Factions Territorial interfaces Simple or single point of contact interfaces Face to face or electronic Electronic or single point of contact Simple, single or limited points of contact Face to face or electronic Medium level contact and contract management interface Complex Multi level contract and contact management interface Flat, team based, integrated interfaces Seamless boundaries Empowered, flat and modular teams and interfaces Extended supply chain and community interfaces Open source type structures ProcessLegalistic Tightly managed one sided contracts Risk Transfer Protect information and knowledge Many d emarcations and hidden agendas Track-able, traceable, deal based Efficiency and effectiveness focus Systems driven and automated Depersonalised STD T&Cs Rule Work to rule or Standard Basic Account Management Major Account Plans linked to KPI measures and contractual obligations Supply chain analysis Key Account Plan leads relationship development and performance obligations Joint Relationship. Business Plan leads the relationship improvement journey Joint ownership Best Practice forums Stretch and breakthrough innovation processes Health of community and legacy focus Integrated and/or modular Few Contracts PeopleAggressive Confrontational Untrustworthy Arrogant, hostile, coercive communicators Self interest focus Protective and Defensive Tribal loyalty Short term deal focus Wo rk/play hard negotiators Dealmakers Task driven Service oriented Technology driven/focused Task driven Reactive account management skills Focus on transfer of non core competencies from Client to Supplier Professional Key Account Managers High accountability Principled Passionate Professional Performance driven Fair minded and reasonable Passionate Proud, Stubborn and Unreasonable Pioneers and Trail blazers Selfless Giving, Caring Working for Community benefit Source: 0 to 10 Relationship Management; Chartered Institute of Purchase and Supply Errors and omissions excepted 37 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Commercial Approach - Deliverables Deliverables determine the areas of focus, the type and number of people employed by the service provider, and the degree of col laboration possible between the IR and the service provider ensures that they have the necessary organisational, technical and financial resources t o meet these requirements. TypeDescriptionProsCons Input BasedAn input based deliverablefocuses predominantly on labour and materials required for a particular task or work package. Control over the programme of work and the budget spend should be retained by IR.This typically sets out the number of resources required, their qualifications and theservices they are to provide. •IR retains control over the programme of work and budget spend •Easy and simple process if IR requires labour to complete particular internally delivered tasks or work packages •Does not allow service provider performance to be measured against specific outputs or outcomes •Requires IR to have strong governance and oversight of the service provider OutputBasedOutput based deliverables focuses on the required outputs and the scope of the service provider’s responsibility. Decisions on how to accomplish this (ie, resources, budgets,etc.) are left to the service provider. •IR can specify the outputs required •Service provider have the flexibility to provide innovative solutions to deliver the agreed outputs •Leverages the service provider’s knowledge and experience •Creates clear allocation of roles and responsibilities between IR and the service provider •Requires significant upfront effort from IR to determine and understand requirements •IR and the service provider must proactively seek to remove as many barriers and constraints as possible to enable the service provider to successfully deliver the agreed outputs •A strong governance structure and process is a necessity for success Outcome Based Outcome based deliverables specify targets aligned with policy, strategic objectives and or organisation growth targets. There is an implicit assumption that standard task output objectives will be fully met, and the focus has moved to IR’s more strategic issues. Thisis key to triggering payment for licensing at the time IR is ready to consume the license. •Focuses on policy outcomes , strategic objectives and growth targets ie, high level benefits and outcomes associated with the Programme •IR compensates service provider primarily on achievement of specified outcomes •IR and the service provider share delivery risk •Costs associated with transfer of delivery risk to the service provider •May result in IR having less control over the Programme •Reliance on clearly defined and well understood outcomes Errors and omissions excepted 38 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Commercial Approach - Performance Management Performance management is an essential consideration in the procurement as it provides a means to measure and monitor whether the selected Supplier is achieving the requirements it was engaged to meet, eg, •Defining all deliverables for which the supplier is (to be) contracted •Determining the factors by which each deliverable will be measured •Establishing key performance indicators (KPIs) for each deliverable •Determining whether the KPIs are SMART (appropriate and up-to-date ) •Determining how the measures will be monitored and the frequency of measurement S pecific performance measures are mapped against IR’s key result area framework, and must align with the following investment objectives: 39 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] PricingDetail Consider/ Recommend? Structured Time and Materials Agreed rate for work however the quantity is variable based uponcapabilities consumed by IR. •Retentionsheld for late deliverables and milestones, waiting time for contingent delay caused by service provider to off-set IR’s costs which may be payable to other suppliers in the service aggregation model – •This is the recommended model as it aligns with the service model already in use with the Business Transformation Services provider Lump Sum - Fixed Price The supplier is paid a fixed price under the contract. There are no variations allowed under this model (ie, to account for inflation) •Can be applied to the agreed deliverables provided that the details provided to the supplier in the Procurement process are sufficiently detailed for them to price this accurately. •The supplier includes a ‘risk premium’ in their pricing, increasing the overall cost to IR or that the supplier carries the commercial risk entirely, which is not consistent with the ‘collaborative’ approach IR wants to adopt. Lump Sum - Fixed Price Variable The supplier is paid a fixed price in the contract however variations are included. This may be the provision for agreed options or variations such as inflation. •Can be applied to the defined deliverables in scope. Defining and agreeing pricing options upfront for scope changes/amendments also gives IR and the supplier commercial certainty. •This model requires a level of trust that pushes this relationship into the Partnership status, it was noted at the Investment Board on March 2013 that IR is seeking a Collaborative relationship. Management Fee Actual work paid for and a management fee on top. The management fee may be a fixed amount or a percentage of costs. •Can be applied to the requirements in scopelike unit rate. •The advantage of this method is that the profit margin can be negotiated. •This pricing method does not drive resource effectiveness and delivery as profit is % of costs incurred. Success Fee The supplier is paid for their costs and their additional compensation is an agreed percentage of the delivered BT Programme benefits. •Can be applied to the entire scope of the strategic ‘integration’ provided that the supplier has end-to-end responsibility for delivery (ie, not design only). This pricing method drives focused, fast delivery with effective use of resources. •Not commonly used in New Zealand IT industry •Requires mature benefits case Time and Materials/Fixed – (Hybrid) Agreed rate for work however the quantity is not specified. Some deliverablescould be fixed price based upon risk/certainty to IR. •Can be applied to the Requirements, in particular if the supplier deems insufficient Requirement details have been shared for them to provide any fixed pricing proposals. •This pricing method requires IR to maintain a high degree of management over the competency of the resources. Commercial Approach –Pricing (Services Options) The pricing method determines the way that the selected suppliers will be paid for the work they perform: 40 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] PricingDetailConsider Software as a Service (Opex) A software licensing and delivery model in which software is licensed on a subscription basis and can be centrally hosted. It is sometimes referred to as "on- demand” software •Unlike traditional software which is conventionally sold as a perpetual license with an up-front cost (and an optional on-going support fee), SaaS providers generally price applications using a subscription fee, most commonly a monthly fee or an annual fee. •The initial setup cost for SaaS is typically lower than the equivalent Enterprise license. SaaS suppliers typically price their applications based on some usage parameters, such as the number of users using the application. •In a SaaS environment customers' data can reside with the SaaS supplier, opportunities also exist to charge per transaction, event, or other unit of value Perpetual (Capex) A perpetual license will allow the IR to use the licensed software indefinitely •Although the software license terms can very the period of‘indefinitely’ needs to be defined as incapable of being terminated. •Many software agreements tie the perpetual right to use to the ongoing payment for support and maintenance. Enterprise (Opex or Capex) A license to install software an unlimited number of times within the enterprise. An Enterprise Agreement is structured as ‘all you can eat’ but the organisation must be licensed for a specific quantity of licenses so this is not strictly an ‘Enterprise License’ model in its pure form •Time bound •Limited to a particularsoftware suite or product set ie,: specific Application Middleware, Database Commercial Approach –Pricing (Software Licenses Models Options) Software Licensing models are wide and varied, these are the most common types for consideration, although different COTS providers have different regimes for different product suites: Once a detailed analysis of total cost of ownership and value for money represents then more refinement on the different options can be made, and which proportions of each model is required to license the overall solution. Errors and omissions excepted 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] PricingDetail Consider/ Recommend? User (Opex or Capex) A license that provides access to the software to a specific number of users. All installations of the software will be counted but installations across multiple devices for the same user will be counted as one license consumption •Named User - A license that allows access to the software by a specific number of named users. In some cases, these licenses can be transferred from one user to another. When you create the license, you should allocate the license to specific users. Only installations associated with allocated users are counted. For example, if the license is allocated to users Sam and Jan, the maximum installation count is two. Any other installations of the licensed application are treated as unassigned installations. For example, if May has also installed the licensed application but has not been allocated to the license, her installation will not be shown against installations of this license •ConcurrentUser - A license which provides wider access to the software but limits the number of simultaneous users using the software. It may or may not include compliance enforcement capabilities. Typically, a concurrent license is “checked out” from the license server when the software is run, assuming a license is available. •If no license is available, the requester experiences a denial of service Appliance (Opex or Capex) A license covering use of a specific piece of hardware •Processor- A license based on the number of CPU/Processor sockets on which the software will run, and NOT the logical processors aka cores. •Core/Processor Points- A license based on points applied as a multiplier to the number of Cores/Processors in the physical server, or in some cases, the virtual machine. Some suppliers count Processor sockets and others count logical processors, or cores, but the license model is similar. For example an application installed on a 4 processor server with 100 points per processor would require a purchase of 400 processor points to cover the license liability. •These licenses are mainly used for Datacentre software licensing such as IBM. •Device - A license for a defined number of software installations. The software may be uninstalled on one computer and installed on any other computer within the same enterprise, so long as the total number of installations does not exceed the number of purchased licenses Commercial Approach –Pricing (Software Licenses Models Options) Software Licensing models are wide and varied, these are the most common types for consideration, although different COTS providers have different regimes for different product suites: Errors and omissions excepted 42 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Commercial Approach – Contract Period The contract period includes the length of the initial period of engagement and any contract extensions that apply. Below is the range of contracting approach options applicable to the BT Programme: DetailApplicableOption to TPPros + /ConsConsider Budget Cycle The contract period is based on the time Treasury funding is allocated or reviewed or re-assessed. Treasury funding is available to IR every5- years (or for Tranche 1 only), therefore the contract offered may only be for the same period. This may involve a three year contract with an optional two year extension. Creates a situation of uncertaintyfor the supplier if their service delivery spans wider than the budget cycle. Programme Cycle The contract period is based on the project plan. The supplier contract will end once delivery of the contracted phase is completed. Gives certainty to the supplieron their remuneration. If there are scope changes these will need to be dealt with at the time. Market Entry The contract period is based on consideration of the time it would take for new suppliers to enter the market and establish themselves. Supplier may have significant start up costs associated with the programme. The contract period should consider the time it will take for the contractors to recover the start up costs they have incurred. Unlikely to be in-line with the Government funding rules.In addition, the scope of work for the supplier is sufficient for the supplier to recover any set-up cost they may have incurred. Lifetimeof Solution The contract period is for the expected duration of the life of the solution for software this is indefinite until terminated. Governmentbudget periods are limited to cycles, as there will be an opex component to the purchase of any software licenses this cost when know should be build into the business case. It’s likely the COTS solutionwill be long term (the existing implementation has lasted 23 years) contracting on the basis of an indefinite term until terminated is commensurate with industry software support and maintenance models. Errors and omissions excepted 43 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Commercial Approach - I ncentives and sanctions Incentives and sanctions define the consequences of meeting (incentives) or not meeting (sanctions) the requirements of the agreed contract. The incentives and sanctions stated in the contract may be used to drive behaviour in the performance management process. It is optimal to use incentives as the primary means of driving behaviour rather than focusing on the negative implications of sanctions. This helps to develop a positive relationship with the selected supplier and informs the type of relationship IR is seeking. However, in some circumstances sanctions are appropriate. The following type of incentives and sanctions could be considered in the BT Programme: • Financial - T he use of monetary rewards or withholdings based on the work performed by the supplier. • Contract Extensions -T he use of optional contract extensions based on the work performed. This is IR’s decision as to whether or not to offer the extension. • Profit at Risk -T he provision that a specified proportion or all of a supplier’s profit paid is subject to them meeting required performance standards. IR still pays the contractor’s direct costs of performing the specified work. • Contract Period -O ffering a longer contract period to entice suppliers to offer cost savings due to receiving benefits for longer terms of investment. • Liquidated Damages - F inancial sanction incurred by the supplier as a result of delayed work that was due to be performed. It is important to note that liquidated damages are only enforceable when the financial impact of delays have been estimated prior to the contract being issued. Errors and omissions excepted 44 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] IncentiveConsider/Recommend?SanctionConsider/Recommend? Financial Rewarding the contractor with a bonus payment for performance of quality work. Withholding a proportion of payment as a result of non- performance. Contractor Competition Rewarding contractors with additional contract periods as a result of high performance. n/a Profit at Risk The full profit is paid for service delivery at the required performance standards. The specified portion of the profit is withheld from the contractor as a result of service delivery not meeting the required standards. Contract Period Establishing a five year contract period to encourage the service provider to offer cost savings due to ability to create efficiencies in service delivery over time. The contract extension is not taken up with the service provider. Defects Liabilityn/a Obliges a supplier to rectify defects that appear in the deliverablesthey have completed during the period when the liability clause is in effect. Liquidated Damagesn/a A contractor is required to pay liquidated damages for not completing programme on time. Termination for Convenience n/a IR can decide the contract needs to end, notifies the supplier and pays the specified compensation for early exit. Commercial Approach - Incentives and sanctions (cont.) Errors and omissions excepted 45 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Commercial Approach - Summary •Relationship– Key/Major for Design phase and a migration plan to mature at the length of engagement increases. •Deliverables– Various based upon the different stages, Input for Services, Outcome for licensing drawdown and Output for Run stage. •Performance Management –Performance will be measured against the delivery plan •Pricing- for services will align to the structured time and materials approach, IR will not contract for licensing until a suitable business case has been approved with the requisite benefits. Licenses will be paid for at drawdown (consumption) not upfront. •Contract Period –all contractual commitments will be subject to programme cycle or lifetime of solution depending on the results of the total cost of ownership analysis. •Incentives and Sanctions – contractual remedies will be aligned with the IRs level of risk, endemic sanctions include profit at risk and retention model. SLAs will be in place for support at the time of support and KPIs will be linked back to the programme objectives. Errors and omissions excepted 46 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Procurement Process This section outlines the available selection options and approaches and provides analysis of these with indicative timelines Errors and omissions excepted 47 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Procurement Process – Supplier Selection Options Procurement MethodDescriptionImplications (1) Open Competitive One-Step Request for Proposal (RFP) issued openly on GETs •Must disclose enough information to enable a supplier to submit a meaningful response •IR would have to issue sensitive information in order to enable a supplier to submit a meaningful price. •IR could stage-gate an RFP (similar to the option below) so that potential suppliers met a threshold or group of defined criteria before being allowed to via the RFP (a NDA could be executed to protect sensitive information) •Threshold criteria could generate criticisms from the general public and local industry due to its exclusionary effect (2) Open Competitive Multi-step A procurement process with more than one step, eg, an Expression of Interest (EOI) openly advertised on GETs followed by the RFPto shortlisted participants only. •Additional resources and programme cost to manage extended process •Potentially double the duration as IR must evaluate responses that meet any minimum criteria set, a six month process minimum •Threshold criteria could generate criticisms from the general public and local industry due to its exclusionary effect (repeat of BT EOI) •It is possible to combine the EOI and RFP stages together and have the EOI as a threshold which shaves ~3 months off the selection process. (3) Closed Competitive (asan approved exemption to the Government Rules of Sourcing) A tender process where an IR asks a limited number of pre- selected suppliers to tender for a contract opportunity. The contract opportunity is not openly advertised. •IR may use closed competitive process to procure goods, services and works from organisations that it knows could provide the outcomes IR is seeking •Approach is supported by extensive market analysis and reference site visits •This requires an exemption from the Government Rules of Sourcing, according to MBIE, given the programme’s heightened visibility this would require cabinet approval •The general public and local industry may want to understand the rationale of such a decision •This would save ~3 months (by not having to do a full EOI), effort for IR as well as the market who sometime respond because they feel they must. (4) Direct Source (asan approved exemption to the Government Rules of Sourcing) A tender process where IR asks a single supplier to tender for a contract opportunity, and the contract opportunity is not openly advertised. •This requires an exemption from the Government Rules of Sourcing, according to MBIE, given the programme’s heightened visibility this would require cabinet approval •The general public and local industry may want to understand the rationale of such a decision Note: Other sub variants of these options exist, this is to differentiate between options that follow the Government Rules of Sourcing and those that would be executed solely in line with the Principles of NZ Government Procurement Errors and omissions excepted 48 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Procurement Process – Supplier Selection Approvals and Governance Procurement MethodApprovalsCommentary (1) Open Competitive One-Step DFA to CIR from Ministers would be required •Any thresholds would likely generate commentary from New Zealand Industry (2) Open Competitive Multi-step DFA to CIR from Ministers would be required •Any thresholds would likely generate commentary from New Zealand Industry (3) Closed Competitive (asan approved exemption to the Government Rules of Sourcing) •CIR would need to grant an exemption from the Government Rules of Sourcing •DFA to CIR from Ministers would be required •MBIE may be expected to provide commentary to Ministers, MBIE have advised that as Cabinet have approved the rules of Sourcing then Cabinet may need to be informed if this approach was approved. •GCIO may have an opinion (4) Direct Source (asan approved exemption to the Government Rules of Sourcing) •CIR would need to grant an exemption from the Government Rules of Sourcing •DFA to CIR from Ministers would be required •MBIE may be expected to provide commentary to Ministers, MBIE have advised that as Cabinet have approved the rules of Sourcing then Cabinet may need to be informed if this approach was approved. •GCIO may have an opinion Note: Other sub variants of these options exist, this is to differentiate between options that follow the Government Rules of Sourcing and those that would be executed solely in line with the Principles of NZ Government Procurement Errors and omissions excepted 49 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Procurement Method DescriptionOpen Competitive One-Step Open Competitive Multi-step Closed Competitive Direct Source Compliant with the Government Rules of Sourcing The Government Rules of Sourcing (the Rules) represent the government’s standards of good practice for procurement planning, approaching the market and contracting and were introduced by cabinet on 1st October 2013 Market Access The level of openness of the Procurement to all potential suppliers in the market Speed to Contract The time it takes for the procurement process to occur, from initial information being released to the market through to the contract being awarded to a supplier Competitive Tension The awareness between suppliers of the existence and capabilities of rival firms and ability to leverage ideal commercial arrangements. Market Response Considers the ability of the market to meet and respond to requirements of the procurement, based on the approach to market Poor Good Supplier Selection Options -Analysis Errors and omissions excepted 50 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Procurement Process – Supplier Selection Options Note: Other sub variants of these options exist. These are highlighted to differentiate between options that follow the Government Rules of Sourcing and those that would be executed solely in line with the Principles of NZ Government Procurement. \*Ministerial and funding approval required prior to release of Market Document (EOI or RFP)\* (2) Open Competitive Multi-Step (EOI –RFP) AUGUSTSEPTEMBEROCTOBERNOVEMBERDECEMBER2015 12 th 2 nd 22 nd 26 th 7 th 10 th 11 th 13 th – 5 th 8 th January Sourcing StrategyProcurement Plan, Eval Plan and RFP Issue RFP(22 days) and Evaluation of RFP responses RFP Findings Report RFP IB endors ement (3) Closed Competitive (as an approved exemption to the Government Rules of Sourcing) AUGUSTSEPTEMBEROCTOBERNOVEMBERDECEMBER2015 12 th 2 nd 22 nd 26 th 7 th 10 th 11 th 13 th –27 th 8 th January Sourcing StrategyProcurement Plan, Eval Plan and RFP Issue RFP(22 days) and Evaluation of RFP response Negotiationsstart and contract agreement RFP IB endors ement (4) Direct Source (as an approved exemption to the Government Rules of Sourcing) AUGUSTSEPTEMBEROCTOBERNOVEMBERDECEMBER2015 12 th 2 nd 22 nd 26 th 7th10 th 5 th 7- 281- 19JanuaryFebruary Develop documents required SS, Procure. Plan, Eval Plan and RFP •(22 nd ) PEWC submission •(26 th ) PGA endorsement Scenarios / Presentations 3 suppliers, maximum 1 week each. RFP IB endors ement Governance for RFP Findings Report (1) Open Competitive One-Step (RFP) Reference Checking / Site Visits (2 weeks) Issue RFPMarket Document •(10 th ) Issue RFP (18 days) •(5 th ) RFP response deadline Evaluation of RFP responses (7 th –28 th ) MONTHAUGUSTSEPTEMBEROCTOBERNOVEMBERDecember W/C20141 st 8 th 15 th 22 nd 29 th 6 th 13 th 20 th 27 th 3 rd 10 th 17 th 24 th 3 rd 10 th 17 th 24 th Develop documents required Communications Plan, Procurement Plan, Evaluation Plan and EOI Document 24 th PEWC endorsement 26 th PGA endorsement Issue EOIMarket Document •(29 th Sept) Issue EOI (15 days) •(24 th Oct) EOI response deadline EOI Findings Report •(24 th –28 th Nov) Internal Review •(3 rd Dec) PEWC endorsement •(10 th or 18 th ) PGA endorsement Start RFP process Evaluation of EOI Individual and Moderation meetings •(30 th Oct - 13 th Nov) Errors and omissions excepted 51 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] COTS Procurement Process – Supplier Selection Recommended Option DECEMBERJANUARYFEBRUARYMARCHAPRILMAYJUNEJULYAUGUST 201420152015201520152015201520152015 Developmentof RFP Evaluation Plan and RFP Market Document Issue RFP Market Document (1 month) 23 rd March to 20 th April RFP Release Governance •(12 th) EWC endorsement •(19 th) PGA endorsement Evaluation RFP Market Document •1 week individual evaluation •3 week product demonstrations (1 week per service provider) •2 weeks reference checking •1 week final moderation meeting •1 week finalise RFP Findings Report 21st April to 16 th June Negotiations, contract award (10 th July) RFP Findings Report Governance •(18 th June) PGA endorsement RFP AUGUSTSEPTEMBEROCTOBERNOVEMBERDecember W/C20141 st 8 th 15 th 22 nd 29 th 6 th 13 th 20 th 27 th 3 rd 10 th 17 th 24 th 3 rd 10 th 17 th 24 th Development of documents required Communications Plan, Procurement Plan, Evaluation Plan and EOI Document 24 th EWC endorsement 26 th PGA endorsement Issue EOI Market Document •(29 th Sept) Issue EOI (15 days) •(24 th Oct) EOI response deadline EOI Findings Report •(24 th –28 th Nov) Internal Review •(3 rd Dec) EWC endorsement •(10 th or 18 th ) PGA endorsement Start RFP process EOI Evaluation of EOI Individual and Moderation meetings •(29 th Oct - 24 th Nov) •29 th Oct – 6 th Nov (Ind. Evaluation) •7 th Nov (Procurement consolidation) •10 th Nov -12 th Nov (Moderation) •13 th Nov –21 st Nov (Reference Check) •24 th Nov (Final moderation) IR has made the following deductions in timelines for a multi-step process as per the GRS: First-step - EOI: b. All tender documents available electronically on GETS -3 days c. Suppliers’ tenders or proposals accepted electronically -4 days Second-step - RFP: a. All tender documents available electronically to shortlisted suppliers-5 days b. Suppliers’ tenders or proposals accepted electronically -5 days Errors and omissions excepted 52 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Contract Management Describes the Programmes approach to Contract Management, including strategy, governance and operational standards and controls. All signed documentation relating to a contract must be forwarded to the Procurement Team for centralised filing. According to IRs Procurement Policy (1 October 2013) A Contract Management Plan must be implemented for all supply contracts: a) with an Maximum Total Estimated Value (MTEV) of $500,000 or more; or b) when warranted by the risk, complexity or importance associated with the supply contract. The Contract Management Plan establishes systems and processes to assist the contract manager to ensure that the supplier complies with the agreed terms and conditions during the life of the contract. Errors and omissions excepted 53 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] OUR DRIVERS Government Procurement: work with and enhance the procurement processes BT Success our success is BT success Collaboration: work together with open communication Agility: be flexibly to meet program changes OUR SUCCESS IS BASED ON FOUR KEY STRATEGY PILLARS:- COMMERCIAL INSIGHT Appropriate Commercial Decisions ENGAGEMENT A Collaborative Journey CAPABILITY Innovation and Agility SOURCING EXCELLENCE Strategic Leading Practice • Customer centric commercial outcomes •Direction and structure aligned to m eeting Government / IRD transformational objectives •Appropriate commercial m echanism in place for each and every situation • Contemporary commercial and procurement skillset • ‘Service Culture’ focus - responsive to customer / stakeholder needs • Clearly defined roles and responsibilities • Flexibility in thinking and delivery • Work collaboratively with IR and other Government stakeholders • Focus on an inclusive partner relationship with key suppliers • Be open and honest in our relationships • Listen and be inclusive of stakeholders requirements • Utilise contemporary procurement and sourcing techniques as applicable • Look to simplify Government Procurement guidelines / processes where possible • Work with IR Procurement to bring them on the journey to support BT Procurement requirements Our Service Delivery: Strategic Commercial advice and delivery to IRD / BT Strategic Procurement/Sourcing advice and delivery to IRD / BT Strategic Stakeholder management across BT programme and Government We are successful when we have: Delivered effective and efficient commercial outcomes to IRD / BT Provided leadership in Commercial Management to the BT Enabled BT to meet its objectives commercially Capable and engaged staff in the Programme Contract Management - Strategy IR Values: exhibit the IR and BT values Errors and omissions excepted 54 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Contract Management - SupplierManagement Dashboard All suppliers providing services to the BT Programme will be assessed against a balanced scorecard. This will be discussed atthe commercial/account management meeting and (where appropriate) linked to any service credit regime in the contract between IR and the supplier Errors and omissions excepted 55 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Contract Management – Programme Delivery The Programme Execution Plan (PEP) serves as a key reference point for the scope, approach, governance arrangements, deliverables, implementation timeline, quality procedures, acceptance criteria, key assumptions, key risks, dependencies, and responsibilities for the Business Transformation Programme. This PEP, together with any associated Statements of Work (SoW) with third party providers, will define the baseline for the Programme. All suppliers will be required to align with programme‘s governance and managementstructures, including roles and responsibilities. Contractual engagements will include a commercial governance schedule During the design phase the IR Programme Director will be responsible for the management of third party suppliers‘ through the twoCommercial Director positions within the programme. The detailed plan of how the agreement(s)s will be managed is contained in the Contract Management Plan. Management of suppliers includes, but is not restricted to the following: •resource allocation to the Programme (if required) •the commercial terms and conditions suppliers are contractually obligated to deliver •management of contractual deliverables •management of change requests •performance management •milestone deliverables •managing suppliers to value add •management of supplier innovation •contract management. Errors and omissions excepted 56 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Contract Management - Governance Framework Each contractual engagement will contain a BT governance schedule, which aligns to the proposed commercial management framework as outlined below. \*Joint forums (with the suppliers) may be constituted under a service aggregation model. Governance Forums ForumIR Attendance Supplier Attendance FrequencyProposed Chair Executive Steering\* •Commissioner •DC,Change •Programme Director •Regional Head •Executive Sponsor •Account Executive Quarter DC,Change Account Management\* •Programme Director •Commercial Director •Programme Manager •Account Executive •Commercial Director •Delivery Lead Monthly x+2 weeks Programme Director Commercial Management •Commercial Director •Contract Manager •Commercial Accountant •Commercial Director •Billing Specialist Monthly x+1 weeks Commercial Director Operational Management\* •Programme Manager •Contract Manager •Project Manager •Delivery LeadMonthly x Programme Manager x=Agreement start date Dispute Resolution Errors and omissions excepted 57 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Appendix - Market Analysis The Market Analysis provides an overview of key insights from recent education visits to COTs providers and other lessons learnt from comparator projects. The analysis of potential suppliers acts as a starting point for determining the size of the market and who the key players are. Errors and omissions excepted 58 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Supplier Supplier Market: supplier strengths and weaknesses Key StrengthsKey Weaknesses Supplier Information redacted Errors and omissions excepted 59 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Market: Taxation and Social Policy COTS suppliers International Supplier Name Global HQ (global employees) NZ OfficesAustralia OfficesCOTS Taxation System Provider TaxSystem Implementation Experience Hosting / Service Provider (NZ facilities) IT Professional Services Supplier Software Development Capability Source: Gartner -Critical Capabilities for Integrated Tax System COTS Products, December 2010 Ernst and Young, February 2012 Information redacted Errors and omissions excepted 60 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Key StrengthsKey Weaknesses Supplier Supplier Supplier Market: supplier strengths and weaknesses Information redacted Errors and omissions excepted 61 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The following table provides an overview of the key characteristics of previous government IT projects Market Analysis – Government IT Case Study Overview Case StudyDelivery Model GovernanceDeliverablesPriceDurationIncentivesProcessValue (US/NZ million) Time frame Information redacted Errors and omissions excepted 62 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Market Analysis – COTS Implementations ReferenceSupplierPricing ModelDelivery ModelCOTS Taxation and SocialPolicy System Provider Comments Information redacted Errors and omissions excepted 63 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] •IR has educated itself so that it can operate as an informed buyer of software and services. •As part of the education process, a cross functional team (management, tax a nd social policy experts and technologists), visited the global research and development facilities of three providers of COTS software. •The objective of the overseas COTS visit was to establish; 1.What solutions the providers currently have available 2.What is under development 3.What may be suitable to serve as aspiration for detailed requirements. 4.Test industry maturity for the type of applications available to meet IR’s business transformation asp irations. Overseas COTS visit Summary Information redacted Errors and omissions excepted 64 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] SupplierSupplierSupplier Tax Revenue Collection and Administration Superannuation Social Services Reporting and Analytics Digital solutions, including mobility Master Data Management Business Rules Management Customer Relationship Management Knowledge Management Content Management Security and Identity Management Enterprise Integration Business to Business (B2B) COTS Tax and Social Policy Education visit Analysis Poor Good These are indicative ratings based on 5 days of education with two incumbents (redacted) and 5 days with (redacted). The findings below do not cover the corporate systems. Information redacted Errors and omissions excepted 65 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] NewZealand SupplierGlobal HQ (global employees) NZ OfficesAustralia Offices COTS Taxation System Provider TaxSystem Implementation Experience Hosting / Service Provider (NZ facilities) IT Professional Services Supplier Software Development Capability Domestic Market Non COTS: Information redacted Errors and omissions excepted 66 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Supplier Supplier Supplier Supplier Supplier Domestic Market Non COTS: supplier strengths and weaknesses •Key Strengths•Key Weaknesses Information redacted Errors and omissions excepted 67 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Appendix – Commercial Model Analysis The Commercial Model Analysis provides an overview of key commercial components that will make up any resulting agreement structure including commercial management model. Errors and omissions excepted 68 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Contracting Approach –Local and global experience demonstrate how value levers drive the optimal contracting model The mix and approach to contracting can vary depending on the type of supplier, any inherent risk, the stage of the BT Programme they are engaged at, and the scope of engagement. Below are some of the options considered for the difference components of engagement, ultimately the contract model will be selected on the basis of inherent risk and overall value. ContractModel RelationshipCombativeTribalTradingTransactionalBasicMajorKey Partnering (Alliancing) PioneeringCommunity Deliverables Input Based Output Based Benefit Based Value Based OutcomesMaterials Only- Value Management Delivery Plan Price Mechanism Value Schedule ValueBoard Approval Change Requests Pricing Unit Rate Lump Sum (Fixed Price) Lump Sum (Variable) Management Fee Performance Fee Risk Reward Structured Time and Materials Time and Materials Contract Duration Budget Cycle Program Cycle Market Entry Whole of life service Periodic (ie, Quarterly) -- Incentives and Sanctions Bonus for Early Delivery Contractor Competition Profit at Risk Contract Period Defects Liability Liquidated Damages Termination for Convenience Retentions Errors and omissions excepted 69 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Most Negotiated TermMost Important Term 1Limitation of liabilityScope and Goals 2IndemnitiesResponsibilities of the parties 3Price / ChargePrice / Charge 4Intellectual PropertyDelivery / Acceptance 5Service levelsService levels 6WarrantiesPayment 7Performance Guarantee / UndertakingsPerformance Guarantee / Undertakings 8Service withdrawal / terminationCommunications and Reporting 9Liquidated damagesChange management 10Delivery / AcceptanceLimitation of liabilities Source: International Association for Contract and Commercial Management Contracting Approach –Emphasis on Risk Errors and omissions excepted 70 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Contracting Approach –What Goes Wrong? Source: International Association for Contract and Commercial Management Errors and omissions excepted 71 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Commercial Approach – Relationship for Design Phase An analysis has been undertaken to determine the type of relationship IR will have with the selected COTs provider. This will influence other considerations which make up the commercial and contractual approach. Further (detailed) analysis is located in Appendix (Slide 77). TypeDescriptionProsCons Transactional Meeting the deliverable requirements (“what you specify is what you get”). This is a basic relationship. The focus remains on meeting the specified deliverables as prescribed at the expected quality and a specified price. Any improvements or innovations occur only at the client requests resulting in variations to the contract. •IR knows exactly what to expect form the deliverable •IR is in complete control and must understand how this deliverable and all the others fit within the scheme of the Programme •Reactive relationship •No incentive for service provider(s) to go ‘above and beyond’ •Tight controls on changes which can be time consuming to justify the commercial impact if change requests are required Key Reactive morethat proactive, safe pair of hands and tends to rely more on inputs focus.Has a strong client Focus •Simple, single or limited points of contact •Face to face or electronic •Do and Charge •Tender Based •Cost Plus •Prescriptive •Focus •Work to rule or Standard •Basic Account Management •Task driven •Reactive account management skills Core Do and Add Value withand ability and depth of organisation to exploit synergies,this relationship tends to act as a Preferred Supplier •Key Account Plan leads relationship development and performance obligations •Professional Key Account Managers •High accountability •Complex Multi level contract and contact management interface Strategic Alliance contractsare based on a long term commitment between two organisations with a common purpose and goals that are achieved by maximising the effectiveness of skills and resources. The contracts are simple and doesnot have clauses covering every possible risk and contingencybut covers off the key business risks. The aim of such an arrangement is performance excellence. It is predicated on improvement and innovation and assumes that both parties win through working closely as one team. •Focus’ is on strategically important processes for IR •Seeks world’s better practice outcomes for IR •IR and service provider focus on delivering continuous improvement/innovation •Creates a flexible relationship between IR and the service provider •Focuses on achieving long term value for money for IR •Focuses on redesigning and improving processes for IR •Needs genuine vision and commitment by IR and the service provider •Requires a genuine long term view by IR and the service provider •Requires significant flexibility and change by IR and the service provider Errors and omissions excepted 72 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Preferred Contracting Approach – Key/Major Relationship IR is looking for the preferred supplier to work with the BT Programme team, to augment experience and expertise that IR has in-house or via contractors. More specifically this will be a long-term relationship likely to span over the full lifecycle of the BT Programme. This will require that IR: •has good visibility over the supplier’s activities so that IR may continue to drive v alue after implementation, and to also effectively manage complexities arising during the different phase(s), •develops a transparent and risk-s haring relationship with the supplier to ensure both parties’ interests are aligned for the duration of the programme lifecycle – to deliver a successful outcomes, and •captures the opportunity to work in partnership with a world class supplier to trans fer knowledge and expertise and embeds sustainable capability. Based on this understanding and the objectives outlined in the Programme Business Case the contracting approach should be one in which IR and the supplier develops and implements in a major/key manner. It is expected given the nature of the engagement that the relationship grow to an aspirational level of Partnering\* and above once trust has been built upon the delivery of benefits. \*Typically partnering and greater levels are grown through cultural alignment of objectives therefore cannot be establish at commencement very easily. Note that several notable\*\* large scale contracts tried at the commencement to enter a partnering structure and this reverted to less mature models with in 5 years. Increasing Value Community centred Pioneering Partnering Key Major Basic Transactional Trading Tribal Combative Errors and omissions excepted