April 2018 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) Inland Revenue User Guide 2 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide This CRS user guide provides instructions about how to register with and report to Inland Revenue for CRS purposes, and should be read in conjunction with the documents listed below. The following documents are available on our website at www.ird.govt.nz (Search keyword: CRS, and select Important AEOI and CRS documents): • Guidance on the CRS for AEOI (IR1048) • Standard for Automatic Exchange of Financial Information in Tax Matters: Implementation Handbook available on www.oecd.org/ctp/exchange-of-tax-information/implementation-handbook-standard-for-automatic-exchange-of-financial- account-information-in-tax-matters.htm • CRS: Due diligence and reporting obligations (IR1049) • CRS Schema 3 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide Contents 2 Introduction 5 2.1 Background 5 2.2 Purpose 5 2.3 Inland Revenue’s Support Role 5 2.4 Due Diligence 5 2.4.1 Nil reports 5 2.4.2 Reporting Options 6 3 Registration 6 3.1 Register with Inland Revenue 6 3.2 Register for the CRS 7 3.2.1 Registration 8 4 Online Services – Third Party Access 10 4.1 Grant third party access 10 4.1 Gain third party Access 13 5 Online Form 17 5.1 Submit a disclosure 17 5.2 Draft disclosures 20 5.3 Data validation and Corrections (Online form) 21 5.4 International errors 23 6 Excel file upload 25 6.1 Excel file 26 6.2 Submit via Excel file 27 6.3 Data validation and Corrections (Excel) 28 6.4 International errors 30 7 XML 32 7.1 Submit via XML 32 7.2 Data validation and corrections (XML) 33 7.3 International errors 33 8 Cancel CRS registration 35 9 Glossary 36 4 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 1.1 Table of Figures Figures 1, 11, 14, 27. myIR homepage Figure 2. Registration screen one – select profile Figure 3. Registration screen two – select account Figure 4. Registration screen three – registration questions Figure 5. I want to section in CRS homepage Figure 6. New intermediary link questions – token process Figure 7. Validation question – token process Figure 8. Confirmation – token process Figure 9. myIR – third party access request received from third party Figure 10. Confirmation – third party access request received from third party Figure 12. Third party redeem token – enter token screen Figure 13. Third party redeem token – validation screen Figure 15. Logon settings screen in myIR Figure 17. Request access to another party screen in myIR Figure 18. Request access to another party – select access screen Figure 19. Review request to another party screen Figures 20, 34, 46 & 49 CRS homepage in myIR Figure 21. Online form – Contact information screen Figure 22. Online form – account information screen Figure 23. Online form – primary account holder information (individual) Figure 24. Online form – primary account holder information (organisation) Figure 25. Online form – add payments screen Figure 26. Online form – report another account option Figure 28. Draft submission menu Figure 29. CRS homepage in myIR Figure 30. Correct via online form – search for account number Figure 31. Correct via online form – account number display Figure 32. Correct via online form – Account overview Figure 33 & 45. Accounts in error tab Figure 35. Excel template – tab 1 – General Information Figure 36. Excel template – tab 2 – account information Figure 37. Excel template – tab 3 – controlling persons information Figure 38. Report by CRS Excel file options Figure 39. Import and export options for Excel file Figure 40. Import file screen Figure 41. Figure 44. See Figures 29 – 32 Figure 47. Upload XML file screen Figure 48. XML error display in myIR. Figure 50. Reason for cancelling account screen Figure 51. Confirmation of account cancellation in myIR Note: All figures are subject to change 5 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 2 Introduction 2.1 Background Globalisation has made it easier for people to invest outside of their jurisdiction of tax residence. This has provided opportunities for offshore tax evasion. New Zealand (NZ) is one of many jurisdictions that has committed to a global initiative led by the Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development (OECD) on the automatic exchange of financial account information using the CRS. This information is required by law to be collected by financial institutions around the world for reporting to tax authorities. Tax authorities will exchange this information to ensure everyone pays the right amount of tax. Tax pays for services we all need and to improve the communities we live in. Inland Revenue will act as an intermediary between New Zealand Financial Institutions (NZFI’s) and reportable jurisdictions, in addition to providing services to collect and securely store CRS-related information from NZFI’s and third party service providers. The collected information will then be transmitted in a timely manner through to the relevant jurisdictions. Annual CRS reporting is between 1 April and 30 June for NZFIS’s submitting information to Inland Revenue, for the previous reporting period ending 31 March. 30 September is the final date for Inland Revenue to exchange CRS information with other reportable jurisdictions. 2.2 Purpose The purpose of this user guide is to provide information and guidance to NZ reporting entities. You will learn how to: • Register for the CRS • Report your CRS disclosures • Gain and grant access to third party services • View history of your disclosures, and • Cancel CRS registration. 2.3 Inland Revenue’s Support Role If you require assistance you can phone Inland Revenue on 0800 377 774, between 8.00am – 4.30pm Monday to Friday. From a mobile or overseas, the phone number is +64 4 978 0779. Alternatively you can email us at global.aeoi@ird.govt.nz 2.4 Due Diligence We expect all CRS-reporting entities to read and understand the CRS Due Diligence requirements available on our website www.ird.govt.nz (keyword: CRS), before proceeding with the rest of the document. 2.4.1 Nil reports Nil reports are not required to be received by Inland Revenue; however a Nil Report can be filed in myIR. We expect NZFI’s to fulfil their due diligence obligations, and retain these records for the statutory seven year period so that you can demonstrate your compliance, if required. 6 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 2.4.2 Reporting Options Inland Revenue is providing three options for financial institutions to send their CRS disclosures. These are: Filing OptionDescription Online Form• Consists of online screens you complete in your myIR account. • Screens consist of; Financial Institution contact information, account balance details, account holder information (individual or organisation), and payment information. • Useful for Financial Institutions that have low volume disclosures. Excel File• An Excel file that is uploaded via myIR. • Option is suitable for Financial Institutions that have medium volume disclosures. • Maximum number per Excel file is 1,000 • The Excel file consists of 3 tabs; General information, Account information and Controlling Persons information. • Excel file is subject to change due to schema updates. The Excel file available via myIR will always be updated and is recommended that this be used each time you submit via the Excel file option. XML • An XML file that is uploaded via myIR. • This option is suitable for Financial Institutions that have a high volume of accounts to report and have the specific in-house capability to deal with the technical nature of XML. • Validations run in myIR will not allow XML files to be submitted with errors. • Maximum file size 350mb Each reporting option is discussed further in this user guide. 3 Registration 3.1 Register with Inland Revenue Before a Financial Institution can register with Inland Revenue for the CRS to file disclosures, it will need to be registered with Inland Revenue and have an IRD number. 3.1.1 With an IRD Number If you have an IRD number, you will be able to register for the CRS via myIR. If you do not have a myIR account, you can create one on our website www.ird.govt.nz For more information about Reporting NZFI’s, refer to Section 3 or the Inland Revenue CRS Guidance (IR1048) which can be found at www.ird.govt.nz 3.1.2 Without an IRD Number Customers without an IRD number will need to contact Inland Revenue via email (global.aeoi@ird.govt.nz) to discuss your situation. 7 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 3.2 Register for the CRS To register for the CRS you will first need to determine if registration is required. This requires self-assessment based on the below questions. Further information regarding these questions can be found on www.ird.govt.nz/crs Source CRS Imp HB p.35 8 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 3.2.1 Registration If you have determined that you are required to register for CRS and have reporting obligations, you can register through myIR. What you need: • An active myIR account • The date you want the CRS account to commence from. To register via myIR: 1. Log on to your myIR account 2. Click Apply for new account (tax type) 3. Select the Financial Institution profile you want the CRS account to sit under then click Next. 9 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 4. Select the relevant tax type (Common Reporting Standard - CRS) from the list, and then click Next. 5. Answer the questions to confirm you are a Financial Institution that needs to register for the CRS. Please make the Account registration start date 1 July 2017, as this was the CRS start date in NZ. 6. If the registration requirements have been satisfied, you need to confirm the Account start date. a. If they have not been met, you may not be required to register. Repeat the self-assessment outlined above, or contact Inland Revenue to discuss your registration. b. If they have been met, select a date and click Next. 7. If you need to go make changes, click Previous to go back. You will also have the option to save the registration at any point and continue at a later time. 8. If no changes are required, review the start date and click Submit. After you have submitted your registration, we will send you a notification email to let you know your registration has been successful. 10 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 4 Online Services – Third Party Access 4.1 Grant third party access Token Method This allows your service provider or trustee to report on your behalf for CRS purposes using myIR. Note: Third party intermediaries or service providers are unable to register on behalf of NZFI's. This process only provides access for reporting purposes. However, tax agents are able to register and report on behalf of a client that they are linked to. To grant access to a third party intermediary using the token method, this can be done through Manage intermediaries under your CRS account in myIR. Figure 5. Here you will be able to determine the account permissions (file, full account access, make payments or view) that the third party will have and send them a token. Before granting access, you will need: • Active myIR accounts • The email address of the person you’re granting access to; and your IRD number, which the intermediary will need to know. To grant access to the intermediary: 1. Go to Manage intermediaries. Read ‘What to expect’ and click Next. 2. Click Add a record 3. Complete the ‘New intermediary link’ form (figure 6) with the intermediary’s details and the account permissions you want them to hold then Click Add. Figure 6. 11 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 4. Select the Financial Institution's IRD number from the drop down box then click Next. Note: The third party will need to know this IRD number in order to verify their token. 5. Confirm the details and click Submit. This will send an email with a token to the third party intermediary to redeem in their myIR. Once they have access, you will be able update or cancel their access under your logon settings. 12 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide Access requests received via myIR If a third party has requested third party intermediary access through their myIR, you will receive an email to approve or decline the request. Clicking the link will redirect you to myIR, where you will be given further details of the request e.g. type of permission requested. If you weren’t expecting this request you should decline it. Otherwise, select Ye s and click Submit to approve third party access. Note: If you receive a request for multiple accounts, you will not be able to decline one and accept others. Instead you need to decline or accept all. Figure 10. 13 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 4.2 Gain third party Access If you are a third party intermediary completing CRS reporting obligations on behalf of a client, you will need to approach the client to get a ‘token’ (one token for each client). Alternatively you can request access through your myIR account. IMPORTANT: Tokens will expire after 24 hours. If the token expires, your client will have to issue you a new token. Access via token method Once your client has sent the token, you will receive an email with the token. To redeem the token you will need: • A myIR account • The token sent from client • Your client's IRD number. To gain access: 1. Login to your myIR and click Redeem Token. Figure 11. 2. Enter the token code and click Next. Figure 12. 3. Enter the client's IRD number to the validate information and click Submit. Figure 13. 14 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide Request access via myIR method To request access via myIR, you will need: • A myIR account • Your client's IRD number. To request access in your myIR: 1. In your myIR homepage, click Settings. Figure 14. 2. In the Settings screen, click Request access to another party. Figure 15. 15 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 3. Read What to expect, and click Next. 4. Complete the information required about the other party and click Next. Figure 16. 5. In the Access Role section, select the access role you would like to have from the drop down box (user, restricted user or administrator). 6. Next select whether you are granting access to an individual or non-individual from the next drop down box. 16 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 7. Select the CRS Account type and the appropriate permissions e.g. file, and click Next. Figure 17. 8. Review the details and click Submit. This will send your request to your client. When the client confirms the request, follow the ‘Gain access by token method’ steps above. Figure 18. 17 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 5 Reporting via Online Form As part of your CRS obligations, you are required to submit disclosure to Inland Revenue of all reportable accounts. The first option available to financial institutions is the online form. The online form will be suitable for financial institutions that have a small number of accounts to report. 5.1 Submit a disclosure 1. Under your CRS account in myIR, click Report by online form. When submitting via online form, any field that has a red flag throughout the online form is required. Figure 19. Reminder Disclosures are required to be submitted to Inland Revenue between 1 April and 30 June for the previous tax year ending 31 March. For more information on reporting obligations refer Section 1.6 CRS Reporting – reportable accounts and undocumented accounts of the Guidance on the CRS for AEOI (IR1048) available on our website www.ird.govt.nz/international/exchange/crs/important-aeoi-crs-documents/ 2. Add the contact details of the person submitting the CRS disclosure on behalf of the financial institution then click Next. Please provide: Contact person, phone number and email address, this is a free text field. These details assist us to contact the right person should there be any problems with the disclosure. Note: This is a free text field. Note: In the reporting period dropdown box you will have the ability to submit disclosures for previous reporting periods. However, you are unable to submit disclosures for future periods. 18 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide Figure 20. 3. Next, enter the account details (account number, balance and currency) as at 31 March for the relevant reporting year. Figure 21. 19 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 4. Enter the account holder details. The primary account holder dropdown box will have two options for you to choose; Individual or Organisation. Figure 22. Figure 23. 20 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide Note: If you need to add controlling persons, select Passive NFE with one or more controlling person that is a Reportable Person from the Select account holder type dropdown box. Once you complete the required Organisation information, click next to add the controlling persons. 5. To add controlling persons, click the Add a controlling person hyperlink. 6. Complete the controlling person information and click Next. 21 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 7. If you need to add more controlling persons for an account, click the Add a controlling person and repeat the process. Otherwise click Next, and continue on with Payments. 8. Add any payments associated with account (dividends, gross proceeds/redemptions, interest or other). If there is more than one payment, you can add these by selecting ‘Add another payment’. If there are no payments associated with the account, check the ‘This account has no payments’ box. Figure 24. 9. Once completed you will be directed to the Review page to confirm the details of the disclosure. Once confirmed, tick the declaration and box and click Submit. 10. Once you have clicked submit, you will be given a submission confirmation. If you have multiple accounts to report, click Report another account and repeat the above process. Otherwise, click OK to finish. Figure 25. 22 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 5.2 Draft disclosures If for any reason you are not ready to submit an account report, you will be able to save your progress by clicking Save Draft. Note: This option is only available for the Online Form. To view, edit and submit or delete the draft disclosures: 1. Logon to myIR account and navigate to your CRS account 2. Under Account Alerts, Click Draft submission. Figure 26. 3. Here you will be given a quick summary of who is submitting the disclosure and status. Under the I Want To menu on the right, you will have three options; View submission, Edit submission and Delete Submission. • View Submission: Click View submission to view submission only. You will not be able to edit or submit using this option. • Edit submission: Click Edit submission to continue and submit the drafted disclosure. • Delete submission: Click Delete submission to delete the drafted disclosure. Figure 27. Note: The draft disclosure will be saved for up to 60 days. During this period you can return to it anytime. Draft disclosures show under Account alerts in your CRS account in your myIR account or under Alerts in your myIR homepage. 23 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 5.3 Data validation and Corrections (Online form) All disclosures are subject to data validation in myIR. This means you will not be able to submit and files to Inland Revenue containing errors until you fix these. The full list of data validations is available through the following link www.ird.govt.nz/international/exchange/crs/important-aeoi-crs-documents/ If you have submitted an incorrect disclosure via online form or need to make corrections, you will have the following options to do so: • can only be corrected via online form or using XML. To correct or delete via online form: 1. Navigate to your CRS homepage in your myIR. 2. Click Review CRS reported accounts. Figure 28. 3. Search for the account you want to correct using account number and click Search. Figure 29. 4. Click on the account number hyperlink. Figure 30. 24 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 5. You will then be given an Account overview. To correct the account click Edit this account. To delete, click Delete this account. Figure 31. 6. You will then go through the online process (as above). Make the corrections required and click Submit. This will send the corrected account to Inland Revenue to be processed. Note: Any corrections that need to be made via XML, will need to be submitted via Report by CRS XML file upload. 5.4 International errors Reporting NZFI’s will receive notification via myIR of errors in their disclosure that requires correction, as a result of the international exchange of their data. Specifically, account alerts within myIR will notify the Reporting NZFI that there are accounts in error. myIR users will see: 1. An Accounts in Error tab in the CRS section of your myIR account that will list the details of each of the error(s); and 2. Different views for: a. Online form 25 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide Accounts Error tab When the reportable account has been submitted via the online form or Excel file, the errors look like this in myIR. Correct the error(s): • Directly in myIR via the online form; or • In your XML file and upload the corrected file into myIR. Figure 32. 26 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 6 Reporting via Excel file upload The Excel file reporting option is suitable for Financial Institutions with up to 1000 reportable accounts per file to be submitted. This option allows for Financial Institutions to submit more than one Excel file. Figure 33. Reminder: Disclosures are required to be submitted to Inland Revenue between 1 April and 30 June for the previous tax year ending 31 March. For more information on reporting obligations refer Section 1.6 CRS Reporting – reportable accounts and undocumented accounts of the Guidance on the CRS for AEOI (IR1048) available on our website www.ird.govt.nz/international/exchange/crs/ important-aeoi-crs-documents/ 27 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 6.1 Excel file The excel file is split into three tabs, consisting of: General information tab – in the Contact field, enter who is submitting the disclosure. Please provide a name, emails address and phone number. In the Reporting period end date, enter the reporting period. Figure 34. 28 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide Account Holders tab – account holder information. Complete the information under each column, including: • Account number • Account balance (as at 31 March) • Payment information and related payments • Account holder details e.g. individual or organisation, account holder name, date of birth, country of tax residence, TIN and address. Note: The Excel file will allow up to and including three foreign TIN's, countries per account holder. If there are more than three TINs for an individual associated with an accountable report, then the NZFI is able to use the online form or XML. Joint accounts require a separate row for each account holder. Figure 35. Controlling Persons tab – complete the controlling persons information in this tab including: • Account number • Tax residence • TIN • Name • Date of Birth • Address • Controlling person type. Note: When selecting bank account number from the dropdown box, click the drop down arrow and scroll up. The Excel file will allow up to and including three foreign TIN's, countries per account controlling person. If there are more than three TIN's, then the NZFI is able to use the online form or XML. Figure 36. Important: The Excel file is subject to change. You must use the up to date version available for download via myIR. Note: Make sure you save a copy of your Excel disclosure in your own system. 29 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 6.2 Submit via Excel file Use the Report by CRS Excel file option in your CRS account in myIR to submit your disclosure. Report by CRS Excel file gives you two options, ‘New’ and ‘Correct or Delete’. Figure 37. Under New you will be given two options; ‘Export’ and ‘Import’. • Export: Click Export to access the Excel file. You can download this to your own system. • Import: Click Import to upload and submit your disclosure to Inland Revenue. Figure 38. 1. To submit an Excel file, click Import. Click Browse, and the select the relevant file from your own system to upload into myIR. 2. Once selected, click Import. Figure 39. Tip: To help keep track of your reportable accounts, use the Excel file as a record keeping tool throughout the year. 6.3 Excel data validation and corrections All disclosures are subject to data validation in myIR. This means you will not be able to submit any Excel files to Inland Revenue containing errors until you have fixed them. The full list of data validations is available through the following link. www.ird.govt.nz/international/exchange/crs/important-aeoi-crs-documents/ If you have submitted an incorrect disclosure via Excel file upload or need to make corrections, you can make corrections: • via online form, Excel upload or XML. Important: the correct function can’t be used to delete records. 30 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide To correct disclosures via Excel Upload 1. In your CRS homepage click Report by Excel 2. As discussed in section 6.2, you have two options New and Correct or delete. To correct, click Correct or delete. Figure 40. 3. Select the Reporting period using the dropdown box and click Next. Figure 41. 31 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 4. Select the MessageRefID and Doc type indicator for the disclosure you are wanting to correct and click Next. Figure 42. 5. To upload a new Excel file, select Ye s. If you want to correct specific accounts, select No. Once you have selected yes or no, click Next. Figure 43. 32 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 6. If you have chosen to upload a new Excel file, you will be taken to the upload screen to Import a file. To import your new Excel file, click Import. Figure 44. 7. If you have to correct specific accounts, click the Select account check next to the accounts you want to correct and click Next. You will then be able to correct these accounts in myIR. Figure 45. 33 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide To correct or delete via Online form: 1. Go to your CRS homepage in your myIR 2. Click Review CRS reported accounts. Figure 46. 3. Search for the account you want to correct using Account number and click Search. Figure 47. 4. Click on the Account number hyperlink. Figure 48. 34 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 5. You will then be given an Account overview. To correct the account click Edit this account and correct the account data. To delete, click Delete this account. Figure 49. 6. You will go through the online form process to correct data (please see Section 5.1 for more detail on the online form). Make the corrections required and click Submit. This will send the corrected account information to Inland Revenue to be processed. Note: Any corrections that need to be made via Excel or XML, will need to be submitted via Report by Excel or Report by XML. 6.4 International errors Reporting NZFI’s will receive notification via myIR of errors in their disclosure that requires correction, as a result of international exchange of their data. Specifically, account alerts within myIR will notify the Reporting NZFI that there are accounts in error. myIR users will see: 1. An Accounts in Error tab in the CRS section of your myIR account that will list the details of each of the error(s); and 2. Different views for: a. Online form and excel file errors; and b. XML file errors. 35 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide Accounts Error tab When the reportable account has been submitted via the online form or Excel file, the errors look like this in myIR Correct the error(s): • Directly in myIR via the online form; or • In your Excel file and upload the corrected file into myIR. Figure 50. 36 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 7 Reporting via XML files The XML file option is for NZFI's that have a high volume of accounts report and have the in-house capability due to the technical nature of an XML file. You will not be able to save a draft disclosure, instead you will have to fix any errors that occur and resubmit your disclosure. You are also unable to submit XML files containing errors. Once errors have been corrected, you can submit an XML file. Figure 51. Reminder: Disclosures are required to be submitted to Inland Revenue by 30 June for the previous tax year ending 31 March. For more information on reporting obligations refer Section 1.6 CRS Reporting – reportable accounts and undocumented accounts of the Guidance on the CRS for AEOI (IR1048) available on our website www.ird.govt.nz/international/exchange/crs/ important-aeoi-crs-documents/ 7.1 Submit via XML 1. To submit a XML disclosure, use the Report by CRS XML file upload option as shown above. 2. To upload a XML file, click Choose File and choose your XML file from your system. Figure 52. Important: If you are using the XML reporting option for your CRS submission and need to split the XML file into more than one then there must be different doc.ref.ids for each of the different XML files. 37 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 7.2 XML data validation and corrections All disclosures are subject to data validation in myIR. This means you will not be able to submit any XML files to Inland Revenue containing errors until you have fixed them. The full list of data validations is available through the following link. www.ird.govt.nz/international/exchange/crs/important-aeoi-crs-documents/ If you upload XML files in myIR that contain errors, you will be given the error type and line number of those errors in myIR. You can export these errors into an Excel file to help keep track of these errors. To do this, click the Export button. If you have submitted an incorrect disclosure via XML or need to make corrections, you can make corrections via: • XML upload. To submit a corrected XML file, use the Report by CRS XML file upload option in your CRS homepage in myIR. 7.3 International errors Reporting NZFI’s will receive notification via myIR of errors in their disclosure that requires correction, as a result of international exchange of their data. Specifically, account alerts within myIR will notify the Reporting NZFI that there are accounts in error. myIR users will see: 1. An Accounts in Error tab in the CRS section of your myIR account that will list the details of each of the error(s); and 2. Different view for XML file errors. XML filers: will receive a return file notification from Inland Revenue highlighting required correction using Status Message XSD. XML responses from Inland Revenue for CRS will be available to download in this format, or alternatively the account errors can be viewed individually in myIR. 38 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide XML International Errors When the reportable account has been submitted via XML file, the errors look like this in myIR. Correct the error(s) by: • Exporting the Status Message containing the errors into a spread sheet to help you keep track of the corrections you need to make; then • Correct the XML file and upload into myIR. Figure 53. 39 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 8 Cancel CRS registration If a reporting NZFI no longer has reportable accounts, you can cancel the CRS registration through your myIR. What you will need: • The reason for cancellation; and • The registration cancellation date. To cancel your CRS registration: 1. Log on to your myIR 2. Access your CRS account from your home page 3. Click Cancel account registration. Figure 54. 4. Read Cancel registration then click Next 5. Select the reason you are cancelling your registration (Closed, no reportable accounts, non-reporting Financial Institution or not a Financial Institution) and add the date you want to cancel your registration. Then click Next. Figure 55. 40 Common Reporting Standard (CRS) - Inland Revenue User Guide 6. Review the cancellation details. Tick the checkbox to confirm and click Submit. Figure 56. Once submitted, Inland Revenue will process your request, and stop your CRS registration or contact you for more information. If for any reason you need to re-register for the CRS, contact Inland Revenue via email: global.aeoi@ird.govt.nz or phone: 0800  377 774 to have your CRS account reopened. Note: If you cancel your CRS registration, you can still file a disclosure for the next reporting (future) period. 9 Glossary Term/AcronymDefinition OECDThe Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development CRSCommon Reporting Standard NZFI New Zealand Financial Institutions. This is from the perspective of administering CRS within New Zealand. A financial institution is defined in the CRS as meaning a custodial institution, a depository institution, an investment entity, or a specified insurance company. XML Extensible Markup Language Reportable Jurisdictions An overseas jurisdiction that New Zealand has an agreement to provide CRS information to, and receive information from. The jurisdiction is identified in a list we publish. TINTaxpayer Identification Number Participating Jurisdiction An overseas jurisdiction that has an agreement with New Zealand under which they will provide us with CRS information. New Zealand's participating jurisdictions will be identified in a list we publish. For more information on CRS terms, visit www.ird.govt.nz/international/exchange/crs/