\[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Version: Final v1.0 Date:13/09/2019 Customer Readiness Approach Prepared by BT Organisation & Customer Change Management and Training \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Customer Readiness Approach - 2 - This document outlines the Release 4 approach on how to measure our customer readiness. •The customer readiness assessment is a component of the overall Readiness Framework for START release 4 which also assesses programme readiness, business and people readiness. •Customer readiness determines “where we expect customers to be” by customer segment. It also includes criteria which is critical for go-live and other criteria which will provide indicators to inform decisions for customer change treatments and/or business resourcing and response. It informs both business readiness and programme readiness, which, along with customer readiness, is assessed at pre-determined checkpoints. •The approach summarises how we will engage with our customers (up to 4 times) to understand how ready they feel for release 4 and how we can help support and better prepare them for the impending changes. While START release 3 impacted most people in New Zealand in some capacity and many were very highly impacted, Release 4 has a more direct impact on specific customers, including 713,606 customers with student loans, 2,938,003 KiwiSaver members and 204,840 Employers who are highly or moderately impacted. Other areas of moderate to low change in Release 4 include tax on income, Working for Families Tax Credits and Research & Development Tax Incentive. A monthly report on customer readiness will be prepared for PGC. In addition, the results of surveying our customers will assist the wider business with implementation planning through briefings with relevant leads and management advisors. Due to the broad range in scope for Release 4, we will use a combination of customer surveys and leveraging off other activities happening across IR with our customers. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Readiness & Support Purpose of Customer Readiness Checkpoints - 3 - Awareness & Understanding Understanding & Readiness OCT DEC APRIL MAY AUG JUN FEB MAR Individuals Business/ Employers Business Partners Intermedia ries Aware of the change Ready for the change Understand the change Progress / transition check Pulse Checks Aware of the change Aware of the change Understand the change Understand the change Understand the change Ready for the change Ready for the change Ready for the change Customer Research (tbc) Go-Live Checks Customer Research (tbc) Customer Research(tbc) Customer Research (tbc) Customer Research (tbc) Customer Research (tbc) Customer Research (tbc) \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Checkpoints for Customer Readiness surveying - 4 - 4a: Fri 3 April Go-Live Committee Can we COMMENCE 4b: tbc 4c: Sun 12 April Go-Live Committee Can we PROCEED Checkpoint 2: Are we ON TRACK Thurs 12 December Customer research will check in with: •Businesses/Employers •Tax Agents Checkpoint 5: 21 May Customer research will check that customers are on track Checkpoints 3a: Are we READY 20 February Customer research will check in with: •Individuals •Businesses/Employers •Tax Agents Checkpoint 1 : AWARE Thurs 24 October Checkpoint 6: 25 June Can we EXIT HyperCare 1 2 APRIL ‘20 Checkpoint 3b : Are we READY Thurs 19 March Feb ‘20 Mar ‘20 Dec ‘19 MAY ‘20 Jun ‘20 Oct ‘19 Aug ‘19 Checkpoint 0: ALIGNED Thurs 22 August S2 S3 S4 S5 Change Restriction 26/08/18 06/01 Change Control (Brown-Out) Change Freeze 03/04 16/3 Change Control 4b 4c 3b 3a 6 Indicates Customer Readiness Checkpoints 5 6 5 6 4a \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The Customer Readiness Approach reflects lessons from prior releases and is based on the approach used in Release 3: 1.Use metrics and data from marketing and communications activities, for example, reach of direct mail, social media and advertising. 2.Incorporate other research findings such as the results of ‘exit’ surveys' run after Community Compliance seminars and the “Customer reactions to R4 Changes” research. 3.Use metrics and data collected by the Areas of Focus teams. 4.Reports via Account Managers (BT, External Relations and Community Compliance) against specific criteria on the readiness status of the intermediaries, service partners and government agencies they engage with. 5.Report insights from Customer Design Validation into customers’ expectations of eServices, including ease of use. 6.Leverage three major waves of market research commissioned by Marketing and Communications to be conducted by third party research agency (tbc). This research will measure against the agreed criteria and measures of impacted customers between November 2019 and May 2020. Customer segments/sub-segments will be surveyed including businesses/employers, Intermediaries (including Tax Agents and Bookkeepers) and Individuals. 7.Assessments by the Customer Segment leads via the BT R4 External Stakeholder Engagement Working Group to (a) agree the high level assessment criteria based on “where we expect to be” for each checkpoint, and (b) endorse the assessment report for each checkpoint, including any ‘go to green’ plans. Seven (7) components make up the Customer Readiness Assessment Approach - 5 - \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Customer Readiness Process - 6 - Readiness Criteria Determine and agree “where we want customers and third parties to be” at specific points in time\*. Criteria to be specific, measurable and trackable over time. Example (PTS Intermediaries) Awarethat proposed legislation will remove the need for PTS going forward. Understandthe options in relation to existing the market or continuing as a Tax Agent. Ready Confirm business decision in relation to exiting market or not. Transfer customers' contact details to IR. Delink personal tax summary customers. \* Some ‘Ready’ criteria may be after go-live Collect Evidence Metrics collected through account managers reporting. Metrics collected relating to marketing & communications activities. Metrics collected through 3 waves of market research measuring awareness, confidence, positivity and readiness between November 2019 and May/June 2020. Other research findings, such as ‘exit’ surveys after Community Compliance seminars. Insights from Customer Design Validation. Reporting via Account Managers (BT, External Relationships, Community Compliance, Significant Enterprises) and the BT R 4 External Stakeholder Engagement Working Group. Assess Conduct assessment of evidence against each criteria before each checkpoint, including reasons if not green and go-to-green plan. 1 2 34 Report Assessment and report prepared for each checkpoint by the BT R 4 External Stakeholder Engagement Working Group, including any ‘go to green’ plans. CPNo.CriteriaDat eReported ByAssessed By Checkpoint 1 Reasons for the status NOT GREEN? Go To Green Plan (Activities planned or underway) Residual Risk (Please use Enterprise Risk Matrix , provide the risk and \[consequence / lik elihood\] Action Owner 149 Customer Change Education Plans in place Completed 25-Oct-18Steve Crump Donald Snow LA Customer "Education activities" are being developed as part of the ACE Plans and the Integrated Change Plan. Circulate customer education plans for review and endorsement. Commence activities on planned dates. Steve Crump 150 Customer Change Management Plan 25-Oct-18Sue MacArthurDianne Saker LA OCMT recently assumed for this Customer Change & Readiness Workstream, and is currently re- planning this deliverable. Develop project plan to deliver to November PGC. Sue MacArthur 161 Development & update of all Content is underway and progressing to schedule (this includes manual and auto letters, returns, forms and guides, web content and customer help te xts ) 25-Oct-18Ma tt Stri kRogan Clarke LA Delays due to iterative changes to design, late design decisions and programme change requests. Replanning and use of overtime to catch up. Ma tt Stri k 161 Content dragons den challenge sessions completed and resulting adjustments to scope ma de. 25-Oct-18Ma tt Stri kRogan ClarkeLGMa tt Stri k 177 3rd Party solutions and interfaces - On boarding approach for Release 3 Service Providers agreed and action underway to establish processes. 25-Oct-18Ma tt Stri kRogan ClarkeLGMa tt Stri k 186 Customer Impact Assessment Completed 25-Oct-18Steve Crump Rogan Clarke LR Delayed to PGC because of iterative changes identified and extent of review required. Executive summary currently being agreed with the aim of achieving November PGC. Steve Crump 189 Legal and Technical signoff for content has commenced 25-Oct-18Ma tt Stri kRogan Clarke G Ma tt Stri k 177 3rd Party solutions and interfaces - On boarding approach for Release 3 Service Providers agreed and action underway to establish processes. 25-Oct-18Ma tt Stri kRogan ClarkeLGMa tt Stri k 150 Customer Change Management Plan 25-Oct-18Sue MacArthurDianne Saker LA OCMT recently assumed for this Customer Change & Readiness Workstream, and is currently re- planning this deliverable. Develop project plan to deliver to November PGC. Sue MacArthur The customer readiness assessment will be completed through a four step process following a ‘simple as possible’ principle \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Next Steps – during September 2019 - 7 - StepDescription Create customer readiness criteria and measures Change team, Marketing and CI&E will identify and define approach, scope and timings for each customer segment according to changes that are being made. Change and Marketing teams will develop criteria and measures for customer readiness. This will be shared with the BT R4 External Stakeholder Engagement Working group (includes representatives from CCS and BT) to ensure visibility and awareness of the core criteria to determine ‘where we expect our customers and third parties to be’ by customer segment across checkpoints (awareness, ready, on track). Work alongside BT R4 External Stakeholder Engagement Working group and the wider business to identify existing and planned engagement activities that can be leveraged for customer readiness. Identify if a customer working group is required and understand who the representatives would be. Develop a detailed plan and timeline to co-ordinate all of the readiness activities and dependencies. Define approach and scope Execute engagement approach Deliverable Planning PGC paper will be created to be populated before each checkpoint with the data. Continuous engagement Regular engagement and updates to the BT External Stakeholder Engagement group about what we ‘know’ from the customer. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The change treatments support each of the customer segments, each delivered through multiple channels and by networked teams - 8 - Hot Spots/ Proposed ACE team Business- led Tactics Account Management Customer Education Via Third Party Advertising, Social Media, Media Direct Marketing Website, myIR and online services Voice Channel Individuals -  --    Individuals: Student Loan Customers -  --  Individuals: KiwiSaver Members ----  Individuals: Families ----  --  Businesses: Micro and SME (includes employer impacts) TBC  Businesses: Significant Enterprises (includes employer impacts) TBC  Intermediaries: Payroll Intermediaries and Bureaux, Tax Agents, Bookkeepers, Tax Pooling Intermediary -  Business Partners: Software Developers --  - - --  - Business Partners: Financial Institutions TBC -  -  --  - Business Partners: KiwiSaver Providers  -  -  --  - Business Partners: Government Agencies (impacted by Release 4) --  -  --  - Business-led Tactics: Outbound calling, inserts with forms and returns, compliance campaigns, tactical planning. Account Management: Via BT Account Managers, CCS External Relationships, Significant Enterprises and Community Compliance. Customer Education: Webinars, seminars and Community Compliance visits. Via Third Party Information received from a tax agent, bookkeeper, software service provider or other influencer. Advertising, Social Media, Media Google search, online, print, radio, advertising, social media, proactively provided articles and content. Direct Marketing: Personalised emails and letters. Website, myIR and online services: Content on IR website: news items, campaign pages, promotional and instructional videos, banner messaging and new functionality. Gateway Services and B2B channels. Voice Channel: IVR messaging and functionality, dedicated 0800 lines, call-flow enhancements, contact centre-provided education. 9 - 9 - \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Customer Readiness Risk Table NOT APPLICABLE - This customer sub segment by product/feature combination is not applicable NOTREQUIRED -At this checkpoint, no readiness assessment is required for this customer segment and/or product NOT PROBLEMATIC – The representative sample of customers/service providers are at the desired phase and have no issues NOT PROBLEMATIC – The representative sample of customers/service providers are tracking to achieve the desired phase - there may be minor issues but these are under control PROBLEMATIC IN DEFINED AREAS – The representative sample of customers/service providers are lagging behind the desired phase but it’s under active management and is showing signs of heading to green PROBLEMATIC – The representative sample of customers/service providers are lagging behind the desired phase due to not meeting the planned readiness criteria. It requires focus to ensure the readiness activities are ramped up to get back on track PROBLEMATIC – The representative sample of customers/service providers are lagging behind the desired readiness phase and require a management refocus of Customer Readiness engagement approach/activities HIGHLY PROBLEMATIC – The representative sample of customers/service providers are lagging behind the desired readiness phase and will not be ready on time for Go-live.