https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/PMO/lead/IR's Guide to Transformation External Site - Developing the Narrative/Delivering the Transformation (Collateral)/Getting Going/PMO/IR BT Deliverables Process.docx Page | 1 BT Deliverables Process Guide \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Background BT tracks deliverables 1 in JIRA and stores the controlled documents in BT SharePoint. • Deliverable Documents in SharePoint. • Deliverables in JIRA. There are two main sections to this document • Pre-Release, Creating or Modifying a Deliverable Process • Deliverable Sign Off Process For more information about this process or any technical difficulties please contact PMO Workflow Deliverables PMOWorkflowDeliverables@ird.govt.nz 1 1. Pre-Release, Creating or Modifying a Deliverable Process A. Pre-Release Preparation Process Before the start of each BT Release, the required deliverables are identified. Workstreams are responsible for identifying these, developing the deliverables and on completion, for arranging formal sign off by the Responsible and Accountable persons. After approval, the BT PMO will facilitate a deliverable QA. Deliverables are recorded in a Release Specific Deliverables Register and on completion, stored in the Deliverables Library on BT SharePoint. Once the Deliverables Register is baselined, the deliverables are: • provided a unique Deliverable ID (e.g., BTDEL-1234), • a JIRA record is created for tracking purposes, and • managed under change control Being under change control means t hat no informal changes can be made to the: • Deliverable Name, Description, RACI, or Completion Dates, • Including descoping a deliverable. Formal approval is required to change a deliverable. The change management process must be followed, and a Programme Change Request (PCR) is required. 1 A deliverable is a programme artefact not a project artefact. For more information, please contact PMOWorkflowDeliverables@ird.govt.nz https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/PMO/lead/IR's Guide to Transformation External Site - Developing the Narrative/Delivering the Transformation (Collateral)/Getting Going/PMO/IR BT Deliverables Process.docx Page | 2 BT Deliverables Process Guide \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Use JIRA and SharePoint to manage work on the deliverable. 1 Request a Change Request (PCR) in JIRA Lin k to PCR process Once the PCR is approved the PMO will update your BTDEL JIRA deliverable or create a new one. Is this prior to the commencement of the Release? A formal / controlled deliverable document is required or needs to be changed as part of the BT Programme. A Yes Contact the PMO and add the Deliverable to the Register for the Release. The PMO will then ensure BTDEL numbers are assigned and document sets in SharePoint are created B No Follow the process for creating / updating a Deliverable during the Release B.1 B.2 AP PRO VED JIRA can be used to manage the deliverable going out for consult or any other logging of the deliverable. You should also link deliverables to scope and dependencies. NEW Pre Release Process B. Process during a Release B.1 Request a PCR To request a NEW deliverable or AMEND an existing deliverable you must use the Programme Change Management process. Link to PCR process B.2 BT PMO Update JIRA and BT SharePoint Once the PCR is approved, BT PMO will: a) Update the existing JIRA BTDEL record, or b) Create a NEW deliverable JIRA item (this will provide the unique BTDEL ID.) c) Create a BT SharePoint Deliverable Doc Set for the deliverable documents to be stored. d) Update the Document link in JIRA to point to the SharePoint doc set. e) Update the master Deliverable Register The JIRA deliverable status will be set to NEW. The SharePoint Doc set will be set at 01 – DRAFT. https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/PMO/lead/IR's Guide to Transformation External Site - Developing the Narrative/Delivering the Transformation (Collateral)/Getting Going/PMO/IR BT Deliverables Process.docx Page | 3 BT Deliverables Process Guide \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] See 3.1 Add Documents to MS SharePoint from Template 2 2. Deliverable Sign Off Process This is the process when the deliverable is ready for the BT PMO to quality review and formally approve. 2 Once a deliverable is ready for Review and Sign off Ensure the Deliverable is uploaded to the BT SharePoint Doc Set for the Deliverable 2.1 2.2 Update the status of the BTDEL JIRA item to PMO Review The PMO then checks the Deliverable and updates SharePoint Doc set to 02 PMO REVIEW 2.3 2.4 The Workstream then manages/ facilitates review and sign off of Deliverable updating JIRA as progress is made The PMO use JIRA to communicate and update. Emails will be added in comments in JIRA On approval the BTDEL will set to Approved and the SharePoint Doc Set updated to 03- APPROVED APPROVED PMO REVIEW PENDING APPROVAL Before submitting for PMO Review the workstream must confirm that the RACI has been followed, endorsements must please be noted in the JIRA BTDEL ticket “comments” as per the deliverable RACI 2.1 Ensure all the documents are in BT SharePoint Ensure the following are uploaded: • Deliverable document/s – this will be the deliverable itself plus any supporting reports, data sheets, charts, etc) https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/PMO/lead/IR's Guide to Transformation External Site - Developing the Narrative/Delivering the Transformation (Collateral)/Getting Going/PMO/IR BT Deliverables Process.docx Page | 4 BT Deliverables Process Guide \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 2.2 Update JIRA Status to PMO Review Before updating the status in JIRA ensure that you have: • Saved the deliverable in the SharePoint Doc ument Set, • Linked the deliverable file to the JIRA ticket (get/copy the link from SharePoint), then Change the status on the JIRA item to PMO Review 2.3 BT PMO Document Review JIRA Deliverables in PMO Review will auto assign and generate a notification to the PMO 1. The PMO will update the status of the MS SharePoint Doc Set to 02 - PMO Review. 2. The PMO will review / QA the deliverable documents in the SharePoint Doc set. (You may need to Review, Accept or Reject track changes as advised by PMO.) 2.4 Manage Deliverable Approval The PMO will change the JIRA status to PENDING APPROVAL.  T he Workstream will facilitate the approvals by the Responsible and Accountable person(s).  An email from the approver embedded in the deliverable document or sign-off memo is ideal.  Endorsement / Approval in the JIRA thread is acceptable. Once approved and approvals have been embedded in the deliverable/ JIRA. T he PMO will: 1. APPROVE in JIRA 2. Change the status of the SharePoint Doc set to 03 APPROVED 3. Save the deliverable as a major version in SharePoint 4. Update the Deliverable Register . https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/PMO/lead/IR's Guide to Transformation External Site - Developing the Narrative/Delivering the Transformation (Collateral)/Getting Going/PMO/IR BT Deliverables Process.docx Page | 5 BT Deliverables Process Guide \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 3 3. Appendix 3.1 Add Documents to MS SharePoint from Template To upload documents, see Uploading a document into SharePoint For ease, we suggest you create the templates. This is easier than copying older templates. 1. Go: https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/deliv • Find the Deliverable Doc set which has been created for you by the PMO • Open the Doc set • Choose + New • Choose the template you wish to use: • PowerPoint, or MS Word 2. The template will open 3. In the Properties on the right give the file a title and 4. Fill in the metadata 5. The Save 6. Name the file: Always start with the deliverable number: D####: Deliverable Name 7. Choose the location: BT SharePoint Home > Deliverables 8. Then click More save options 9. Choose the doc set 10. Then Save Alternatively, you can save the document to another location and when ready upload it to the doc set. • Please remember to do this from the doc set location and to fill in the metadata. https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/PMO/lead/IR's Guide to Transformation External Site - Developing the Narrative/Delivering the Transformation (Collateral)/Getting Going/PMO/IR BT Deliverables Process.docx Page | 6 BT Deliverables Process Guide \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 3.2 Using JIRA to consult JIRA can be used to mention, log and track activity on the Deliverable. For general information see https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/BTTools/SitePages/ JIRA.aspx. If you want to tag people for consult on a deliverable, please use the consult field. 3.3 Deliverable Dashboard in JIRA Within JIRA there is a Deliverable Dashboard. If you would like to see active deliverables, and their progress, see this link: https://jira.nsp.ird.govt.nz/secure/RapidBoard.jspa?rapidView=526. Many teams include deliverables in their own dashboards. Or, create their own document tracking dashboards that include deliverables and other documents. If you need help with JIRA dashboards, please contact your Project Coordinator or email BT PMO Tools BTPMOTools@ird.govt.nz 3.4 Viewing Deliverables in MS SharePoint To find deliverables in SharePoint go to the BT Deliverables Library. https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/deliv. Sensitive deliverables can only be viewed by your team. Please contact BTPMOTools@ird.govt.nz for assistance with this. Deliverables can also be viewed by Workstream in other ways. https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/deliv/For ms/Workstream.aspx See How to use views for more information.