BT Design Authority Terms of Reference \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] BT Design Authority Terms of Reference ROLE  The scope of the Design Authority (DA) is all aspects of the BT P rogramme Scope, including (but not limited to): START, ESS, Digital and Customer Experience, Intelligence Led, Workplace, and Optimisation.  The DA also covers any design changes that are proposed as part of P roduction support.  To support this area, a concept of a D A Lite 1 , has been introduced. Any decisions discussed by DA Lite are made visible to the main DA at the next available meeting. The DA has the authority to question and or escalate any decisions they disagree with.  Any decisions discussed by DA Lite are made visible to the main DA a t the next available meeting. The DA has the authority to question and or escalate any decisions they disagree with.  The Design Authority will provide key recommendations and e scalate design decisions to the Enterprise Priorities and Performance Committee (EPPC) in cases of significant operational impact and/or customer experience impacts. This includes any deviations from the agreed customer and product strategies.  Design Authority will have the delegated authority to ratify decisions r elating to the designs developed by the programme within the authorities delegated via the approved Blueprints, Strategies, Roadmaps and design patterns.  Areas outside of delegations will be provided as recommendations, c ontaining options analysis to the EPPC. Decisions that have a direct Customer impact will require visibility (at a minimum) at the EPPC  The Design Authority may recommend scope items for inclusion in B T Releases. The DA does not approve scope. Final approval will rest other governance bodies and/or roles based on agreed delegation levels. RESPONSIBILITIES To ensure that all elements of the Programme Design covering Business Processes, Organisation Change and Training, Applications Solution Architecture, Data, Policy, Products, Channels and Customer Experience arealigned To provide formal approval of any planned Deliverable within the DA’s delegated authority i.e. to serve as a key review forum To provide recommendations including options analysis and proposed recommendation(s) to the Enterprise Priorities and Performance Committee (EPPC). This may also include demonstrations of the solutions with supportingdocumentation Ensure alignment with existingstandards Ensure alignment with agreed design patterns, Product and Customer Segment Strategies andRoadmaps Ensure all delivery elements of Programme scope are represented, including START, ESS, Digital and Customer Experience, Intelligence Led, Workplace, and Optimisation. 1 DA Lite ceased from end-April 2021 as the volume and urgency of decisions did not warrant continuing with the current DA-Lite approach. This will reconvene as required. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] MEMBERSHIP The Design Authority membership and administrative requirements are as follows: Voting Members R efer to Appendix A attached. Non-V oting Distribution List Refer to Appendix B attached. Guests PMO Governance Co-Ordinator (s)  Quorum\*: Chair + voting members to ensure a minimum of 67%, plus at least one relevant Product Owner –From end May-2021 (total 11 members) quorum 8 (Chair +7)  Consensus: Chair + voting members to ensure a minimum of 67%, plus at least one relevant Product Owner  Veto rights: Chair (Note 1)  Frequency: Weekly NOTES Note 1: Veto rights will apply to consensus on decisions only, will not include the right to make unilateral decisions In the event that a decision is vetoed, the arbitration process will i nclude one additional Design Authority meeting In the event that the issue is not resolved, it will be escalated to th e Enterprise Priorities and Performance Committee (EPPC) for resolution Note 2: All members will have the right of escalation i.e. to the EPPC BT Design Authority Terms of Reference \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Appendix A -Voting MembersDesign Authority Governance Chair Enterprise Architecture & Design Lead Core Voting Members 1.DeputyChair: BT Business Architect 2.Lead Business Transformation Manager 3.START delivery Programme Manager 4.Programme Director 5.External Relationships Lead 6.Customer Experience/Digital Director 7.START lead architect 8.START Architect 9.Transition and Business Integration Programme Manager 10.START ProjectManager Guest: PMO Governance Co-Ordinator (Minutes, meeting administration) Product Specific VotingMembers \* 1.Product Owner -Child Support 2.Product Owner -KiwiSaver \* Note that these members will provide specific guidance on their respective product area of expertise and will having voting rights for decisions that impact their specific area. Optional Attendees – Voting rights \*\* 1.ProgrammeManager Enterprise Services 2.Programme Manager Intelligence Lead \*\* Note that these members will have voting and escalation rights for any decisions that affect their respective delivery programmes. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Appendix B Non-VotingattendeesDesign Authority Governance Optional non-voting attendees \*\*\* •Customer Segment Lead - Individuals •Customer Segment Lead – Micro Business •Customer Segment Lead – Small & Medium Enterprises •Customer Segment Lead - Families •Organisational Change Management & Training •BT Account Management •Policy •Service Designers •Heritage •Risk & Controls Lead and SME •Business Process Analysis Lead •Business Analysis Lead •Deployment Workstream Manager •Data Cleansing Lead •Business Transformation Managers \*\*\* Non-Voting attendees are not required to attend the meeting for the duration. Virtual attendance is encouraged. Guests •As required (guests will be invited by the PMO Governance Co-Ordinator) Email Distribution list •This is managed by the PMO Governance Co-Ordinator •Permission for inclusion on this list from the Chair, Deputy Chair or a Voting Member is required •The DA meeting agenda, minutes, papers and meeting packs are circulated via the DA email distribution list \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Sign-off Note: the ToR has been provisionally signed-off and approved by the Design Authority Members. Ref DA minutes 25 May 2021