UNCLASSIFIED \[UNCLASSIFIED\] DETERMINATION > FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS > GENERAL Specified Rate Issued: 24 October 1990 G23 This Determination may be cited as “Determination G23: Specified Rate”. G23 24 October 1990 UNCLASSIFIED Page 1 of 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 1 Explanation (which does not form part of the determination) 1. This determination applies where for the purposes of calculating income or expenditure it is necessary to determine an annual yield or interest rate for valuation purposes. This rate is called the specified rate. The rate may be required where the present value of an amount payable or receivable under a financial arrangement is to be calculated. Such a calculation is necessary, for example, in Determination G22: Optional Conversion Convertible Notes Denominated in New Zealand Dollars Convertible at the Option of the Holder. 2. When a financial arrangement is denominated in New Zealand dollars the specified rate is the market yield applying to Bank Bills of a similar Term to the Term of the financial arrangement; if the Term is longer than 12 months the market yield on New Zealand Government Stock must be used. 3. When a financial arrangement is denominated in a currency other than New Zealand dollars the specified rate is— (a) The interbank bid or offer rate for the currency and the Term of the financial arrangement; or (b) An implied foreign currency interest rate calculated by reference to appropriate forward and spot exchange rates and the New Zealand Bank Bill or New Zealand Government Stock rates appropriate to the Term of the financial arrangement. 4. An implied foreign currency interest rate will generally be calculated when it is not easy to find a quoted interbank interest rate for the currency and Term of a financial arrangement. 5. The specified rate will be required by other determinations which will detail the method or methods to be applied to determine income derived or expenditure incurred in relation to a particular class of financial arrangement. That method will include the date at which the specified rate is to be determined, the currency of the financial arrangement and the Term. 2 Reference This determination is made pursuant to section 64E(1)(a) to (f) of the Income Tax Act 1976. G23 24 October 1990 UNCLASSIFIED Page 2 of 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 3 Scope This determination shall be used to select a yield or interest rate as required by any other determination issued pursuant to section 64E of the Income Tax Act 1976. 4 Principle 1. The specified rate is a market base rate for borrowing in a particular currency for a particular Term. 2. Where the base rate in a currency is not readily obtainable it may be calculated from spot and forward exchange rates for converting the currency to New Zealand dollars and New Zealand dollar interest rates. 5 Interpretation 1. In this determination, unless the context otherwise requires— Expressions used have the same meaning as in The Act and where a word or expression is given a particular meaning for the purposes of sections 64B to 64M of The Act it shall have the same meaning as in the said sections 64B to 64M: “Acceptable Present Value Calculation Method” means Method A of Determination G10B: Present Value Calculation Methods, or an alternative method producing not materially different results: “The Act” means the Income Tax Act 1976: “Bank Bill” means an order to pay drawn upon and accepted by a person who is a registered bank for the purposes of the Reserve Bank Act, 1989: “Base Currency” in relation to a financial arrangement means the currency in respect of which a specified rate is to be calculated: “Forward Rate” means the rate for a forward contract determined in a manner consistent with Determination G6C: Foreign Currency Rates provided that the currency in respect of which the Forward Rate is to be found need not be one of the currencies referred to in Determination G6C: “Interbank Rate” means the bid or offer rate quoted for deposits in the Base Currency determined in a manner consistent with Determination G13A: Prices and Yields G23 24 October 1990 UNCLASSIFIED Page 3 of 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] provided that the market in respect of which the rate is to be found need not be one of the markets referred to in Determination G13A: “Spot Rate” means the rate for a spot contract determined in a manner consistent with Determination G6C: Foreign Currency Rates provided that the currency in respect of which the Spot Rate is to be found need not be one of the currencies referred to in Determination G6C: “Term” means the Term of the financial arrangement specified in the determination which requires a specified rate to be used. 2. Any reference in this determination to another determination made by the Commissioner shall be construed as including a reference to any fresh determination made by the Commissioner to vary, rescind, restrict or extend that determination. 3. For convenience, words or phrases defined in this determination are indicated by initial capital letters, but the absence of a capital letter shall not alone imply that the word or phrase is used with a meaning different from that given by its definition. 6 Method 1. The specified rate at any date in relation to a financial arrangement denominated in New Zealand currency is— (a) Where the Term of the financial arrangement is twelve months or less, the yield for Bank Bills of a similar Term to the Term of the financial arrangement; (b) In any other case, the yield for New Zealand Government Stock of a similar Term to the Term of the financial arrangement— determined in accordance with Determination G13A: Prices or Yields. 2. The specified rate at any date in relation to a financial arrangement denominated in a foreign currency is— (a) The Interbank Rate for the Base Currency and the Term of the financial arrangement; or (b) A rate derived by— (i) Converting the final amount payable or receivable in relation to the financial arrangement from the Base Currency to New Zealand currency at the forward exchange rate appropriate to the Term of the financial arrangement; and G23 24 October 1990 UNCLASSIFIED Page 4 of 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] (ii) Calculating the present value of the amount thus calculated using an Acceptable Present Value Calculation Method and a rate determined in accordance with clause 6(1)(a) or (b); and (iii) Converting the amount thus calculated to the Base Currency at the Spot Rate for the currency; and (iv) Calculating the rate such that if an Acceptable Present Value Calculation Method were applied to the final payment in the Base Currency over the Term of the financial arrangement the present value so calculated would be equal to the amount calculated in subparagraph (iii) above. 7 Example A company is required to calculate the present value of US$100,000 payable on the 30 June 1991 as at balance date, 31 March 1991, as part of a method detailed in another determination to ascertain income derived or expenditure incurred from a financial arrangement. This determination approves two methods of selecting a specified rate: (a) The US interbank dollar offer rate (LIBOR or SIBOR) on 31.3.91 for 90 days is 8.6% p.a. (the specified rate) ascertained using a method consistent with Determination G13A: Prices or Yields; or (b) The company calculates an implied rate by the steps below: Convert the amount of US$100,000 using a forward exchange rate to New Zealand dollars. The Forward Rate for US dollars ascertained on 31 March 1991 for delivery in 90 days is USD/NZD 0.5688. US$100,000/0.5688 = NZ$175,809 Assume that the yield for NZ Bank Bills of a 90 day Term is 13.46% p.a., ascertained at 31 March 1991 in accordance with Determination G13A: Prices or Yields. Foreign currency Spot Rate ascertained in accordance with Determination G6C: Foreign Currency Rates, as at 31 March 1991 is USD/NZD 0.5752. Method A of Determination G10B: Present Value Calculation Methods, is applied to calculate the present value as at 31 March 1991 as follows— G23 24 October 1990 UNCLASSIFIED Page 5 of 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] This amount is converted to US dollars using the Spot Rate on 31 March 1991, NZ$170,085 × 0.5752 = US$97,833. The specified rate is that which results in the US$100,000 when discounted being equal to US$97,827. The rate calculated in accordance with Determination G3: Yield to Maturity Method, is 8.86% p.a. About this document General determinations set out the Commissioner’s view on how the financial arrangements rules apply to a specific type of financial arrangement. All general determinations are binding on the Commissioner and some are also binding on taxpayers.