UNCLASSIFIED \[UNCLASSIFIED\] DETERMINATION > FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS > GENERAL Futures and Options Markets Issued: 22 January 1993 G7C This Determination may be cited as “Determination G7C: Futures and Options Markets”. G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 1 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 1 Explanation (which does not form part of the determination) 1. This determination rescinds and replaces Determination G7B: New Zealand Futures and Options Markets and Determination G18: International Futures and Option Markets, both of which were made by the Commissioner on 4 December 1989. This determination differs from Determinations G7B and G18 by amalgamating the two, updating the terminology used in relation to the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange and members thereof, adding to the list of approved markets on that exchange and to the list of approved overseas futures and options markets, modifying the approved sources of information in respect of those overseas markets and substituting more relevant and up-to-date examples. 2. This determination applies where, for the purpose of calculating the income or expenditure of a person in respect of a Futures Contract or Option Contract, it is necessary to determine the price of that contract. 3. This determination sets out the approved markets, sources of information, and method, used for determining the prices for Futures Contracts and Option Contracts that are either traded on the New Zealand Futures Exchange or denominated in a foreign currency. It does not apply in relation to Option Contracts in respect of shares, as such contracts are “excepted financial arrangements” (as defined in subsection 64B(1) of the Act) and are not subject to the accrual provisions. 2 Reference 1. This determination is made pursuant to Subsections 64E(1) and (6) of the Income Tax Act 1976. 2. This determination rescinds and replaces Determination G7B: New Zealand Futures and Options Markets and Determination G18: International Futures and Option Markets, both of which were made on 4 December 1989. 3 Scope of Determination This determination applies where, for the purpose of calculating the income or expenditure of a person in respect of a Futures Contract or Option Contract, it is necessary to determine the price of that contract. It does not apply in relation to Option Contracts in respect of shares, as such contracts are “excepted financial arrangements” (as defined in subsection G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 2 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 64B(1) of the Act) and are not subject to the accrual provisions. It does, however, apply to options relating to share price indices (such as the NZSE-40 Capital Share Price Index Option Contract). 4 Principle 1. Markets are approved having regard to the following criteria— a) The number of participants in the market or having access to the market; b) Frequency of trading in the market; c) The nature of trading in the market — how the price or rate is determined and how the financial assets are traded on the market; d) The existence, in relation to the market, of an appropriate regulatory body established by law; e) The potential or demonstrated capacity of a person or group of persons to significantly influence the market; f) Significant barriers to entry; and g) Discrimination on the basis of quantity bought and sold unless based on the risks involved or the transaction costs or economies of scale. 2. Sources of information are approved having regard to the following criteria— a) Reliance on the sources of information by the market; and b) The accessibility of the sources of information by participants in the market. 3. A method of obtaining a price for Futures Contract or Option Contract is approved if it is determined by an independent source and is adopted by participants in the market. 5 Interpretation 1. In this determination, unless the context otherwise requires— Expressions used, except the expression “Income Year”, have the same meaning as in the Act, and where a word or expression is given a particular meaning for the purposes of sections 64B to 64M of the Act, it shall have the same meaning as in the said sections 64B to 64M. “The Act” means the Income Tax Act 1976. “Approved Exchange” means the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange and any exchange listed in subclause 6(3) of this determination. “Futures Contract” means a futures contract traded on the New Zealand futures and options market or on a futures market outside New Zealand. G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 3 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] “Income Year” means— a) Where a taxpayer furnishes a return of income under Section 15 of the Income Tax Act 1976 for an accounting year ending with an annual balance date other than the 31st day of March, the period commencing in the day after the end of the immediately preceding accounting year and ending on that balance date; b) In respect of the income of any person, the year in which that income has been derived by that person. “New Zealand Dealer” means a public broker or principal trader on the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange: “New Zealand Futures and Options Market” means the market in futures and option contracts administered by the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange Limited. “Option Contract” means an option contract traded on the New Zealand futures and options market or on an organised and regulated option market outside New Zealand. “Subscriber Screen Broadcast” means a screen broadcast by any subscriber to the ticker price feed of the relevant approved exchange. 2. Any reference in this determination to another determination made by the Commissioner shall be construed as including a reference to any fresh determination made by the Commissioner to vary, rescind, restrict, or extend that determination. 3. For convenience, words and phrases defined in this determination are indicated by initial capital letters, but the absence of a capital letter shall not alone imply that the word or phrase is used with a meaning different from that given by its definition. 6 Method 1. Determination G7B: New Zealand Futures and Options Markets and Determination G18: International Futures and Option Markets are hereby rescinded with effect from the day on which this determination is signed. 2. The New Zealand futures and options markets in the following contracts are approved: Any contracts (other than Option Contracts in respect of shares) listed for trading on the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange. 3. In relation to Futures Contracts or Option Contracts traded in foreign markets, the following futures and options markets are approved: Any contracts (other than Option Contracts in respect of shares) listed for trading on any of the following Approved Exchanges: G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 4 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] American Stock Exchange (AMEX) Australian Options Market (AOM) Belgian Futures & Options Exchange (Belfox) Bolsa de Mercadorias & Futuros (BM & F) Budapest Commodity Exchange (BCE) Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) Chicago Rice & Cotton Exchange (an affiliate to MidAm) Citrus Associates of the New York Cotton Exchange Inc Commodity Exchange, Inc (COMEX) Copenhagen Stock Exchange Deutsche Terminborse (DTB) European Options Exchange (EOE) Financial Futures Market Amsterdam (FTA) Financial Instruments Exchange (FINEX — a division of NYCE) Finnish Options Market Exchange and Clearing House (FOM) Guarantee Fund for Danish Futures & Options (FUTOP) Hokkaido Grain Exchange Hong Kong Futures Exchange Ltd (HKFE) Index & Options Market (IOM — a division of CME) International Monetary Market (IMM — a division of CME) International Petroleum Exchange (IPE) Irish Futures & Options Exchange Kansas City Board of Trade (KCBT) Kobe Raw Silk Exchange Kobe Rubber Exchange G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 5 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Kuala Lumpur Commodity Exchange Kuala Lumpur Options & Financial Futures Exchange (KLOFFE) London Futures & Options Exchange (London Fox) London International Financial Futures Exchange (LIFFE) London Metal Exchange (LME) Exchange (CBOE) Maebashi Dried Cocoon Exchange Manila International Futures Exchange Marche a Terme International de France (MATIF) Marche des Options Negociables de Paris (MONEP) Meff Renta Fila Meff Renta Vanable Mercardo de Futuros y Opciones S.A (Merfox) Mid America Commodity Exchange (MidAm) Minneapolis Grain Exchange Montreal Exchange Nagoya Textile Exchange New York Coffee Sugar & Cocoa Exchange (CSCE) New York Cotton Exchange (NYCE) New York Futures Exchange (NYFE) New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) OM London Ltd OM Stockholm Ltd Osaka Grain Exchange Osaka Securities Exchange (OSE) Osaka Sugar Exchange Osaka Textile Exchange G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 6 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Oslo Stock Exchange Osterische Termin Und Optionenbouse (OTOB) Pacific Stock Exchange (PSE) Philadelphia Board of Trade (PBOT) Philadelphia Stock Exchange (PHLX) Singapore International Monetary Exchange (SIMEX) South African Futures Exchange (SAFEX) Swiss Options & Financial Futures Exchange AG (SOFFEX) Sydney Futures Exchange (SFE) Tokyo Commodity Exchange Tokyo Grain Exchange Tokyo International Financial Futures Exchange (TIFFE) Tokyo Stock Exchange Tokyo Sugar Exchange Toronto Futures Exchange Toyahashi Dried Cocoon Exchange Vancouver Stock Exchange Winnipeg Commodity Exchange Yokahama Raw Silk Exchange 4. The following sources of information for futures and options prices are approved in relation to Futures Contracts or Option Contracts traded on the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange: a) For New Zealand Dealers — the Statement of Open Position provided by a New Zealand Dealer. b) For persons other than New Zealand Dealers — advice as to the price for a Futures Contract or Option Contract given to that person by a New Zealand Dealer, which price shall be obtained from a source approved in paragraph 6(4)(a) of this determination. G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 7 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 5. For persons other than New Zealand Dealers — advice as to the price for a Futures Contract or Option Contract given to that person by a New Zealand Dealer, which price shall be obtained from a source approved in paragraph 6(4)(a) of this determination. a) A Subscriber Screen Broadcast that quotes prices for Futures Contracts or Option Contracts; b) Where a person does not have access to a Subscriber Screen Broadcast, advice as to the price of a Futures Contract or Option Contract from a member of the exchange at which the contract is traded. The price shall be derived from a source approved in paragraph 6(5)(a) of this determination, and shall be the price at which the member would buy or sell the Futures Contract or Option Contract. 6. a) Where, for the purposes of determining the income or expenditure of a person in respect of a financial arrangement, it is necessary to determine the price for a Futures Contract or Option Contract at the end of an Income Year the price for the Futures Contract or Option Contract shall be the market price for that contract in the market in which it is traded on the same exchange, as advised by an approved source of information (in respect of that exchange), at the close of trading on the last permitted day for trading in the person’s Income Year. If the relevant contract has not been traded on that day, the price shall be the closing call price as determined by the relevant exchange’s clearing house, or the exchange, for margin purposes at the end of that day. b) Where, for the purposes of determining income or expenditure of a person in respect of a financial arrangement, it is necessary to determine in New Zealand dollar value of the futures or option contract at the end of the Income Year, the spot rate for the currency in which the Futures Contract or Option Contract is quoted shall be ascertained in accordance with Determination G5D: Foreign Currency Rates, and used to convert the value of the Futures Contract or Option Contract to New Zealand dollars. 7 Example 1. The Statement of Open Position referred to in paragraph 6(4)(a) of this determination will generally set out information relevant to the particular Futures Contract or Option Contract, including delivery month, number bought or number sold. The following are illustrative examples of advice as to the market price of Futures Contracts and Option Contracts which may be obtained from the New Zealand futures and options market’s G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 8 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] clearing house by New Zealand Dealers who subscribe to an optional “brokers package” system: In this example, Merchant Bank has positions in the September 92 and December 92 BBC contracts, which it has acquired at different times. The market price for September 92 contracts at 1/5/92 was 93.13, and for December was 92.98. The margin column states the unrealised profit in terms of margin deposited, and variable margin accumulated and eroded. Therefore the transaction of 20 bought BBC futures contracts on 12/12/91 has an unrealised profit of $54,062.80. Merchant Bank has an unrealised profit of $49,774.60 for the September 92 maturity, and $51,666.80 for the December 92 maturity, giving a total of $101,441.40. G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 9 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] In this example, Merchant Bank has a position of 53 bought, and 13 sold call and put options on the NZSE-40 Share Price Index. The net unrealised profit position of Merchant Bank is indicated in the margin column. The premium value indicates the maximum profit that could be received by the option writer (seller) at the expiration of the option contracts (the declaration date). If, on the expiration date, there is a debt margin (ie, loss), that amount will be deducted from the premium value before any profit is realised. 2. Subclause 6(5) of this determination refers to a Subscriber Screen Broadcast that quotes prices for Futures Contracts or Option Contracts. Such a service is commonly provided by companies such as Reuters, Telerate and Bloomberg LP. The following are examples of Subscriber Screen Broadcast pages provided by Telerate New Zealand Limited and Reuters New Zealand Limited: a) G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 10 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] This is an example of a Subscriber Screen Broadcast page provided by Telerate New Zealand Limited. It shows price information for the three year T-Bond futures contract traded on the Sydney Futures Exchange. Two maturities are quoted — the September 1992 contract, and the December 1992 contract. The market price for the September 1992 three year T-Bond futures contract is 93.58 (or 6.42%) being the LAST price at which trades occurred. b) This is an example of a Subscriber Screen Broadcast provided by Reuters New Zealand Limited, relating to the same Futures Contract as in paragraph 7(2)(a) above. The market price for the September 1992 three year T-Bond futures contract is 93.58 (or 6.42%), being the LAST price. c) This is a different example of a Subscriber Screen Broadcast page provided by Reuters New Zealand Limited. It shows market prices for a Eurodollar Futures contract maturing in December 1989 as traded on the London International Financial Futures Exchange. The market price of the contract is 91.70, being the last traded price and identified by the description “LAST” (as distinguished from “LAST 1”, “LAST 2” etc.). The closing price for the previous trading day is 91.68. G7C 22 January 1993 UNCLASSIFIED Page 11 of 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] About this document General determinations set out the Commissioner’s view on how the financial arrangements rules apply to a specific type of financial arrangement. All general determinations are binding on the Commissioner and some are also binding on taxpayers.