UNCLASSIFIED \[UNCLASSIFIED\] DETERMINATION > FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS > GENERAL Requirements as to Precision Issued: 13 May 1987 G2 This determination may be cited as “Determination G2: Requirements as to Precision” G2 13 May 1987 UNCLASSIFIED Page 1 of 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 1 Explanation (which does not form part of the determination) This Determination sets out the level of precision acceptable in calculations made under other determinations made by the Commissioner pursuant to section 64E(1) of the Income Tax Act 1976. 2 Reference This Determination is made pursuant to section 64E(1) of the Income Tax Act 1976. It defines the precision acceptable in calculations made under other determinations made by the Commissioner pursuant to section 64E(1) of the Income Tax Act 1976. 3 Scope Unless specifically excluded therein, this Determination applies to all other determinations made pursuant to paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of section 64E(1) of the Income Tax Act 1976. 4 Principle The test for sufficient precision is whether an increase in precision will give a significantly different result in respect of income derived or expenditure incurred in any period to which an amount that is deemed to be income or expenditure is to be allocated. 5 Interpretation In this determination, unless the context otherwise requires, expressions used have the same meanings as in section 64B to 64M of the Income Tax Act 1976. 6 Method A calculation is sufficiently precise for the purposes of the application of any determination made under section 64E(1) of the Income Tax Act 1976 if the income derived or expenditure incurred from a financial arrangement in any period to which an amount that is deemed to G2 13 May 1987 UNCLASSIFIED Page 2 of 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] be income or expenditure is to be allocated would not be changed by more than $5 by the use of greater precision in all intermediate calculations. 7 Example (1) The calculation of the income on the yield to maturity basis for this example is discussed in paragraph 7 of “Determination G3: The Yield to Maturity Method”. A financial arrangement, with a face value of $1,000,000 is purchased for $1,012,500 on 12 March 1987. It bears interest at 7 percent per annum payable semi-annually and is repayable at par on 15 January 1988. The coupon payments are made on 15 May and 15 November each year. Using the yield to maturity method and 1 decimal place gives the accrued income schedule in Table 1 below. Using a yield to maturity of 16.23 percent, on which Table 2 is based, allows the more precise calculation of accrued income. The difference column in Table 2 displays the difference between the calculated accrued income in Table 1 and the calculated accrued income in Table 2. Since some of the net accrued amounts differ by more than $5 more precision is required in the intermediate calculations— G2 13 May 1987 UNCLASSIFIED Page 3 of 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] If any one of the differences is greater than $5 it is necessary to repeat the calculation. As this is the case the calculation must be repeated at greater precision. Table 4 demonstrates the results using a yield to maturity of 16.2308%. The differences are all less than $5 compared with Table 3 and would be acceptable for income tax reporting purposes. (2) The calculation of the amounts used in this example are derived from paragraph 7 of “Determination G1: Apportionment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis”. G2 13 May 1987 UNCLASSIFIED Page 4 of 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] On 29 January 1987 a company issues 180-day bill for an amount of $3,000,000, at a discount of $294,000. The company's balance date is 31 March and it elects under “Determination G1: Apportionment of Income And Expenditure on a Daily Basis” to use a 365 day year. There are 61 days from 29 January to 31 March 1987. As 31 March falls between the issue date and the redemption date it is necessary to apportion the $294,000 expenditure incurred between 2 income years. To do so it is necessary to calculate 61/180 as a proportion. Initial Calculation: 61/180 = 0.3 Amount allocated to income year 1 = .3 × 294,000 = 88,220 Amount allocated to income year 2 = .7 × 294,000 = 205,800 The company is required to do a second calculation using greater precision. Second Calculation: 61/180 = 0.34 Amount allocated to income year 1 = .34 × 294,000 = 99,960 Amount allocated to income year 2 = .66 × 294,000 = 194,040 As the change in expense allocated to each year is greater than $5 it is necessary to increase the precision so the company tries: Third Calculation: 61/180 = 0.339 Amount allocated to income year 1 = .339 × 294,000 = 99,666 Amount allocated to income year 2 = .661 × 294,000 = 194,334 As the change in expense allocated to each income year is still greater than $5 it is still necessary to increase precision: Fourth Calculation: 61/180 = 0.3389 Amount allocated to income year 1 = .3389 × 294,000 = 99,636.60 Amount allocated to income year 2 = .6611 × 294,000 = 194,363.40 The comparison must be repeated again as the difference has not yet reduced to $5 or less: Fifth Calculation: 61/180 = 0.33889 Amount allocated to income year 1 = .33889 × 294,000 = 99,633.66 Amount allocated to income year 2 = .66111 × 294,000 = 194,366.34 G2 13 May 1987 UNCLASSIFIED Page 5 of 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Since the difference is less than $5 it is acceptable to use the ratio .3389 to allocate expenditure to the income year ending on 31 March 1987. About this document General determinations set out the Commissioner’s view on how the financial arrangements rules apply to a specific type of financial arrangement. All general determinations are binding on the Commissioner and some are also binding on taxpayers.