1 Diversity, Equity & Inclusion at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake Our roadmap to creating a diverse and inclusive place to work 2024-25 2 Table of Contents Introduction by Peter Mersi 03 Our approach to diversity, equity and inclusion 05 Engaging with our people 10 Understanding our people’s experiences 11 What are we trying to achieve? Representation goals 12 Measuring change - inclusion and our people experience 13 Gender pay gaps 16 Ethnicity pay gaps 21 Measuring change - representation 24 Measurement 26 Focus on Pacific peoples’ representation 27 Focus on disability 31 Our Diversity, Equity and Inclusion roadmap 33 Kia Toipoto - Public Service Pay Gaps Action Plan progress 37 Papa Pounamu 40 3 Introduction by Peter Mersi, Our Commissioner and co-chair of Papa Pounamu Our behaviours of whanaungatanga, manaakitanga and mahi tika, which are encompassed in Te Pou o te Tangata, are also vital in creating an inclusive workplace, where diversity is valued, and we are open and accountable for what we do. Our Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Roadmap 2024-25 highlights the progress we are making towards our diversity and inclusion goals of a Diverse Workforce, Inclusive Workplace, and Leadership and Accountability. It also details our focus for the coming year on three key areas: • supporting the sustainability of our people-led networks • enabling our people to develop and grow their capability through learning and development opportunities • supporting leaders by mitigating bias in their decision making and recognising and harnessing the value of diverse teams. At Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake everything starts and ends with people. Our people are the reason we can do our work and make our workplace a great place to be. Our work is driven by our aspiration – improving oranga for current and future generations. We recognise that we make our biggest contribution to oranga though the activities we support and deliver to our customers. This year, we have continued our strong focus and commitment to responding to the needs of our diverse workforce and building an inclusive workplace for everyone. We do this by providing a workplace where everyone can feel respected, valued, and supported to do their best work every day, regardless of background. Through embracing diversity our people understand the needs of the many different communities we serve. Diverse teams bring different perspectives, which helps stimulate creativity and innovation. We also support leaders to recognise the value diversity brings and celebrate the contribution people make. 4 INTRODUCTION Our progress to date includes continuing to reduce our gender and ethnic pay gaps, people having increased feelings of inclusion, and improvements across a range of our diversity and inclusion people practices. It is important to recognise that many of the areas of focus over the last year are longer term and we will continue to progress these over the next 12-24 months. The actions outlined in this roadmap continue to support the goals in Kia Toipoto – Public Service Pay Gaps Action Plan, along with the five priority areas set out in the Papa Pounamu diversity and inclusion work programme for the wider Public Service. I am proud of the progress we are making towards achieving our diversity, equity and inclusion goals so that everyone across Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake feels respected, valued and is able to reach their potential and do a great job. 5 Our approach to diversity, equity and inclusion These goals are supported and reinforced through Kia Toipoto – Public Service Pay Gaps Action Plan guidance, and are aligned with Papa Pounamu, which sets the diversity and inclusion work programme for the wider Public Service, with guidance from Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission. This Diversity, Equity and Inclusion roadmap is complemented by an equal focus on supporting the career development of Māori. These actions can be found in our Māori representation roadmap. Our focus continues to respond to the needs of our diverse workforce, providing people from different communities with what they need to perform at their best. This means supporting leaders to lead diverse people, enabling them to achieve their goals, grow in their roles and contribute to organisational priorities. Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake is committed to building an inclusive workplace free from inequalities for our 4,486 people (headcount as of 30 June 2024), where all our people are valued, respected, and feel supported to reach their full potential. Our approach is based around our 3 diversity and inclusion strategic goals: • Diverse workforce - We will break down barriers to inclusion, and celebrate, retain, develop, and attract a truly diverse workforce that is representative of the communities we serve. • Inclusive workplace - We will create a safe and open working environment where all our people feel able to grow and do their best work without fear of embarrassment or retaliation. • Leadership and accountability - We will actively demonstrate our commitment to an inclusive culture through our leadership, and we will hold ourselves accountable for our progress. 6 The following is a summary of the 2023/24 roadmap activities that have contributed to our progress. Reflections of the last 12 months 7 Diverse Workforce • We have reviewed our talent acquisition processes to address barriers to development and career progression for Māori and Pacific peoples. This helps us create a diverse talent pipeline for leadership and senior technical roles. We will continue working in partnership with Māori and Pacific peoples to support a shift in representation. • Our Active Listening programme informs our understanding of the experience people have working at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake. This includes regular pulse surveys (our PX Pulse) and surveys across the employee life cycle such as joining or leaving the organisation (Moments that Matter). The latest to be launched was our external candidate experience survey. This will help us understand the experience of applying and being interviewed for a role. Through our suite of surveys, our people tell us they like our supportive and inclusive environment. 1 GOAL 1: 8 Inclusive Workplace • We have created a new Reasonable Accommodation policy and guidelines to help meet the individual needs of disabled people. This year we joined the New Zealand Disability Employers’ Network to review our practices and identify new opportunities for improvement for disabled and neurodiverse people both within Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake and our customers. • Our property programme has continued to improve to ensure that projects are accessible and enhance our people’s wellbeing. A key achievement relates to the guidance for all future projects to include accessibility as a key consideration, and members of our Diversability People Network are included as part of Business Engagement Groups (BEG) for property projects. See our roadmap section for further work in the property programme. • Our people networks have continued to thrive and are well established as key stakeholders in many initiatives. They have updated guidance on how to set up networks and delivered Network Role Guidance for members and leaders. This supports the understanding of the role and value of people networks in supporting capability development and growth of network members. Our people networks help people across the organisation to learn about diverse groups and have contributed to significant initiatives, such as our Reasonable Accommodation policy and reaccreditation with the Rainbow Tick. 2 GOAL 2: 9 Leadership & Accountability • Te Pou o te Tangata – how we do things at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake was designed with our people including our people-led networks, with a focus on amplifying the voices of underrepresented communities. In the past year we have delivered comprehensive leadership learning to support leaders to lead in an inclusive way. • We have continued embedding our flexible working policy and approach, encouraging solution-focused conversations between leaders and their people. The last 12 months has seen leadership teams working together to promote consistency in decision-making and reflecting on what a principle-based approach to flexible working means within their business group contexts. • We continue to strengthen what we do to protect our people from harm at work, promoting positive ways to support wellbeing and resilience, and supporting recovery or accommodating illness when needed. We have reviewed our employee assistance programme offerings and have a new provider with wellbeing resources. • We have progressed work on resources to support our Māori capability programme Te Awatea, launching in the upcoming year. 3 GOAL 3: 10 Engaging with our people 11 Engaging with our people Understanding our people’s experiences When developing our Diversity, Equity and Inclusion roadmap, we committed to understanding the experiences of Māori and Pacific peoples, in terms of developing careers and the barriers that have been faced. We have worked in partnership to establish actions that will create a positive impact on Māori and Pacific representation, and in turn reduce the pay gaps. This Diversity, Equity and Inclusion roadmap responds to the insights we have gathered from our people to identify tangible actions that can bring meaningful change for underrepresented communities at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake. Alongside this roadmap is our Māori Representation roadmap – this includes activities specifically focused on enabling meaningful change in Māori representation. Developing our roadmap Our journey to develop this roadmap has been supported through engagement with a range of stakeholders; this includes: • our people networks (Tagata Pasifika, Wāhine Tūhono – Women’s Network, He Toa Takitini - Rainbow Network, Diversability Network and Multicultural Network) • whānau Māori members from across Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake • our 3 unions (PSA, Taxpro and NUPE) with on-going significant support from PSA Rūnanga and Tagata Moana Delegates and Taxpro representatives from Māori and Pasifika communities • senior leaders and business partners • representatives of business groups who provide or support services that enable our diversity equity and inclusion goals. 12 What are we trying to achieve? Representation goals Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake wants to be representative of all the communities we serve and see diversity at all levels of the organisation. Diverse teams bring different perspectives together, stimulating creativity and innovation, which lead to new ideas and solutions. Embracing diversity in our workplace means our people understand the needs of the diverse communities we serve, which informs the way we design and deliver our policies, products, functions and services. We aim to improve diverse representation across all levels of our workforce to reflect New Zealand’s population. There are 3 key areas of our work programme that support a positive shift in representation over time. • Career development – supporting our people to build fulfilling careers at our organisation. This will help people develop capability and successfully move to senior roles and roles of influence. • Talent attraction – thinking about how we attract diverse candidates to want to apply to work at our organisation, at all levels. • Talent selection – supporting candidates to do their best, and also supporting leaders to make non-biased decisions and engage with candidates with diverse values and worldviews. The representation areas where we have a clear opportunity to create positive change are: • representation in senior positions across all non-European ethnicities - both people and technical leadership • representation of women in non-people leader roles with pay between $150,000 and $210,000 - these are generally higher- level technical roles • increased representation of Pacific peoples across all levels of people leadership • increased representation of Pacific peoples across higher level/higher paid technical roles • increased Asian representation across all levels of leadership • increased representation of disabled people and members of LGBTTQIA+ (rainbow) communities across all roles. For Māori representation goals – please refer to our Māori representation roadmap. 13 Our people tell us they like our supportive and inclusive environment. Over the past year, 89% of staff who responded to our people experience survey felt ‘mostly included’ or ‘really included’ in their day-to-day experience at work. This has continued to trend in a more positive direction since the survey was introduced in 2020. The themes remain consistent when we compare this across all ethnicity and gender groups at similar role levels. We integrate health and safety into all our activities and encourage everyone to show manaakitanga. We continue to develop resources and guidance to support leaders to understand the wide range of factors that can impact the quality of mentally healthy work. This understanding can assist leaders to work with their people to improve any obstacles to a great work experience. On average over the last year, 67% of respondents to surveys rated their wellbeing as ‘good’ or ‘very good’. 75% of respondents felt ‘good’ or ‘very good’ about their day-to-day work experience. 62% of our people are strong advocates for Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake as a great place to work, and 79% of those leaving told us that we delivered well against those things they value most from an employer. Our internal candidates feel Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake has an inclusive interview process with 85% feeling they could bring their whole self to the interview. Measuring change – inclusion and our people experience OF SURVEY RESPONDENTS: rated their wellbeing as ‘good’ or ‘very good’ 67% felt ‘good’ or ‘very good’ about their day-to-day work experience 75% are strong advocates for IR as a great place to work 62% 14 PX Pulse results for the ‘Inclusion’ Dimension 2022-24 Least favourableMost favourable 2024 89% feel included 2023 86% feel included 2022 83% feel included Since 2022, reported feelings of inclusion have continued to trend in a more positive direction. 15 Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake has continued to take deliberate action to ensure gender and ethnicity are not a determining factor in what people get paid. Pay gaps 16 The current average gender pay gap is 14.6%. This has reduced from 20.6% since 2016. Our analysis shows the following: • There are minimal like-for-like gender pay differences within roles. • Where the average salary differs within roles, this can be attributed to factors such as capability, tenure or length of time in roles. • Our gender balance across male and female in leadership is at levels we are satisfied with, and we aim to maintain this. When referring to gender pay, the measurements do not include employees that identify outside the gender binary, due to limited numbers and the risk associated with publishing figures that may cause individual employee data to be identified. Gender pay gaps Gender pay gaps Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake has continued to take deliberate action to ensure gender and ethnicity are not a determining factor in what people get paid. The drivers of our gender and ethnic pay gaps relate to representation. This means that although we have diversity within our frontline roles and lower paid roles, the level of diversity reduces in higher paid, more senior or influential roles. 17 The median gender pay gap has decreased by 3.8% and the average pay gap has decreased by 6% since 2016. Average and median gender pay gaps over time (2016-2024) 24.7% 20162017201820192020202120222023 24.2% 24.5% 25.8% 26.1% 23.8% 23.0% 20.9% 20.6% 19.6%19.4% 18.8% 17.9% 18.3% 17.7% 14.6% Median gender pay gap Average gender pay gap2024 20.4% 16.9% 18 Gender pay gaps The gender pay gap is driven by representation. There is a high proportion of women in frontline and lower paid roles at almost 70%, for example, Customer Service Officers. We do not intend to force a change here, but see this as an opportunity for women to enter the organisation and create a pipeline for future talent. For this reason, Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake is likely to always have a gender pay gap of >10%. Our pay gap is not driven by within-role difference but by uneven representation across roles. Women are less represented than men in roles earning above $150,000. At senior leadership level (tiers 1-3) female representation is 54%, management level (tiers 4-5) is 46%, and team lead level is 66% (as at 30 June 2024). Female representation has increased for management and team lead roles, but has decreased for senior management roles since 2023. OF WOMEN: are in senior leadership level roles (tiers 1-3) 54% hold team lead level positions 46% work in frontline and lower paid roles 70% 19 Female representation by organisation level from 2023 to 2024 Female representation has increased for management and team lead roles, but has decreased for senior management roles since 2023. 54% Senior Management -9% 66% +1% Team Leader 68% No change Staff +1% Management 46% 20 Female representation begins to drop below 50% for roles above $150,000. Generally there has been an improvement year-on-year. Since 2021, the remuneration point where female representation dips below 50% is getting higher. Female representation by pay 2023 2024 80% 72.0% 0% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% <75,00075,000 - 100,000 100,000 - 125,000 125,000 - 150,000 150,000 - 175,000 175,000 - 200,000 200,000+ 72.0% 62.0% 55.0% 49.0% 39.0% 44.0% 70% 60% 21 Over the last year pay gaps have been decreasing across all groups. Our analysis of ethnicity pay gaps show the following (data from 30 July 2024): • The average pay for men/tāne is higher than that for women/ wāhine across all ethnicities except European women. • The current average ethnicity pay gaps are 13.4% for Pacific peoples, 15.9% for Asian, 8.45% for Middle Eastern, Latin American and African people (MELAA), and 8.06% for Māori. • The pay gaps are significantly higher for women – with a pay gap of 21% for Māori wāhine, 24% for Asian women and 24% for Pacific women. • Over the past five years pay gaps have been decreasing across all groups except for Asian women, which has increased. This is likely due to an increased number of Asian new hires in frontline roles. As with gender, representation is the primary reason for Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake’s ethnicity pay gaps. A large proportion of Māori, Pacific peoples, Asian and MELAA people are in lower paid roles, and a smaller proportion are in higher paid roles. Within roles, like-for-like pay differences are minimal. We will continue to review within role analysis as the population shifts to ensure no pay gaps are created. AVERAGE ETHNICITY PAY GAPS: AsianMāoriPacific Peoples 13.4%15.9%8.1% Ethnicity pay gaps 22 Pay gaps by ethnicity 2023–2024 Ethnicity pay gaps The average pay gap has increased for Asian, and Pacific peoples but decreased for MELAA, European and Māori. One of the drivers of the increase in the Asian pay gap is a high level of recruitment in front line and lower paid roles. Female/wāhine pay gaps by ethnicity 2023–2024 The average female/wāhine pay gaps have reduced for all ethnicity groups except Asian over the past year. 20% Pacific Peoples 10% 0% -10% -20% AsianMELAAMāori European Pacific Peoples AsianMELAAMāoriEuropean 2024 2023 2024 2023 20% 30% 10% 0% 40% 13.5% 8.5% 8.1% -25.5% 15.9% 24.6% 24.2% 20.7% 21.4% 7.8% 23 Representation 24 Ethnicity Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake’s employee ethnicity closely reflects the ethnicity breakdown in New Zealand. New Zealand’s working- age population is 15% Māori, 7% Pacific peoples. Representation for Asian, MELAA and Pacific peoples at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake is higher than in the New Zealand working population, but lower for European, Māori and other ethnicities. However, the diversity is concentrated within our front-line roles and lower paid roles. In our higher paid, more senior or influential roles there is less diverse representation. Over the past year, our representation for most non-European groups has increased, and remained stable for Māori. Measuring Change \*Statistics New Zealand Household Labour Force survey, March 2024 European Asian Māori Pacific Peoples MELAA Other Ethnicities Staff Ethnicity representation by organisation level position Team Leader Management Senior Management 020406080100 Note: Ethnicity totals equal more than 100% due to individuals declaring multiple ethnicities European representation increases as the organisation level increases. 25 Inland Revenue representation compared with New Zealand population Our employee ethnicity closely reflects the ethnicity breakdown in New Zealand. Inland RevenueNew Zealand Population EuropeanMāoriMELAAPacific peoplesAsian 24% 18% 59% 67% 12% 15% 4% 3% 9% 7% 26 103,170.56 81,286.11 89,995.21 81,271.23 91,843.09 77,713.86 85,796.70 77,634.73 113,030.84 95,399.36 Measurement Unless otherwise stated, measurement is from 1 July 2024. Group pay gaps are calculated as the difference between the average salary for a group and the average salary of all those not in that group, expressed as a percentage of the average salary of those not in that group. For female pay gaps by ethnicity, the comparator group is males from all ethnicities – calculated as the difference between the average pay for all men and the average pay for women of the ethnic group, expressed as a percentage of the average pay for men. The percentage of our people who have declared their ethnicity is 85.4% as at July 2024 (3,973 compared to 664 who have not declared their ethnicity). There are 194 ethnicities that an individual may select, and these are categorised into Asian, European, Māori, MELAA, Pacific peoples, other ethnicities, and did not declare. Disabled people and members of Rainbow communities Our representation and pay gap data about disabled and Rainbow employees at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake is limited. We gather information about new starters, including if they self-identify as having a disability but declaring this information is not compulsory. We can use Te Taunaki Public Service Census data to help us form insights about representation of these groups. As this survey is confidential, it is likely to have an increased uptake, and therefore provide us with more robust data. Median and average pay by gender and ethnicity European $80k $60k $40k $20k 0 $100k $120k Māori Female/Wahine Male/Tāne Pacific Peoples MELAAAsian The average and median pay is lower for Pacific, Asian, Māori and MELAA women and highest for European men. 27 Focus on Pacific peoples’ representation Pacific peoples make up 9.3% of our workforce, with 7% being Pacific women. The New Zealand population is approximately 8% Pacific peoples. Today we currently have a 13.5% pay gap across all Pacific peoples and 24.6% for Pacific women, being the largest pay gap for any Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake population. As with our all pay gaps, our Pacific peoples’ pay gap is driven by representation. Our data shows that 46% of our Pacific people are in Customer Service Officer Level 1 roles - this is one of the lowest paid roles in the organisation. Representation in the Team Lead group is 9.2%, reducing to just 3.7% in management (tier 4-5) and 2.9% in senior leadership (tier 1-3) level roles. Pacific peoples’ average pay gap 202220232024 13.5% Pacific wa - hine average pay gap 202220232024 24.6% 14.2%13.3% 26.8%25.1% 28 Pacific peoples representation by role level Representation for Pacific peoples in team leader, management and senior leadership roles has remained relatively stable from 2022 to 2024. 12% 8% 6% 4% 0% 2% ManagementTeam LeaderStaffSenior Leadership 10% 2024 2023 2022 9.3%9.3% 9.5% 8.5% 10.6% 9.2% 2.8% 3.8% 3.7% 3.4% 3.6% 2.9% In the past year there has been a reduction in representation in all leadership roles, and as a result an increase in the pay gap, although minimal. This highlights a need to continue focusing on representation of Pacific peoples in leadership roles. 29 Pacific peoples’ overall representation 2022-2023 The percentage of Pacific peoples in Inland Revenue has been stable from 2022 to 2024. 10% All Pacific Representation 8% 6% 4% 0% Pacific Wāhine Pacific Tāne 2% 2023 2022 2024 9.4% 9.18% 9.26% 6.59% 6.84% 7.04% 2.38% 2.31% 2.19% 30 Understanding the lived experiences We have been working alongside members of our Pacific communities at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake to understand their experience in relation to development and careers. The experiences they have shared cross many of our people processes, leadership including the capability of people leaders, the behaviours we demonstrate and our working environment in general. We have worked in partnership to establish the way forward and a series of actions to continue to support a positive shift in representation of our Pacific people. Taking action Engagement and insights from across our Pacific community have informed actions in our Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Roadmaps. These include: • leadership development • recruitment practices that are inclusive of cultural needs and create a supportive experience for Pacific peoples • an open and visible approach to set people up for success when they apply for external development programmes aimed at underrepresented communities. We are also supporting the progress of a development programme for Pacific peoples, developed with Pacific peoples. Other actions in this roadmap that relate to our talent system, access to learning that supports individual needs and the cultural capability of people leaders will all contribute to creating a positive change to Pacific peoples’ representation. Creating outcomes The overall outcome of this focus is to support a positive shift in the representation of Pacific peoples at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake, and to enable increased outcomes for Pacific peoples in terms of career development and aspirations. For specific representation outcomes see the Representation goals section of the roadmap. Focus on Pacific peoples’ representation 31 Based on data collected from our people at the time of onboarding, only 4.3% of our people have told us that they have a disability. But with disabled people accounting for 24% of New Zealand’s population , we know that this number is likely to be significantly higher. Disability takes many forms – some are visible, and many are hidden. Some people are disabled by society but may not identify as having a disability. We want all people at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake to be supported to perform at their best. We have an on-going focus on removing barriers to employment and ensuring that our practices, processes and tools are inclusive and enabling for all. “Nothing about us without us” This is the principle that we work to when focusing on work that supports our people with disabilities. We will work collaboratively with the disabled community to develop, review and implement our actions that enable them. Accessibility Tick assessment In the 23/24 Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Roadmap we committed to working with the Diversability Network to explore the New Zealand Disability Employer’s Network and the Accessibility Tick. Our aims of doing so were to understand our current state and any areas of improvement needed to be inclusive of disabled and neurodivergent people. An initial assessment has provided us with useful advice on where we might improve. These will be worked through with the Diversability community and different parts of the organisation to identify the actions that we already have underway and any new opportunities for improvement that align with Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake’s priorities. Our focus for 2024/2025 Focus on disability 32 Our Diversity, Equity and Inclusion roadmap Many of the actions that were initiated over previous years are now being embedded, are part of business as usual, or are part of a continuous cycle of improvement. These actions are not captured as part of this roadmap, which sets out new actions or actions yet to be completed. 33 GOAL 1: DIVERSE WORKFORCE We will break down barriers to inclusion, and celebrate, retain, develop, and attract a truly diverse workforce that is representative of the communities we serve. This focus includes actions to mitigate bias in recruitment, career development and talent system to enable purposeful focus and equitable outcomes. Supporting the recruitment, development and aspirations of people from underrepresented groups, by working in partnership with them, will support a positive shift in representation at all levels of the organisation. We continue to support leaders to recognise and value the benefits of diversity of thought, ideas, and cultural competency to improve business outcomes. FOCUS AREADETAILMILESTONES Career development equity • Increase awareness of appropriate external development programmes and review how we support people to apply for these. Q4 2024 Review approach to support people to apply for external programmes. Talent and development system • Increase visibility of individuals from underrepresented groups through the tools we use for talent management and succession planning. • Enable purposeful discussions about individuals from underrepresented groups as part of the overall approach to talent management and succession planning Q3 2025 New talent management processes including consideration of underrepresented talent are tested. Attracting diverse talent• Analyse and understand what diverse communities are saying about what it means to work at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake and consider what this means for our employee value proposition (EVP). • More deliberately reflect diversity in our recruitment campaigns to continue to ensure that we are attracting diverse candidates. • Explore more non-traditional sourcing channels to encourage more diverse talent to apply for all roles across the organisation. Recruitment• Work with representatives of diverse communities and underrepresented groups to continually review and improve inclusive recruitment processes that mitigate bias in decision making. Q3 2025 New job advertisements include support options for disabled people. Improve diversity data• Encourage participation in Te Taunaki through a strong communication approach to increase completion. • Analyse findings released in late 2025 regarding the diversity of our people alongside other public servants. This will include their experience of inclusion and wellbeing at work and their view on working for the Public Service. Q1 2025 Te Taunaki Survey 34 GOAL 2: INCLUSIVE WORKPLACE We will create a safe and open working environment where all our people feel able to grow and do their best work without fear of embarrassment or retaliation. This focus includes continuing to create workplaces that are modern and fit for purpose, accessible and inclusive for all people, sharing informal learning through language weeks and our communication channels, and supporting People Network leads to connect to the wider outcomes for diversity and inclusion and how they contribute to this. FOCUS AREAACTIVITIESMILESTONES Inclusive environment for disabled people See ‘focus on Disability’ section of this roadmap for more information of this focus area. Progress priority work from the Accessibility Tick assessment. This includes: • Building a neurodiversity portfolio in our Diversability network to break down barriers, promote safe sharing of lived experience and help inform our organisation’s practice, including health and safety. • Exploring options to support mental health training for leaders to build on existing capability. • Exploring including building assessments in health and safety reviews. • Exploring upskilling health and safety representatives to complete accessibility assessments. • Exploring mechanisms for disabled and neurodiverse people to contribute to workplace health and safety. • Increasing plain language capability for people who create and update web and intranet content. • Improving quality and accessibility of IT knowledge content. • Ongoing education and awareness for buyers to include accessibility when making buying decisions. Q4 2025 Update existing accommodation guide to include agreed accessibility requirements. Inclusive environment for our LGBTTQIA+ (rainbow) people. • Promotion and visibility of what it means to be an ally and how allyship can enable the safety and wellbeing of Rainbow community members, particularly in homogenous environments or smaller work communities. Q3 2025 Rainbow Tick reaccreditation and actions. Learning• Cultural capability learning – review current offering (Mana Aki) and consider suitable alternatives. • Mental health – provide opportunities to create awareness and understanding of maintaining good mental health and wellbeing, and support leaders to understand their role in a work context, and where to send people for support. • Unconscious bias – review current offering and consider the provision of tools and learning resources for both formal and informal learning. • Design and deliver Te Awatea – te ao Māori capability learning. Q2 2024 Te Awatea initial learning delivered. People networks• Design an induction for current and potential future network leads to provide direction, plan and prioritise activities and general leadership across their networks. Q2 2025 Network lead induction launched. 35 GOAL 3: LEADERSHIP & ACCOUNTABILITY We will actively demonstrate our commitment to an inclusive culture through our leadership, and we will hold ourselves accountable for our progress. This focus includes supporting our leaders to demonstrate Te Pou o te Tangata, the way we do things at our organisation, and to get to know their people to inform the best way to support their individual needs. FOCUS AREAACTIVITIESMILESTONES Leadership development Continue to focus on building inclusion skills for leaders who can demonstrate Te Pou o te Tangata in how they lead. • Measure the benefits of new leadership learning to inform areas for future focus or intervention. • Build new integrity topics for leadership teams to demonstrate inclusive practice. • Consolidate and create visibility of leadership development programmes – such as coaching skills that support the practical application of Whanake – our performance approach. Fostering diverse leadership Continue offering external development programmes that support our focus to increase the diversity of our leadership pipeline. • Increase the support and visibility of programmes such as Te Aratiatia (Ministry of Social Development Leadership programme for Māori and Pacific aspiring leaders) to help increase the diversity of our leadership pipeline. Hiring leaders Leveraging the voice and experiences of our people to create space for diverse needs throughout the recruitment process. • Continue work the Talent Acquisition team has started with a career development working group, made up of representatives from underrepresented communities to review recruitment processes and the role of the hiring leader. Q2 2025 Review and update hiring leaders guidance to set a tone of inclusion and cultural understanding. Cultural capability Cultural capability means recognising, understanding and valuing the cultural and social norms of diverse populations. This is a capability leaders need to recognise the strengths in diversity and provide equitable leadership. • Target specific learning needs in relation to Māori cultural capability through Te Awatea, and leverage opportunities to support leaders to grow and role model the type of leadership we want to see more of. 36 Kia Toipoto – Public Service Pay Gaps Action Plan progress 37 KIA TOIPOTO AREAMILESTONEINLAND REVENUE TE TARI TAAKE PROGRESS Te Pono – TransparencyAgencies and entities publish annual action plans based on gender and ethnicity data and union/ employee feedback. Our Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Roadmap includes our progress and action relating to Kia Toipoto. This roadmap is published both internally and externally on Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake’s website. For the second year, we have created a Māori representation roadmap in partnership with Māori - including data and actions to achieve equitable outcomes for Māori. Agencies and entities ensure easy access to human resources and remuneration policies, including salary bands. All Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake policies are available for our people on our internal intranet Haukāinga. This includes all human resources policies and remuneration information. Ngā Hua Tōkeke mō te Utu – Equitable pay outcomes By the end of 2022, entities ensure that starting salaries and salaries for the same or similar roles are not influenced by bias. Our banded and graded pay structures mitigate bias by removing the role of a single leader in pay decisions. Our remuneration structure is robust, with controls for the potential for bias. Starting salaries for same or similar roles are based on pay bands and capability. Agencies monitor starting salaries and salaries for the same or similar roles to ensure gender and ethnic pay gaps do not reopen. On-going scans check for any flags in same or similar roles and trigger further investigation. Pay equity processes are used to address claims and reduce the impact of occupational segregation. Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake has been party to two pay equity claims and follows the lead of Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission. Te whai kanohi i ngā taumata katoa – Leadership and representation By the end of April 2023 agencies/entities have plans and targets to improve gender and ethnic representation in their workforce and leadership. By the end of 2024 the Public Service workforce and leadership are substantially more representative of society. See the Measuring Change section of this roadmap. We have achieved gender balanced leadership between men and women at all levels of leadership. We are focusing on shifting representation – see our Representation Goals section. Te Whakawhanaketanga i te Aramahi – Effective career and leadership development By mid-2023, agencies/entities have career pathways and equitable progression opportunities that support women, Māori, Pacific peoples and ethnic employees to achieve their career aspirations The foundations are in place for Whanake – our performance approach, capability-based roles, and talent management. We are now focusing on embedding and evolving these inclusive people practices, and focusing on reducing the barriers to career development for Māori and Pacific peoples. 38 KIA TOIPOTO AREAMILESTONEINLAND REVENUE TE TARI TAAKE PROGRESS Te whakakore i te katoa o ngā momo whakatoihara, haukume anō hoki – Eliminating all forms of bias and discrimination By the end of 2023 entities have remuneration and human resources (HR) systems, policies and practices designed to remove all forms of bias and discrimination. In 2018, we introduced a new pay approach and continued to embed it over 2019. Our banded and graded pay structures mitigate bias by removing the role of a single leader in pay decisions. Both pay approaches prioritise larger increases for those paid lower in the pay range. We know that our remuneration structure is robust, with controls for the potential for bias. Agencies embed and monitor the impact of bias-free HR and remuneration policies and practices. We continue to embed learning around the role bias can play in the decisions leaders make and review our HR practices and polices regularly to mitigate bias. Agencies/entities ensure leaders and employees learn about and demonstrate cultural competence. Our people networks are well supported and help to create awareness and learning of a range of different cultures at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake. Cultural competency learning is available for all our people, with tools and systems in development or being embedded to put learning into practice through the decisions leaders need to make about their people. Te Taunoa o te Mahi Pīngore – Flexible work by default By the end of 2024 agencies and entities offer equitable access to flexible-by-default working and ensure it does not undermine career progression or pay. Our refreshed Flexible Working Policy and Guidelines were released in 2021 and are aligned with the flexible-by-default guidelines. Our policy reinforces a principles-based approach to flexibility. We are now focusing on leadership capability to lead in a flexible by default way, and to embed our approach, with a particular focus on location-flexible working. Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission will be producing revised guidance on Flexible Work by Default and Hybrid Working Arrangements and during 2024/25 we will update our policies to reflect this. 39 Papa Pounamu 40 FOCUS AREAHOW INLAND REVENUE TE TARI TAAKE IS FOCUSING ON THIS Te Urupare i te Mariu Addressing bias We will continue to ensure all our people undertake unconscious bias learning. Our learning was updated in mid-2023 with a refresher module to specifically address bias in recruitment. We will review guidance for hiring leaders and recruitment panel members. Hautūtanga kākano rau Fostering diverse leadership Having leaders who reflect the diversity of New Zealand’s communities means we are more likely to understand diverse perspectives, value different worldviews, avoid assumptions and address bias. We actively support and develop future leaders from communities that have traditionally been underrepresented within the Public Service. We will continue to connect people to resources and learning showing the importance of building diverse relationships at work, including external development programmes for Māori and Pacific peoples, and continue to embed Te Pou o te Tangata, the way we do things at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake (Whanaungatanga, Manaakitanga and Mahi tika). Te āheinga ā-ahurea Cultural competence We will continue to connect people to a variety of learning options on cultural competency, and support both participation in learning and follow up actions they could take as individual or teams to ensure inclusive practices. In this context, this covers broad cultural competency across the many diverse groups and individuals at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake, it will also link with Te Awatea – developing our Te Tiriti o Waitangi and Māori capability. We will continue to review and develop our cultural competency learning. Ngā tūhononga e kōkiritia ana e ngā kaimahi Employee-led networks Our employee-led networks, which we call people networks, foster many opportunities for our people to grow connections, create a sense of belonging and build their capabilities, as well as contribute to critical organisational decision-making. We will continue to support our networks and network leads to create action plans that support the purpose of the network within Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake and help leaders to see the value of employee attendance at network events. We will explore further opportunities for networks to support sector development opportunities for their members and continue to explore opportunities for networks to join up and co-host intersectional events. Hautūtanga Ngākau Tuwhera Inclusive leadership We will continue to add resources to our leadership learning library. We will support leaders to understand what inclusive leadership best practice is and areas they could improve on such as career development conversations and recruitment processes.