1 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] High-Wealth Individuals Research Project Entity Questionnaire Guide February 2022 Project purpose 1. The high-wealth individuals research project is a statistical research project that seeks to estimate the effective tax rates of high-wealth New Zealanders in relation to their economic income. 1 The project will improve the evidence base regarding how the tax system is currently operating and will inform future tax policy. 2. No-one’s tax liability will be reassessed as part of this project; information provided for the project will not be used for tax compliance or assessment purposes. A final report on the project’s findings will be made public in 2023. This will not identify any individual or entity. This questionnaire 3. You are receiving this questionnaire as you are in the project population. You are required to provide the information in this request as either: • Individual A: this is the person who was previously issued with the notice under section 17GB of the Tax Administration Act 1994 seeking details about their family; or • The domestic partner of individual A: this is the person identified as the partner of individual A in response to the prior section 17GB notice. 4. As discussed below, partners may provide either a separate or joint response to this questionnaire. 5. This questionnaire asks about the entities (including partnerships and trusts) in which family members hold a substantial interest. We need this information because our calculations of effective tax rates are based on estimates of your family income. The measures of income we are calculating will include the economic income your family earns from ownership of or interests in entities. Economic income is a broader concept than taxable income and includes non-taxable gains such as capital gains. 6. This information is sought under section 17GB of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Section 17GB allows the Commissioner of Inland Revenue to collect information she considers relevant to a purpose relating to the development of policy for the improvement or reform of the tax system. Each person who has received a notice is legally required to provide this 1 An effective tax rate is calculated as the amount of tax a person pays divided by a measure of income. 2 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] information. You may request a tax agent or other representative complete the form on your behalf although you remain ultimately responsible. 7. You are required to provide this information by 5pm on 4 April 2022. 8. You must use reasonable endeavours to provide the requested information. It is acceptable to use reasonable estimates where you are unsure of certain information (such as ownership percentages). S tate “unknown” where you cannot obtain the requested information or leave blank questions that are not applicable. How to complete this questionnaire 9. We ask you to tell us about the entities you are connected to by completing four entity spreadsheets (referred to as Disclosure Statements). This guide tells you how to complete those Disclosure Statements, respectively referred to as: a. The Company Disclosure Statement; b. The Trust Disclosure Statement; c. The Partnership Disclosure Statement; d. The Other Entity Disclosure Statement. 10. You are also required to complete an Index Sheet. This sheet asks you to identify who the form is being completed for (individual A, domestic partner, or joint response). It also asks you to list all the entities being disclosed in the Disclosure Statements and their unique identifier. We may use the unique identifier in future communication with you to protect the security of your information. 11. Instructions for completing the Disclosure Statements (including the unique identifier) and the Index Sheet are described under Detailed Instructions. 12. Key terms are explained in the glossary and are bolded from here where appropriate. The defined terms apply for the Disclosure Statements as well. Scope of entities covered 13. Entities is defined broadly in the questionnaire and includes companies, partnerships and other forms of joint business ownership structures, and trusts. 14. You are only required to disclose entities that meet the scope criteria. The scope criteria for entities other than trusts requires that an asset or income threshold be met and requires a minimum ownership threshold to be met. Trusts are only to be disclosed where they meet an asset threshold. 15. The cumulative value of your interests in entities that fall below the scope criteria will form part of the information required later in the year, but you are not required to disclose them individually here. 16. Where a company is fully consolidated with another for both tax and accounting purposes, you only need to disclose the tax nominated company, the company which reports the 3 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] consolidated results (if different), and companies that filed a Controlled Foreign Company (CFC) disclosure for the relevant period. 17. You are not required to disclose not-for profit entities ( such as charitable trusts or foundations), widely held or listed investment trusts, or unit trusts. You are not required to disclose foreign companies, CFC and FIF interests, but you must report which disclosed companies filed CFC disclosures (if any). 2 18. You are required to disclose all entities that meet the scope criteria as at the reporting date in any of the relevant years. Where required, ownership of the entity is then reported for each relevant year. Where an entity met the scope criteria at a point in the reporting period, but you were not an owner on the reporting date for a relevant year, (i.e., it has been liquidated, was amalgamated or you sold your entire interest), then report 0% as your ownership percentage for years you were not an owner on the reporting date. 19. Each entity should only be disclosed once for each applicable person. How this questionnaire applies to Individual A and their domestic partner 20. This questionnaire asks for information on entities to which your family is connected. Family members’ holdings are sought as the research will use information on the tax paid and income of the family to construct measures of effective tax rates. Using family income is consistent with other similar research that seeks to understand the distribution of wealth or income, such as research based on the Household Economic Survey that is conducted by Stats NZ. Information to be completed by individual A 21. If you are individual A, you are required to complete the Disclosure Statements for yourself and any dependent children. With the exception of the Trust Disclosure Statement, you only need to report interests of dependent children who are qualifying dependent children. These children should have been disclosed by name in response to the prior section 17GB notice. 22. For the Trust Disclosure Statement, you are required to tell us what relationships all dependent children have with disclosed trusts. 23. Where a trust has been disclosed in your Trust Disclosure Statement (disclosed trust), you will need to disclose its ownership of entities meeting the scope criteria in the Company, Partnership and Other Entity Disclosure Statements. 24. The D isclosure Statements need to separately identify individual A’s interest and that of each of : a. the qualifying dependent children (in the case of the Trust Disclosure Statement the dependent children); b. the domestic partner, if completing a joint Disclosure Statement; c. a disclosed trust where it has an interest that must be disclosed. 2 You may still be required to report an interest in a New Zealand entity or a trust relationship which you own or have through a foreign entity if the New Zealand entity or trust meets the scope criteria to be disclosed as an indirect interest. 4 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 25. You do this by choosing the relevant person from the drop-down menu in Section AA for the Company, Partnership and Other Entity Disclosure Statement, and adding a new column for each person in respect of each entity. This person is referred to as the applicable person. 26. When completing the Trust Disclosure Statement, a trust should be disclosed once (that is, in a single column) for the family, even if more than one family member has a relationship with the trust. Each family member’s interest is then disclosed in Section B by selecting from the drop-down menu. The family members whose relationship is reported in the Trust Disclosure Statement: a. will include the domestic partner, where partners are completing a joint Disclosure Statement; b. not include the domestic partner, where partners are completing separate Disclosure Statements. Domestic partner 27. If you are the domestic partner of individual A, you only need to provide information for yourself (not your dependent children). You may complete your own Disclosure Statements separate to individual A, or you may provide your information jointly in the same Disclosure Statement as individual A. Where you provide your information in a joint Disclosure Statement, you will still need to ensure your interest is identified separately. You will do this by selecting domestic partner from the drop-down menu in Section AA of the Company, Partnership and Other Entity Disclosure Statements. For the Trust Disclosure Statement, your interests are identified in Section B. 28. Where a trust has been disclosed in the Trust Disclosure Statement you are completing (disclosed trust), you will need to disclose its ownership of entities meeting the scope criteria in the Company, Partnership and Other Entity Disclosure Statements. Jointly held interests 29. For interests held jointly by both individual A and their domestic partner, you should each separately disclose your share of the total interest. 30. Where the proportionate interest is not known at the time (e.g., property held in joint tenancy), individual A and the domestic partner should each disclose a 50% interest in the jointly held property. For example, if you jointly hold 60% of the shares in a company, you will each record 30% as your ownership in the company (as well as any separate individually owned interest). 31. Where you had a joint interest with a previous domestic partner that you have separated from, disclose your best estimate of your share of the relationship property. 32. You do not need to identify potential relationship property shares between partners (which might apply in future if the relationship ends). Simply report the property you legally hold in the shares you hold it (if held jointly). 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Indirect Interests 33. You are required to disclose both direct and indirect interests held in entities. 3 An indirect interest is calculated by taking your ownership percentage of entities higher up the ownership chain, multiplied to work out your ownership percentage of the entities further down the chain. For example, if you own 50% of the shares of company A, which owns 50% of the shares of company B, your indirect interest in company B is 25%. How to submit 34. Submit the completed Disclosure Statements through the secure online platform by completing the file upload instructions on page 11. 35. 36. For e ase of subsequent information collections, please retain a copy of the completed Disclosure Statements. Next steps 37. Further information in relation to the financial affairs of these entities may be sought in June 2022, along with other financial information that is necessary to calculate the measures of income the project will use. This information will also be sought under section 17GB. 38. 39. Enquiries regarding the project more generally, or for assistance to upload the file, should be directed to etrproject@ird.govt.nz. 40. Further information on the project can be found at: High-wealth individuals research project (ird.govt.nz) 3 You are not required to disclose indirect interests in a partnership. 4 Don’t include the full stop at the end of the sentence. s18(c)(i) s18(c)(i) 6 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Detailed instructions Index Sheet 41. In the Index Sheet, select who the Disclosure Statements are being completed for (individual A, domestic partner or joint response). 5 You will also need to provide the name, IRD number and date of birth for the person(s) the Disclosure Statements are being completed for. 42. When you complete the Disclosure Statements (either manually or electronically), please allocate a unique identifier to each separate entity, in the following way: a. use C, if it is a company, P, if it is a partnership, T if it is a trust, and O for other; b. then number from 1 onwards for each entity added. 6 43. The same identifier should be used for all instances of the same entity where the interests of different applicable people are recorded. 44. Prior to submitting the Disclosure Statements, list each entity and its unique identifier in the Index Sheet, grouping by entity type ( select company, partnership, trust, other). Interests in New Zealand companies 45. The following applies for the Company Disclosure Statement. 46. The required information must be reported separately for the interest of each applicable person in each company. For dependent children, only separately disclose interests held by qualifying dependent children. Add a column for each new company, and applicable person per company, by clicking the “add column” button 7 and then selecting the relevant person from the drop-down menu in Section AA. If you are completing the Disclosure Statements manually, please fill-in this information. 47. Section A of the Company Disclosure Statement must be completed for all companies that must be disclosed. Section B and C ask you to list the applicable person’s direct and indirect interest in the company respectively. Companies that must be disclosed 48. A company must be disclosed in the Company Disclosure Statement if it is a New Zealand company, in which an applicable person was an owner (either directly or indirectly) during the reporting period, and the company meets the scope criteria in any relevant year (subject to the consolidation exception below). 49. Consolidation exception: for New Zealand companies that are members of a tax and financial reporting consolidated group for all relevant years, only the following members of the group need to be separately disclosed in the C ompany Disclosure Statement: 5 Click on the cell and the drop-down menu will appear. 6 The first company listed in the Disclosure Statement will be C1, the first trust T1. 7 You may need to click twice to add the column in the Statements or if an add column (or trust) button does not work use your insert column function. 7 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] a. the nominated company for the consolidated group ( as defined by the Income Tax Act 2007); b. the company responsible for reporting consolidated financial information (if different); c. any company which has filed a CFC disclosure for the reporting period. 50. If a New Zealand company that is required to be disclosed is part of a consolidated group for financial accounting purposes, i ndicate in Section A that this company is part of a consolidated group for financial accounting purposes. Note that all New Zealand companies meeting the scope criteria that are part of a financial accounting consolidated group but not part of a tax consolidated group must be separately disclosed and provide the information in the “consolidated groups” part of the Disclosure Statement (as well as the other relevant parts). 51. For New Zealand companies where the applicable person was an owner for only some of the relevant years, choose from the drop-down menu the reason ownership ceased ( select NA if not applicable). If shares were sold, transferred or gifted, select “sold”. Direct and indirect interests 52. Complete Section B when the applicable person held a direct interest in a New Zealand company disclosed in Section A in any relevant year (including where both a direct and indirect interest were held). Only provide the direct interest in Section B. 53. Complete Section C when the applicable person held an indirect interest in a New Zealand company disclosed in Section A in any relevant year (including where both a direct and indirect interest were held). Only provide the indirect interest in Section C. 54. These sections ask for each applicable person’s ownership interest in the company (as a percentage of all ownership interests in the company), calculated as at the reporting date f or each relevant year. 55. When completing Section C, only name the entity(ies) which had the direct shareholding in the company, and in which the applicable person also had a direct or indirect interest. For example, where the applicable person has a chain of companies between themselves and the reported company, you only need to name the company sitting directly above the reported company, not every company in the chain. Where the applicable person has an interest in more than one entity that sits directly above the reported company, list these in Section C, separating each one by using a “;”. 56. Where a disclosed trust is the applicable person, and companies owned by the trust are required to be disclosed: a. report the interest as a direct interest of the trust if owned directly by the trust; b. report the interest as an indirect interest of the trust when it is owned through another entity. 57. Where the applicable person owns an interest in a partnership and the partnership owns shares in a New Zealand company that meets the scope criteria, the interest in the New Zealand company is disclosed as an indirect interest. The indirect ownership percentage is calculated by attributing the applicable person’s partnership share of the partnership’s 8 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] interests in the company (i.e., if the applicable person has a 50% interest in a partnership that owns 50% of the shares of a New Zealand company, the indirect interest in the New Zealand company is 25%). Foreign companies 58. Indicate in Section D whether the disclosed company filed any CFC disclosures during the reporting period. Other CFC interests are not required to be disclosed at this stage. We will check your tax returns for CFC disclosures over the reporting period. You are not required to disclose FIF interests now, but we may ask for the value of such investments at a later stage. Trusts 59. The following applies for the Trust Disclosure Statement. 60. A trust must be disclosed in the Trust Disclosure Statement if it meets the scope criteria in any relevant year, and if any of the following were a beneficiary, settlor or appointer in any relevant year: a. any family member (subject to paragraph 65); b. a company (including a foreign company), where the sum of the family members’ direct and indirect ownership interests exceeded 50% in any relevant year; c. another disclosed trust. 61. The information in Section A must be provided for all trusts required to be disclosed ( add a trust by clicking “add trust”). Section B (direct interests) must be completed when a family member being reported on in the Trust Disclosure Statement had a relevant relationship. 8 Section C (indirect interests) must be completed when a company described in paragraph 60b, or a disclosed trust (connected entity in the Trust Disclosure Statement) is a beneficiary, settlor or appointer of a trust that meets the scope criteria. 62. Where more than one member of the family has a relationship with the trust, disclose the trust only once but indicate each member of the family who had a relevant interest in Section B. This is done by selecting the appropriate family member from the drop-down menu next to each relationship question. 63. If you are completing the Disclosure Statements manually, write in the family member or members with the relevant relationships with the trusts. These can be: a. Individual A; b. Domestic partner; c. Dependent child or children; d. A combination of the above (list them); e. For Section C, the connected entities. 64. You must include the interests of all dependent children in the Trust Disclosure Statement (not just qualifying dependent children). 8 While a trustee relationship in itself is not sufficient for the trust to be disclosable, if the trust must be disclosed per paragraph 60 then it must be reported if an adult family member were a trustee. 9 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 65. If the domestic partner chooses to report in a separate Trust Disclosure Statement, they only need to tell us about their relationship with the trusts and are not required to answer questions relating to other family members. In this case the domestic partner’s interest is not included in individual A’s Trust Disclosure Statement. 66. You are not required to disclose interests in a charitable trust, widely held or listed investment trusts, or unit trusts. 67. Section D asks you to indicate if the substantive assets (80% or more of the value of gross assets) of the disclosed trust are residential property, and if yes, the address of that property. Providing this information now means that we may not then require further information on the trust in our next information collection. 68. Entities owned by a disclosed trust, are required to be disclosed as per the requirements in the Company, Partnership or Other Entity Disclosure Statement. Partnership and joint business ownership interests 69. The following applies for the Partnership Disclosure Statement. 70. The required information must be reported separately for the interest of each applicable person in each partnership. For dependent children, only separately disclose interests held by qualifying dependent children. Add a column for each new partnership, and applicable person per partnership, by clicking the “add column” button and then selecting the relevant person from the drop-down menu in Section AA. If you are completing the Statements manually, please fill-in this information. 71. A partnership must be disclosed in the Partnership Disclosure Statement if an applicable person was an owner in any relevant year, and the partnership meets the scope criteria in any relevant year. 72. You are only required to disclose direct interests in partnerships. Where a disclosed trust owns the interest, report this as a direct interest held by the trust. 73. Provide all the information required in the Partnership Disclosure Statement for all disclosed partnerships. Report the direct ownership percentage of the applicable person, as at the reporting date for each relevant year (or 0% for any years they were not an owner). Other entities 74. If an applicable person was an owner of other entities that meet the scope criteria in any relevant year and they have not been captured in the other Disclosure Statements, please provide details of these entities by completing the Other Entity Disclosure Statement. You are not required to disclose foreign companies. 75. The required information must be reported separately for the interest of each applicable person in each entity. For dependent children, only separately disclose interests held by qualifying dependent children. Add a column for each new entity, and applicable person per entity, by clicking the “add column” button and then selecting the relevant person from the 10 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] drop-down menu in Section AA. If you are completing the Disclosure Statements manually, please fill-in this information. 76. For entity type, please give a description of the entity. 77. Where the applicable person owns an interest in a partnership and the partnership owns another entity that meets the scope criteria, the interest in the entity is an indirect interest. 78. Where a disclosed trust is the applicable person, and an entity owned by the trust is required to be disclosed: a. report the interest as a direct interest of the trust if owned directly by the trust; b. report the interest as an indirect interest of the trust when it is owned through another entity. Investments out of scope 79. You do not need to disclose other investments that are out-of -scope of this questionnaire. However, you may be asked about such investments later. 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] File upload instructions for Disclosure Statements 1) 2) If you are submitting the Disclosure Statements yourself, you will be asked to enter your personal IR D number, so we can authenticate your submission. (no initial ‘0’, numeric characters only, no spaces or special characters (hyphens)) • If you are a tax agent and completing the submission for your client, please enter your client’s personal IRD number. • If partners are providing a joint response in a single form, please provide individual A’s personal IRD number. 3) Once you have logged in, you will progress to a page where you can upload your submission. 4) You can only upload the file one time, so please make sure the final version is the one you want to submit. s18(c)(i) s18(c)(i) 12 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Glossary Applicable person: the person or disclosed trust whose interest is being recorded (being either: individual A, individual A’s domestic partner, a qualifying dependent child (or in the case of the Trust Disclosure Statement any dependent child) or a disclosed trust) Appointer: means a person who (alone or with others) may do any of the following: • Participate in appointing or removing one or more trustees or beneficiaries • Provide their required consent to appoint or remove one or more trustees or beneficiaries • Control or veto the decisions of one or more trustees • Participate in a power to amend the terms of the trust • Act as the nominated governor, protector or guardian of a trust. BIC code: business industry classification code. Where this is required, you may provide the first three characters and should choose the code most appropriate to the main business of the entity or consolidated group as relevant. 9 CFC: “controlled foreign company” as defined by the Income Tax Act 2007. Company: has the same meaning as in the Companies Act 1993 and any overseas equivalent and includes a Look Through Company (LTC). Connected entity: means an entity described in paragraph 60(b) or (c). Dependent child(ren): a child/children of individual A and/or their domestic partner from a biological, adoptive or fostering relationship who, as at 1 November 2021, was: • Aged 17 or under; and • Not in full time paid employment (regularly working 30 hours or more per week); and • Not married, in a civil union or in a de facto relationship themselves; and • Individual A regards as being part of their household due to them, for example: often living at a shared address, or sharing household activities, or being viewed as individual A’s dependent child by others. De facto relationship: where two people: a) Currently share a mutual concern for each other and are emotionally committed for the foreseeable future, and b) Are not married or in a civil union, and c) Have a degree of economic, social and emotional interdependence through: o often living at a shared address, or o sharing of household responsibilities, bills, and/or financial accounts; or o others viewing them as a couple. Direct interest (or own directly or similar): any interest in an entity owned directly in the name of an applicable person, including through an entity with no substance, power or control over the interest and that holds the interest on the applicable person’s behalf, such as a nominee or bare trustee. A direct interest: a) Does not include an interest a person owns in the capacity of trustee (except as provided in b) ; 9 See Home » Business Industry Classification Code (businessdescription.co.nz) 13 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] b) Where the applicable person is a disclosed trust, it means an interest owned directly by a trustee in their capacity as trustee. Disclosed trust: a trust disclosed in the Trust Disclosure Statement. Discretionary trust: a trust where the trustee is given discretion as to when and what funds or property are given to the beneficiaries. Domestic partner: A person who is related to individual A through marriage or civil union or a de facto relationship (and is not separated from individual A). Entity: any body, organisation, or structure of any kind inside or outside of New Zealand, incorporated or unincorporated, that holds assets or generates income or financial gains including but not limited to a company, trust, partnership or joint venture. Entities do not include not-for profit entities, such as charitable trusts and foundations, widely held or listed investment trusts, or unit trusts. Family: individual A and, if any, their domestic partner and dependent children. FIF: “foreign investment fund” as defined by the Income Tax Act 2007. Foreign company: an incorporated entity that is not resident for tax purposes in New Zealand. Income year: the year ending on 31 March or the balance date of the entity in question (if this differs). Indirect interest (or own indirectly or similar): any interest owned through one or more entities (including a foreign entity). Individual A: the person identified in the initial project population. This person is identifiable due to having been sent a section 17GB notice previously asking for information about their family. New Zealand company: a company that is treated as resident in New Zealand for tax purposes (it is not treated as a Controlled Foreign Company or a Foreign Investment Fund). Owned (and derivatives) means: c) In relation to a company, the holding of voting or non-voting shares d) In relation to a partnership, the right to the income or the assets of the partnership (but does not include the right to repayment of a loan) e) In relation to a trust, references to the trust owning (or similar) mean the trustees of a trust owning an asset in their capacity as trustee. Partnership: includes all forms of joint business. Person: means any individual or entity. Qualifying dependent child: a dependent child who is reasonably believed to currently have net assets in their own name in excess of $1,000,000 or in the 2021 income year had taxable income in excess of $1,000,000. Relevant year: any of the income years from 2016-2021. Reporting date: 31 March or the balance date of the entity in question (if this differs). Reporting period: the period covering the income years from 2016 -2021. 14 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Scope criteria: an entity meets the scope criteria if, as at the reporting date in any relevant year: 1. For a company, or other entity except a partnership or trust, it either had total gross assets that exceeded $1,000,000 or taxable income that exceeded $1,000,000, or both, in any relevant year; and it is believed that the total direct and indirect ownership in terests of the family and disclosed trusts exceeded 10% of the total ownership interests in the entity in any relevant year. 2. For a trust, it had total gross assets that exceeded $1,000,000 in any relevant year. 3. For a partnership, it had total gross assets that exceeded $1,000,000 or taxable income that exceeded $1,000,000, or both, in any relevant year; and it is believed that the total direct ownership interests of the family and disclosed trusts exceeded 10% of the total ownership interests in the partnership in any relevant year. Where partners are completing the Disclosure Statements separately, in determining if the scope criteria are met, they must use the aggregate interests of all family members when known, but where other family members’ interests are not known it is acceptable to base the test on known interests only. Settlor: means a person who has transferred goods or services of value to trustees for the benefit of the trust, directly or indirectly and including by way of a loan made for less than market value. Substantive assets: in relation to trust means 80% or more of the value of gross assets. TIN: tax identification number. Trust: can mean trustee acting in their capacity as trustee.