Please direct all comments and correspondence to FATCA@ird.govt.nz Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) Registration and reporting user guide April 2018 2FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide This FATCA user guide provides instructions about how to register with, and report to Inland Revenue for FATCA purposes and should be read in conjunction with the documents listed below. The following documents are available on our website at www.ird.govt.nz (Search keyword: FATCA, and select Important FATCA documents): • Inland Revenue FATCA ‘Due Diligence Guidance Notes’ • Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA) between New Zealand and the United States of America • The Intergovernmental FATCA XML Schema and XML User Guide v2.0 available on the U.S IRS website - https://www.irs.gov/businesses/corporations/fatca-xml-schemas-and-business-rules-for-form-8966 3FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide Contents 2 Introduction 5 2.1 Background 5 2.2 Purpose 5 2.3 Inland Revenue’s Support Role 5 2.4 Due Diligence 5 2.4.1 Nil returns 5 2.4.2 Reporting Options 6 3 Registration 7 3.1 Register with Inland Revenue 7 3.1.1 With an IRD Number 7 3.1.2 Without an IRD Number 7 3.2 Register for the FATCA 7 3.2.1 Registration 7 4 Online Services – Third Party Access 10 4.1 Grant third party access 10 Access requests received via myIR 11 4.2 Gain third party Access 12 5 Online Form 16 5.1 Submit a disclsoure 16 5.2 Draft disclosures 20 5.3 Data validations and amendments (online form) 21 6 Excel File upload 23 6.1 Excel file 24 6.2 Submit via Excel file 26 6.3 Data validations and amendments (Excel) 27 7 XML File upload 29 7.1 Submit disclosure using XML 30 7.2 Data validation and amendments 30 8 Cancel FATCA registration 31 9 Glossary 32 4FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 1. 1 Table of Figures Figures 1, 11, 14. myIR homepage Figure 2. Registration screen one – select profile Figure 3. Registration screen two – select account Figure 4. Registration screen three – registration questions Figure 5. I want to section in FATCA homepage Figure 6. New intermediary link questions – token process Figure 7. Validation question – token process Figure 8. Confirmation – token process Figure 9. myIR – third party access request received from third party Figure 10. Confirmation – third party access request received from third party Figure 12. Third party redeem token – enter token screen Figure 13. Third party redeem token – validation screen Figure 15. Logon settings screen in myIR Figure 16. Request access to another party screen in myIR Figure 17. Request access to another party – select access screen Figure 18. Review request to another party screen Figures 19, 26, 32, 38, 42 & 44. FATCA homepage in myIR Figure 20. Online form – Contact information screen Figure 21. Online form – account information screen Figure 22. Online form – primary account holder information (individual) Figure 23. Online form – primary account holder information (organisation) Figure 24. Online form – add payments screen Figure 25. Online form – report another account option Figure 27. Draft submission menu Figure 28. FATCA homepage in myIR Figure 29. Correct via online form – search for account number Figure 30. Correct via online form – account number display Figure 31. Correct via online form – Account overview Figure 33. Excel template – tab 1 – General Information Figure 34. Excel template – tab 2 – account information Figure 35. Excel template – tab 3 – controlling persons information Figure 36. Report by FATCA Excel file options Figure 37. Import and export options for Excel file Figure 39. – Figure 41. See Figures 28 – 31 Figure 43. Upload XML file screen Figure 45. Reason for cancelling account screen Figure 46. Confirmation of account cancellation in myIR 5FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 2 Introduction 2.1 Background The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) was enacted by the United States (US) in 2010, and requires overseas financial institutions (for instance New Zealand (NZ) banks or managed funds), unless exempt, to provide details about the accounts and investments they hold for U.S citizens, tax residents and certain entities controlled by such US person, to the U.S Internal Revenue Service (IRS). On 12 June 2014, the New Zealand Government signed an Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA) with the U.S Government to assist New Zealand financial institutions (NZFIs) to comply with FATCA. On 30 June 2014, the legislation enabling NZFIs to meet their FATCA obligations became law. Financial institutions and (where permitted) third-party service providers began collecting and/or reporting FATCA information from 1 July 2014. Inland Revenue acts as an intermediary between NZFI’s and IRS, and provide services to collect and securely store FATCA-related information from NZFI’s, sponsoring entities and third party service providers and then transmit this information in a timely manner to the IRS. Annual FATCA reporting is between 1 April and 30 June for NZFI's submitting information to Inland Revenue, for the previous reporting period ending 31 March. 30 September is the final date for Inland Revenue to exchange FATCA information with the United States. 2.2 Purpose The purpose of this user guide is to provide information and guidance to NZ reporting entities. You will learn how to: • Register for FATCA • Prepare and submit you FATCA disclosures • Get and grant access to third party service provider/intermediaries • View history of your disclosures; and • Cancel FATCA registration 2.3 Inland Revenue’s Support Role If you require assistance you can phone Inland Revenue on 0800 377 774, between 8.00am – 4.30pm Monday to Friday. From a mobile or overseas, the phone number is +64 4 978 0779. Alternatively you can email us at fatca@ird.govt.nz 2.4 Due Diligence We expect all FATCA-reporting entities to read and understand the FATCA Due Diligence requirements available on our website www.ird.govt.nz (keyword: FATCA), before proceeding with the rest of the document. 2.4.1 Nil returns Nil reports are not required to be received by Inland Revenue; however a Nil Report can be filed in myIR. We expect NZFI’s to fulfil their due diligence obligations and retain these records for the statutory seven year period so that you can demonstrate your compliance, if required. Nil reports are not required to be received by Inland Revenue; however a Nil Report can be filed in myIR. We expect NZFI’s to fulfil their FATCA due diligence obligations and retain these records for the statutory seven year period to can demonstrate compliance. 6FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 2.4.2 Reporting Options Inland Revenue is providing three options for financial institutions to send their FATCA disclosures. These are: Filing OptionDescription Online Form• Consists of online screens to complete in your myIR account. • Screens consist of; – Financial Institution contact information – Account balance details – Account holder information (individual or organisation); and – Payment information. • Useful for Financial Institutions that have low volume disclosures. Excel File• An Excel file that is uploaded via myIR. • Option is suitable for Financial Institutions that have medium volume disclosures. • Maximum number of reportable accounts per Excel file is 1,000 • The Excel file consists of 3 tabs; – General information – Account information; and – Controlling Persons information. • Note: The Excel file is subject to change annually and will reflect relevant schema updates. The up to date Excel file is only available via myIR and must be used each time you submit FATCA via the Excel file option, otherwise there may be errors. XML File• An XML file that is uploaded via myIR. • This option is suitable for Financial Institutions with a high volume of accounts to report and specific in-house capability to deal with the technical nature of XML files. • Validations run in myIR will not allow XML files to be uploaded with errors. Errors must be corrected by the submitter. • Maximum XML file size 200mb. Each reporting option is discussed further in this user guide. 7FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 3 Registration 3.1 Register with the IRS Before a financial institution can register for FATCA with Inland Revenue, they will need to register with IRS to get a Global Intermediary Identification Number (GIIN). If you have not registered with the United States Internal Revenue Service (IRS), you should do this immediately through: https://www.irs.gov/businesses/corporations/foreign-account-tax-compliance-act-fatca For more information on IRS registration refer to Part V – Registering with the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) in the Registration Guidance Notes available on our website Once you have registered and been approved by the IRS, you will be able to proceed with the FATCA registration process. 3.2 Register for FATCA with Inland Revenue 3.2.1 With an IRD Number If you have an IRD number, you will be able continue registration for FATCA through MyIR. 3.2.2 Without an IRD Number Customers without an IRD number will need to contact Inland Revenue via email (FATCA@ird.govt.nz) to continue the registration process. To register for the FATCA you will first need to determine if registration is required. This requires self-assessment. More information can be found on: http://www.ird.govt.nz/international/nzwithos/fatca/register/ Already registered for FATCA? Inland Revenue is migrating the existing FATCA registrations and disclosures into our new system. If you are already registered for FATCA you will be able to see your FATCA account when you access myIR. 3.2.3 Registration If you have determined that you are required to register for FATCA and have reporting obligations, you can register through myIR. What you need: • An active myIR account; and • The date you want the FATCA Account to commence from. To register for FATCA via myIR: 1. Log on to your myIR account. Figure 1. 8FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 2. Click Apply for a new account (tax type). 3. Select the Financial Institution profile. Figure 2. 4. Select the FATCA account type from the list, and then click Next. Figure 3. 9FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 5. Answer the registration questions to confirm you are a Reporting Financial Institution. Figure 4. 6. If the registration requirements have been satisfied, confirm the FATCA Account start date. a. If they have not been met, you may not be required to register. Repeat the self-assessment outlined above, or contact Inland Revenue to work through the details of your registration. b. If they have been met, select a date and click Next. 7. If you need to make changes, click Previous to go back. You will also have the option to save the registration at any point and continue at a later time. 8. If no changes are required, review the start date and click Submit. After you have submitted your registration, we will review your registration and notify you by email whether your registration has been successful. If your registration has been declined, the notification email will outline the reasons why. 10FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 4 Online Services – Third Party Access 4.1 Grant third party access If you are a Financial Institution, you can delegate FATCA reporting obligations to a third party intermediary, trustee, sponsor or service provider to do so on your behalf using myIR. Note: Third party intermediaries or service providers are unable to register on behalf of NZFI's. This process only provides access for reporting purposes. However, tax agents are able to register and report on behalf of a client that they are linked to. To grant access to a third party intermediary using the token method, this can be done through Manage intermediaries under your FATCA account in myIR. Figure 5. Here you will be able to determine the account permissions (file, full account access, make payments or view) that the third party will have and send them a token. Before granting access, you will need: • An active myIR account • The email address of the person (from the third party intermediary) you’re granting access to; and • Your financial institution’s IRD number To grant access to the third party intermediary: 1. Go to Manage intermediaries. Read ‘What to expect’ and click Next. 2. Click Add a record. 3. Complete the ‘New intermediary link’ form with the intermediary’s details and the account permissions you want them to hold then click Add. Figure 6. . 11FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 4. Select the relevant IRD number from the drop down box then click Next. Note: The third party will need to know this IRD number to verify their token. Figure 7. 5. Confirm the details and click Submit. This will send an email with a token to the third party intermediary to redeem in their myIR. Once they have access, you will be able update or cancel their access under your logon settings. Figure 8. Access requests received via myIR If a third party has requested third party intermediary access to your FATCA account through their myIR, you will receive an email with a link inside it to approve or decline the request. Figure 9. 12FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide Clicking the link will redirect you to myIR, so you can see the details of their request e.g. type of permission requested. If you weren’t expecting this request you should decline it. Otherwise, select Ye s and click Submit to approve third party access. Note: If you receive a request for multiple accounts, you will not be able to decline one and accept others. Instead you need to decline or accept all. Figure 10. 4.2 Gain third party Access If you are a third party intermediary completing FATCA reporting obligations on behalf of a client, you need to approach the client to get a ‘token’ (one token for each client). Alternatively you can make a request access to your client’s FATCA account, online via your myIR account. IMPORTANT: Tokens will expire after 24 hours. If the token expires, your client will have to issue you a new token. Access via token method: Once your client has sent the token, you will receive an email with the token. To redeem the token you will need: • A myIR account • The token sent from client; and • Your client's IRD number. To gain access: 1. Login to your myIR and click Redeem Token. Figure 11. 13FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 2. Enter to the token code and click Next. Figure 12. 3. Enter your client's IRD number to validate information and click Submit. Figure 13. Request access via myIR method: To request access via myIR, you will need: 1. A myIR account; and 2. Your client's IRD number To request access in your myIR: 1. In your myIR homepage, click Settings. Figure 14. 14FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 2. In the Settings screen, click Get access to another party. Figure 15. 3. Read What to expect, and click Next. 4. Complete the required fields and click Next. Figure 16. 5. In the Access Role section, select the access role you would like to have from the drop down box (user, restricted user or administrator). 6. Next select whether you are granting access to an individual or non-individual from the next drop down box. 15FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 7. Select the FATCA account that you want access and the appropriate permissions e.g. file, and click Next. Figure 17. 8. Review the details and click Submit. This will send your request to your client. When the client confirms the request follow the ‘Gain access by token method’ steps above. Figure 18. 16FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 5 Reporting via Online Form As part of your FATCA obligations, you are required to file disclosures with Inland Revenue of all reportable accounts. The first option available to financial institutions is the online form. The online form will be suitable for financial institutions that have a small number of accounts to report. 5.1 Submit a disclosure Figure 19. REMINDER: Disclosures are required to be submitted to Inland Revenue between 1 April and 30 June for the previous tax year ending 31 March. For more information on reporting obligations refer to: http://www.ird.govt.nz/international/exchange/FATCA/important-aeoi-FATCA-documents/ 1. Under your FATCA account in myIR, click Report by FATCA online form. When submitting via online form, any field that has a red flag throughout the online form is required. 17FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 2. Add the contact details of the person submitting the FATCA disclosure on behalf of the financial institution then click Next. Please provide: Contact person, phone number and email address, this is a free text field. These details assist us to contact the right person should there be any problems with the disclosure. Note: In the reporting period dropdown box you can submit disclosures for previous reporting periods, you can’t submit disclosures for future periods. Figure 20. 3. Next, enter the account details (account number, balance and currency) as at 31 March for the relevant reporting year. Figure 21. 18FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 4. Enter the account holder details. The primary account holder dropdown box will have two options for you to choose; Individual and Organisation. Figure 22. Figure 23. 19FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide Note: If you need to add controlling persons, select Passive NFFE with Substantial U.S Owners (controlling persons) from the Select account holder type dropdown box. Once you complete the required Organisation information, click Next to add the controlling persons. 5. To add controlling person, click the Add a substantial owner (controlling person) hyperlink. Figure 24. 6. Complete the controlling person information and click Next. Figure 25. 20FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 7. If you need to add more controlling persons for an account, click the Add a substantial owner (controlling person) hyperlink and repeat the process. Otherwise click Next, and continue on with payments. Figure 26. 8. Add any payments associated with the account (dividends, gross proceeds/redemptions, interest or other). If there are no payments associated with the account, check the ‘This account has no payments’ box. If there is more than one payments to report, click Add another payment and repeat the process until you have entered all of the payments associated with the account. Figure 27. 9. Once completed you will be directed to a review page to confirm the details of the disclosure. Once confirmed, tick the declaration and box and click Submit. 10. Once you have clicked submit, you will be given a submission confirmation. If you have multiple accounts to report, click Report another account and repeat the above process. Otherwise, click OK to finish. Figure 28. 21FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 5.2 Draft disclosures As noted above, if for any reason you are not ready to submit an account report, you will be able to save your progress by clicking Save Draft. Note: This option is only available for the Online Form. To view, edit and submit or delete the draft disclosures: 1. Logon to myIR account and navigate to your FATCA account. 2. Under Account Alerts, Click Draft submission Figure 29. 3. This is a summary of who is submitting the disclosure (referred to as a Submission) and its status. In the I Want To menu on the right, you have three options; View submission, Edit submission and Delete Submission. Figure 30. • View Submission: Click View read-only submission to view submission only. You will not be able to edit or submit using this option. • Edit submission: Click Edit submission to continue and submit the drafted disclosure. • Delete submission: Click Delete submission to delete the drafted disclosure. Note: The draft disclosure will be saved for up to 60 days. During this period you can return to it anytime. Draft disclosures will show under Account alerts in your FATCA account in your myIR account. 22FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 5.3 Data validations and amendments (online form) All disclosures will be subject to data validation in myIR. This means you will not be able to submit any files to Inland Revenue containing errors until these have been fixed. The full list of data validations is available through the following link. http://www.ird.govt.nz/international/nzwithos/fatca/documents/ If you have submitted an incorrect disclosure via online form or need to make amendments, you can correct it via: • Online form and XML To correct or delete via online form: 1. Navigate to your FATCA homepage in your myIR. 2. Click Review FATCA reported accounts. Figure 31. 3. Search for the account you want to correct using account number and click Search. Figure 32. 23FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 4. Click on the account number hyperlink. Figure 33. 5. This displays and Account overview. To correct the account click Edit Submission. To delete, click Delete Submission. Figure 34. 6. You will then go through the online form screens (as in section 5.1). Make the amendments in all of the screens required and submit. This will send the corrected disclosure account information to Inland Revenue to be processed. Note: Any amendments that need to be made to the submission using XML, must be done via Report by FATCA XML file upload. 5.4 International errors Reporting NZFIs will receive notification via myIR of errors in their disclosure that requires correction, as a result of the international exchange of their data. Specifically, account alerts within myIR will notify the Reporting NZFI that there are accounts in error. myIR users will see: 1. An Accounts in Error tab in the FATCA section of your myIR account that will list the details of each of the error(s); and 2. Different views for Online form and Excel file submissions. Accounts Error tab When the reportable account has been submitted via the online form or Excel file, the errors look like this in myIR Correct the error(s): • Directly in myIR via the online form; or • In your Excel file and upload the corrected file into myIR. Figure 35. 24FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 6 Excel File upload The Excel file reporting option is suitable for Financial Institutions with up to 1000 reportable accounts per file to be submitted. This option allows for Financial Institutions to submit more than one Excel file. Figure 36. REMINDER: Disclosures are required to be submitted to Inland Revenue by 30 June for the previous tax year ending 31 March. For more information on reporting obligations refer to: http://www.ird.govt.nz/international/exchange/FATCA/important-aeoi-FATCA-documents/ 25FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 6.1 Excel file The excel file is split into three tabs, consisting of: General information tab – in the Contact field, enter who is submitting the disclosure. Please provide a name, email address and phone number. In the Reporting period end date, enter the reporting period. Figure 37. 26FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide Account holders tab – add account details including: • Account number • Account balance as at 31 March • Payments associated with account i.e. dividends, interest, gross proceeds/redemptions and other income • Account holder details e.g. account holder name, date of birth and TIN in this tab Figure 38. Substantial Owners – add substantial owners (controlling persons) details including: • Account number • Individual or organisation • TIN • Name • Date of Birth. Note: When selecting bank account number from the dropdown box, click the drop down arrow and scroll up. Figure 39. IMPORTANT: The Excel file is subject to change. You must use the up to date version available for download via myIR. Note: The Excel file will allow up to and including three foreign TINs countries per account holder. If there are more than three TINs for an individual associated with an accountable report, then the NZFI is able to use the online form or XML. Make sure you save a copy of your Excel disclosure in your own system. 27FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 6.2 Submit via Excel file To submit a FATCA disclosure via Excel file, use the Report by FATCA Excel file option in your FATCA account in myIR. Report by Excel, gives you two options, Create new FATCA Excel upload and Change FATCA Excel file upload. Figure 40. Under Create new FATCA Excel upload you will be given two options; ‘Export’ and ‘Import’. Export: Click export to give you access to a blank Excel file Import: Click import, to upload and submit your completed FATCA disclosure to Inland Revenue. IMPORTANT: The Excel file is subject to change. You must use the up to date version available for download via myIR. Figure 41. TIP: To help keep track of your reportable account, use the Excel file as a record keeping tool. 28FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 6.3 Excel data validations and amendments All disclosures are subject to data validation in myIR. This means you will not be able to submit any Excel files to Inland Revenue containing errors until you have fixed them. The full list of data validations is available through the following link. http://www.ird.govt.nz/international/nzwithos/fatca/documents/ If you have submitted an incorrect disclosure via Excel file upload, or need to make amendments, you can make amendments via: • online form , Excel file or XML. IMPORTANT: the change FATCA Excel function can’t be used to delete records To correct or delete via Excel file: 1. Got to your FATCA homepage in your myIR. 2. Click Report by FATCA Excel File. Figure 42. 3. Click Change FATCA Excel file upload. Figure 43. 29FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 4. Select the reporting period from the Reporting Period dropdown box and click Next. Figure 44. 5 Select the MessageRefID and Doc type indicator for the disclosure you are wanting to correct and click Next. Figure 45. 30FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 6. To upload a new Excel file, select Ye s. If you want to correct specific accounts, select No. Once you have selected yes or no, click Next. Figure 46. 7. If you have chosen to upload a new Excel file, you will taken to the upload screen to Import a file. To import your new Excel file, click Import. Figure 47. 31FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 8. If you have to correct or amend specific accounts, click the Select account check box next to the accounts you want to correct and click Next. You will then be able to correct these in myIR. Figure 48. To correct or delete via online form: 1. Go to your FATCA homepage in your myIR 2. Click Review FATCA reported accounts. Figure 49. 3. Search for the account you want to correct using account number and click Search. Figure 50. 32FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 4. Click on the account number hyperlink Figure 51. 5. This displays the Account overview. To view click on the View submissions. To correct the account information, click Edit submission. To delete, click Delete submission. Figure 52. 6. You will then go through the online form screens (as in section 5.1). Make the amendments required and submit. This will send the corrected account information to Inland Revenue to be processed. Note: Any amendments made via Excel file or XML, are submitted via Report by FATCA Excel file or Report by FATCA XML file upload. 6.4 International errors Reporting NZF’s will receive notification via myIR of errors in their disclosure that requires correction, as a result of international exchange of their data. Specifically, account alerts within myIR will notify the Reporting NZFI that there are accounts in error. myIR users will see: 1. an Accounts in Error tab in the CRS section of your myIR account that will list the details of each of the error(s); and 2. different views for: a. online form and excel file errors; and b. XML file errors. 33FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 7 Reporting via XML File upload The XML reporting option is for NZFI’s that have a high volume of reportable accounts and have the in-house capability to handle the technical nature of an XML file. You are unable able to save a draft XML disclosure. Instead you will have to fix any errors that occur and resubmit your disclosure. You are also unable to submit XML files containing errors. Once errors have been corrected, you can submit an XML file. Figure 53. REMINDER: Disclosures are required to be submitted to Inland Revenue by 30 June for the previous tax year ending 31 March. For more information on reporting obligations refer to: http://www.ird.govt.nz/international/exchange/FATCA/important-aeoi-FATCA-documents/ 34FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 7.1 Submit XML disclosure Use the Report FATCA by XML file upload option as shown above. Here you can directly upload your file. To submit an XML file, click Choose File and choose the relevant file from your own system. Figure 54. IMPORTANT: If you are using the XML reporting option for your FATCA submission and need to split the XML file into more than one then there must be different doc.ref.ids for each of the different XML files. 35FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 7.2 Data validation and amendments XML disclosures are subject to data validations in myIR. This means you are unable to successfully submit files to Inland Revenue containing errors until you have corrected them. The full list of data validations is available through the following link: http://www.ird.govt.nz/international/nzwithos/fatca/documents/ If you upload XML files in myIR that contain errors, you will be given the error type and line number of those errors in myIR. You can export these errors into an Excel file to help keep track of these errors. To do this click the Export \*Bold\* button. You will then need to correct these errors in your XML file and re-upload the file. Figure 55. If you have submitted an incorrect disclosure via XML or need to make amendments, you can do this via: • XML file only To submit a corrected XML file, use the Report by FATCA XML file upload option in your FATCA homepage in myIR. 36FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 7.3 XML International Errors Reporting NZFI’s will receive notification via myIR of errors in their disclosure that requires correction, as a result of international exchange of their data. Specifically, account alerts within myIR will notify the Reporting NZFI that there are accounts in error. myIR users will see an Accounts in Error tab in the CRS section of your myIR account that will list the details of each of the error(s). Correct the error(s) by: • Exporting the Status Message containing the errors into a spread sheet. This will help you keep track of the corrections you need to make; then • Correct the errors in a XML file and upload into myIR. Figure 56. XML Filers: will receive a return file notification from Inland Revenue highlighting required corrections using Status Message XSD. XML responses from Inland Revenue for FATCA will be available to download in this format, or alternatively the account can be viewed individually in myIR. 37FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 8 Cancel FATCA registration If a reporting NZFI no longer has reportable accounts, you can cancel the FATCA registration through your myIR. What you will need: • The reason for cancellation; and • Cancel registration date. To cancel your FATCA registration: 1. Log on to your myIR. 2. Access your FATCA account from the home page. Figure 57. 3. Click Cancel account registration. 4. Read Cancel registration and click Next. 5. Select the reason you are cancelling your registration (Closed, no reportable accounts, non-reporting Financial Institution or not a Financial Institution) and add the date you want to cancel your registration. Then click Next. Figure 58. 38FATCA - Registration and reporting user guide 6. Confirm the cancellation details and, tick the declaration box and click Submit. Figure 59. Once submitted, Inland Revenue will process your request, and cancel your FATCA registration or contact you for more information. If for any reason you need to re-register for FATCA, contact Inland Revenue via email: fatca@ird.govt.nz or phone: 0800 377 774 to reopen your FATCA account. Note: If you cancel your FATCA registration, you will have the ability to file a disclosure for the next (future) reporting year. 9 Glossary Term/AcronymDefinition FATC AForeign Account Tax Compliance Act IRSInternal Revenue Service NZFI Financial Institutions. This is from the perspective of administering FATCA within New Zealand. A financial institution is defined in the FATCA as meaning a custodial institution, a depository institution, an investment entity, or a specified insurance company. XML Extensible Markup Language TIN Tax Identification Number DisclosureFATCA reportable account information. This is submitted to Inland Revenue through one of the three reporting options; online form, excel file upload and XML file upload For more information on FATCA terms, visit www.ird.govt.nz/fatca