Table   of   Contents   In   confidence   Page   2       Section   Page   Executive   Summary   3   Background   5   Enhancing   GST   online   services   7   Changing   policy   and   legislative   settings   9   Making   it   easier   for   people   to   manage   their   obligations   and   entitlements   10   Supporting   customers   to   adapt   to   release   2   changes   15   Implementing   a   new   organisation   design   for   Inland   Revenue   21   Procuring   the   products   an d   services   required   for   transformation   24   Mana ging   and   governing   transformation   25   Appendix   1:   Transformation   roadmap   27   Appendix   2:   Release   plan   28   Appendix   3:   Transformation   indicators   and   thresholds   29   Appendix   4:   Case   studies   30   Appendix   5:   Key   transformation   risks   31      Executive   summary   In   confidence   Page   3     A   modern,   digital,   revenue   system   will   serve   the   needs   of   all   New   Zealanders.   Customers   will   spend   far   less   time   and   effort   ensuring   they   meet   their   obligations   and   receive   their   correct   social   policy   entitlements,   as   tax   will   be   correctly   withheld   and   assistance   provided   at   the   time   it   is   needed.   New   Zealand’s   revenue   system   will   be   transformed   in   four   broad   stages   –   digital   services,   tax,   social   policy   and   a   final   wrap   up.      The   fi rst   stage,   implementing   GST,   was   completed   in   Februar y   20 17   and   is   a   significant   and   public   step   forward.   GST   accounts   for   25%   of   the   revenue   Inland   Revenue   collects   for   the   government.   So   successfull y   moving   it   to   new   systems   and   processes,   albeit   not   without   its   challenges   for   some   stakehol ders,   is   significant.   Since   GST   went   live,   Inland   Revenue   has   worked   with   tax   agents   in   particular   to   improve   their   experiences   with   the   new   online   GST   services.   Transformation   is   now   moving   into   delivering   the   other   tax   products,   and   the   chan ges   being   made   will   deliver   significan t   benefits   for   customers.   Stage   2   will   be   implemented   in   a   series   of   releases   over   2018   and   2019   to   carefully   manage   the   amount   of   change   being   introduced.   The   next   release,   release   2,   in   April   2018   will:    Provide   a   pay ‐ as ‐ you ‐ go   opti on   for   small   businesses   for   their   provisional   tax  ‐  the   acc ounting   income   method   (AIM).    Help   combat   global   tax   avoidance   through   the   implementation   of   the   automatic   exchange   of   information   (AEOI)   with   international   tax   treaty   partners.    Enable   employers   to   send   their   information   to   Inland   Revenue   on   payday   if   they   choose   to   do   so. 1    Make   it   easier   for   customers   to   meet   their   obligations   for   withholding   taxes, 2   fringe   benefit   tax,   payroll   subsidy,   and   gaming   machine   duty   by   moving   them   to   new   systems   and   processes.    Collect   income   information   in   START   so   that   pre ‐ population   of   individuals’   information   can   begin.   Release   3   in   April   2019   will   implement   income   tax   products   on   new   systems   and   processes;   require   employers   to   provide   PAYE   information   on   pay day   and   more   businesses   to   file   electronically; 3   and   enable   payers   of   investment   income   to   provide   detailed   recipient   information   on   a   more   frequent   basis   if   they   choose   to. 4   From   2019,   it   will   be   easier   for   customers   to   calculate   and   pay   what   they   owe.   They’ll   be   able   to   use   their   own   systems   and   processes   to   meet   their   obligations   as   they                                                                      1   Subject   to   legislation.   2   Including   resident   withholding   tax,   non ‐ resident   withholding   tax,   dividend   withholding   tax,   resident   land   withholding   tax,   and   approved   issuer   levy   3   Subject   to   legislation   4   ibid   will   be   integrated   with   Inland   Revenue’s   systems   and   processes.   The   revenue   system   itself   will   be   more   resilient   and   agile.    Compared   to   GST,   release   2   has   much   wider   implications   for   employers,   tax   agents,   bookkeepers,   payroll   intermediaries,   software   developers,   and   financial   institutions.   For   the   majority   of   other   customers,   there   will   be   no   major   cha nges   in   2018.        To   administer   a   modern   revenue   sys tem,   Inland   Revenue   is   changing   the   way   it   works.   Implementation   of   the   first   wave   of   Inland   Revenue’s   new   organisation   design   began   on   12   February   2018.   This   is   an   important   step   in   becoming   more   agile   and   intelligence ‐ led,   and   built   around   the   needs   of   customers.   Those   delivering   customer   se rvic e s   will   be   enabled   and   empowered   to   make   more   decisions   and   resolve   customers’   issues   more   quickly.   New   delegations   combined   with   broader   roles   means   customers   will   have   their   issues   responded   to   more   quickly   and   will   be   able   to   talk   to   one   person   to   get   more   of   their   queries   resolved. Inland   Revenue   is   working   directly   with   the   businesses   that   need   to   make   the   most   changes.   This   includes   working   closely   with   large   enterprises   with   customised   payroll   systems   including   government   agencies,   and   communicating   directly   with   businesses   still   filing   on   paper.    In   confidence   Page   4     Inland   Revenue   has   adopted   a   more   collaborative   approach   to   the   design   of   future   stages   based   on   the   lessons   learned   from   implementing   GST.   Customers   are   actively   involved   in   the   remaining   stages   of   transformation.   Tax   agents   have   joined   transformation,   opportunities   for   customers   to   validate   new   services   before   go ‐ live   are   being   provided,   and   considerable   efforts   were   made   to   en gage   a   wide   range   of   New   Zealanders   in   the   social   policy   pr oposals.     Inland   Revenue   is   working   across   the   public   sector   to   ensure   that   New   Zealanders   continue   to   receive   the   services   they   do   today,   following   the   changes   being   introduced   by   transformation.   Work   on   policy   and   legislative   setting s   is   continuing.   Legislative   improvements   to   the   collection   and   use   of   PAYE   and   investment   income   information   are   currently   before   Parliament.        Trans f ormation   remains   inherently   high ‐ risk.   Transformation   is   complex   and   challenging.   Inland   Revenue   is   now   operating   two   systems   and   the   departme nt’s   risk   profile   has   increased.   It   will   remain   high   until   the   completion   of   transformation   due   to   the   need   fo r   old   and   new   systems   to   co ‐ exist.   Inland   Revenue   is   currently   undergoing   a   major   redesign   of   its   organisation   to   support   transformation.   Significant   changes   for   cu stomer ‐ facing   areas   and   some   of   the   key   capabilities   that   support   them   were   announ ced   in   Jul y   2017.    Moving   a   large   number   of   people   into   new   structures,   teams   and   roles   is   not   without   its   challenges.   During   the   change   process,   the   Public   Service   Association   initiated   legal   proceedings   regarding   aspects   of   the   process   for   moving   peo ple   into   new   roles.   A   ruling   by   the   Employ ment   Court   on   21   December   2017   resolved   some   issues.   In   January   2018,   Inland   Revenue   and   the   Public   Service   Association   had   good   discussions   about   the   process   for   and   concerns   of   the   members   the   union   represents,   and   reached   agreement   on   the   way   forward.   The   agreement   includes   a   specific   way   forward   in   supp ort   of   implementing   the   first   three   new   organisati on   gro ups.   A   further   hearing   in   the   Employment   Court   is   scheduled   for   14 ‐ 28   May   2018   regarding   some   aspects   of   the   selection   process   for   some   roles.   As   a   result   of   the   Public   Service   Association   challenge,   the   selection   pro cess   for   these   roles   was   amended   so   that   the   three   new   groups   could   be   established   as   plan ned   on   12   February   2018.   However,   Inland   Revenue   understands   that   the   PSA   has   since   withdrawn   proceedings.   Robust   risk   management   processes   are   in   place   to   identify   and   mitigate   risks,   and   the   independent   quality   assurance   programme   forms   an   integral   part   of   the   management   of   risks.   Transformation   remains   on   schedule   an d   costs   are   tracking   as   expected,   and   within   the   fundin g   approved   by   Government.     Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Background   In   confidence   Page   5     This   update   outlines   the   progress   being   made   by   Inland   Revenue   in   implementing   transformation.   It   has   been   reviewed   by   the   corporate   centre.   In   March   2013,   Cabinet   accepted   that   transformation   of   the   revenue   system   was   required.   A   number   of   potential   investment   options   for   modernising   the   revenue   system   were   presented   to   Cabinet   in   2013,   ranging   fr om   “do   nothing”   through   to   an   all   of   government   solution.   Cabi net   agreed   to   invest   in   modernising   the   revenue   system   through   business   process   re ‐ engineering,   supported   by   new   technology   (known   as   Option   3B).   Design   activity   commenced,   and   delivery   partners   (Accenture   and   FAST   Enterprises)   were   secured   to   support   Inland   Revenue.   In   November   20 15,   Cabinet   agree d   to   invest   in   the   implementation   of   New   Zealand’s   future   revenue   system.   A   multi ‐ year   funding   envelope   was   approved,   together   with   a   financial   delegation   of   $1,870   million   to   complete   transformation.   The   funding   envelope   comprises   new   funding   from   the   Crown   of   between   $800   million   and   $1,005   million   with   the   balan ce   of   funding   provided   by   Inland   Revenue   through   administrative   savings   and   cap ital   reserves   (CAB ‐ 15 ‐ MIN ‐ 0249   refers).    Business   transformation   is   a   long ‐ term   programme   to   modernise   New   Zealand’s   revenue   system.   A   modern,   digital,   revenue   system   will   serve   the   needs   of   all   New   Zealanders.   It   will   help   customers   to   get   their   tax   and   social   poli cy   payments   right   first   time,   avoid   errors   and   give   them   a   clearer   view   of   what   the y’ve   paid   and   what   they   owe   during   the   year.   The   revenue   system   will   be   simple   to   comply   with   and   responsive   to   customers’   changing   circumstances.   People   will   spend   far   less   time   and   effort   ensuring   the y   meet   their   obligations   and   receive   their   correct   social   policy   entitlements,   as   tax   will   be   correctly   withheld   and   assistance   pro vided   at   the   time   it   is   needed.   Transformation   involves   far   more   than   an   upgrade   of   technology.       Delivering   New   Zealand’s   future   revenue   system   involves:    Simplifying   policy   and   legislative   settings.    Makin g   more   intelligent   use   of   inform ation   to   proactively   ensu re   customers   get   it   right   from   the   start.    Designing   and   delivering   services   with   others   inside   and   outside   of   government   that   enable   customers   to   self ‐ manage.    Creating   an   organisation   that   works   together   better   to   improve   outcomes   for   customers.    Implementing   a   modern   technology   platfor m   (START)   that   is   highly   automate d,   more   resilient   and   more   responsive   to   change.   Central   to   the   modernisation   of   the   revenue   system   is   delivery   of   the   new   tax   and   social   policy   platform   (START).   In   addition,   a   number   of   other   changes   are   being   made   to   support   digital   services   and   intelligence ‐ led   out comes.   There   are   sign ificant   benefits   fr om   transformation   for   customers   and   the   Crown.   The   changes   being   delivered   by   transformation   will:    Provide   confidence   in   the   continued   collection   of   tax   revenue   and   distribution   of   entitlements.    Improve   the   Government’s   ability   to   make   policy   changes   faster   and   more   cost ‐ effectively.    Grow   voluntary   compliance   by   making   it   easier   for   people   to   ge t   it   right.    Create   an   information   asset   to   deliver   improved   outcomes   for   New   Zealand.    Deliver   cumulative   additional   Crown   revenue   of   $2,8 80m–$6,175m   by   2023/24.    Deliver   cumulative   compliance   cost   savings   (economic   benefits)   for   small ‐  medium   sized   enterprises   in   particular,   until   2023/24   of   between   $1, 330m   to   $2,26 5m.    Ena ble   Inland   Revenue   to   realise   administrative   savings   of   $495m–$580m   by   2023/24.   In   addition,   transformation   will   make   a   significant   contribution   to   improving   digital   interactions   with   government,   improving   cross ‐ government   outcomes   and   a   growing   healthy   economy. Transformation   is   enabled   by   a   combination   of   changes   to   policy,   process,   technology   and   the   organisation   design   of   Inland   Revenue.   It   is   an   opportunity   to   fundamentally   review   how   the   revenue   system   is   administered   and   consider   what   changes   may   be   needed.    In   confidence   Page   6     Customers’   interactions   with   government   and   Inland   Revenue   will   fundamentally   change.   Only   by   improving   and   modernising   its   technology   can   Inland   Revenue   significantly   enhance   experiences   for   customers   and   meet   their   needs.      Those   with   less   complex   needs   will   only   need   to   confirm   their   details   using   automated,   straight ‐ through   digital   services.   Customers   who   do   have   to   provid e   information   will   use   their   own   systems   and   processes   to   do   so   as   part   of   their   everyday   business   activities.   Infor mation   will   be   checked   when   it   is   received   and   errors   fixed   wherever   possible.   Earlier,   more   complete   information   will   be   available   to   Inland   Revenue   which   will   lead   to   greater   accuracy   and   mean   fewer   u nder   or   over   payments   for   customers.   Together,   new   systems,   processes   and   services   and   legislative   changes,   will   sim plify   customers’   tax   affairs   and   make   it   easier   for   them   to   meet   their   obligations.   There   are   four   broad   stages   in   transformation.   The   programme   roadmap   (please   refer   to   appendix   1)   sets   out   the   high ‐ level   order   in   which   produ cts   and   services   will   be   implemented.   The   first   stage   has   already   been   completed.   GST   has   been   successfully   implemented.   In   February   2017,   GST   was   successfully   moved   to   START.   New   services   mean   it’s   now   quicker   and   easier   for   customers   with   straight ‐ forward   transactions   to   manage   their   GST   online.   Changes   to   th e   new   online   GST   services   were   made   monthly   from   July   to   October   2017   to   improve   the   experiences   of   customers   with   more   complex   circumsta nces.   Inland   Revenue   is   on   track   to   realise   the   benefits   committed   from   the   implementation   of   GST.   These   are   improved   experiences   for   customers,   compliance   cost   reductions   for   small–medium   sized   businesses   and   administrative   savings   for   In land   Revenue.     The   next   release   will   move   more   taxes   to   new   systems   and   processes,   improve   customer   experiences,   and   introduce   legislative   change.   Stage   2   will   be   implemented   in   a   series   of   releases   over   2018   and   2019,   significantly   reducing   the   effort   required   by   businesses   to   kee p   on   top   of   their   tax   obligations   so   they   can   spend   more   time   running   their   businesses.    The   likelihood   of   errors   will   be   much   reduced,   resulting   in   greater   certainty,   fewer   interactions,   less   debt,   and   less   need   for   compliance   checks.   Businesses   will   have   a   clearer   view   of   their   tax   position   during   the   year   and   will   be   able   to   meet   their   tax   obligations   at   minimum   cos t   and   minimum   disruption.    Once   Stage   2   has   been   fully   implemented   in   2019   customers   will   have:    on ‐ line   services   for   all   tax   produ cts  ‐  for   example   customers   will   be   able   to   file   returns,   set   up   payment   plans   and   include   att achments   on ‐ line    integrated   tax   and   business   processes    faster,   more   accur ate   tax   information,   providing   near   real ‐ time   visibility   of   tax    faster   tax   refunds    less   likelihood   of   tax   debt   and   more   payment   options.   Transformation   will   make   a   significant   contribution   to   wider   government   outcomes.   Modernising   the   revenue   system   will   significantly   contrib ute   to   imp roving   outcomes   for   New   Zealanders   –   ensuring   they   pay   and   receive   the   right   amounts,   and   making   it   easy   for   them   to   interact   with   government   when   they   need   to.     In   the   future,   most   customers   will   not   need   to   interact   with   Inland   Revenue   as   their   information   will   be   provided   to   Inland   Revenue   on   their   behalf.   Enhancing   GST   online   services   In   confidence   Page   7     Moving   GST   to   new   systems   and   processes   in   February   2017   was   a   very   significant   and   public   step   forward   in   the   modernisation   of   New   Zealand’s   revenue   system.   It’s   now   quicker   and   easier   for   customers   with   straightforward   transactions   to   manage   their   GST   online.   However   it   hasn’t   been   as   easy   for   customers   with   more   complex   circumstances.   Tax   agents   in   partic ular   experienced   some   challenges   from   having   to   work   in   two   systems.   GST   accou nts   for   25%   of   the   revenue   Inland   Revenue   collects   for   the   government.   So   successfully   moving   it   to   new   systems   and   processes,   albeit   not   without   its   challenges   for   some   stakeholders,   is   significant.   Inland   Revenue   is   continuin g   to   improve   stakeholders’   experiences   with   GST.   Since   GST   went   live,   Inland   Revenue   has   been   working   with   tax   ag ents   to   improve   their   experiences.   Working   together,   tax   agents   and   Inland   Revenue    identified   the   biggest   challenges   and   agreed   the   improvements   needed   to   address   them.   To   ensure   the   most   important   issues   were   addressed   first,   Inland   Revenue   ran:    focus   grou ps   with   tax   agent   administrator s   to   better   understand   the   practical   aspects   of   tax   agents’   work    sessions   with   tax   agents   to   better   understand   the   impacts   on   their   day ‐ to ‐ day   operations   of   viewing   and   processing   GST   transactions    surveys   of   small   groups   of   tax   agents   th roughout   New   Zealand    one ‐ on ‐ one   sessions   with   tax   agen ts   in   user   experience   labs.   Changes   have   already   been   made,   however   others   will   take   longer   as   a   result   of   co ‐ existence   between   FIRST   (Inland   Revenue’s   old   system)   and   START   (Inland   Revenue’s   new   system).    Improvements   have   been   implemented   on   a   monthly   basis.    Changes   were   made   in   Ju ly,   August,   Se ptember,   and   October   2017.   Of   the   twenty ‐ five   improvements   made,   the   most   significant   were:    Making   it   easier   for   tax   agents   to   identify   their   client   names   and   IRD   numbers.    Consolidating   the   number   of   letters,   notifications   and   alerts   sent   to   customers   when   there   is   som ething   for   them   to   do   in   myIR.    Improving   traceability   of   GST   transfers   between   systems.    Improving   cus tomers’   ability   to   navigate   between   different   periods   when   viewing   GST   transactions.    Providing   tax   agents   with   a   new   summary   report   that   makes   it   easier   for   them   to   prepare   their   clients’   annual   GST   reconciliation.        The   chan ges   made   have   been   positively   received   by   tax   agents.   A   monthly   cycle   provides   sufficient   time   fo r   tax   agents   and   Inland   Revenue’s   front   line   staff   to   prepare   for   each   release   of   improvements.   Each   month   tax   agents   and   their   professional   bodies   are   provided   with   an   update   on   changes   ready   to   be   implem ented,   as   well   as   a   view   of   what   is   in   the   pipeline.   Notwith standing   the   challenges,   customer   uptake   of   new   services   is   strong.   Shifts   in   customer   behaviour   are   evident.   At   the   end   of   December   2017,   more   than   1.7   million   returns   had   been   filed   using   the   new   web   service   and   just   over   an   additional   220 ,000   returns   were   filed   by   approximately   70,000   customers   thro ugh   their   accounting   software.    For   the   year   to   date   to   December   2017,   85%   of   customers   filed   their   GST   returns   electronically,   compared   with   83%   for   the   year   to   date   to   December   2016   and   77%   for   the   year   to   date   to   December   20 15.   Stage   1   was   about   more   than   GST.   GST   was   not   the   only   thing   Inland   Revenue   delivered   as   part   of   Stage   1.   In   September   2017,   Inland   Revenue   implemented   RealMe   as   an   option   for   customers   to   use   when   identifying   themselves   to   the   department.   As   at   the   end   Improvements   were   implemented   following   user   labs   where   Inland   Revenue   worked   one ‐ on ‐ one   with   agents   around   the   country   to   make   sure   their   requirements   were   clearly   understood.   The   solutions   developed   were   then   taken   back   to   the   same   tax   agents   to   validate   before   they   were   tested   and   implemented.    In   confidence   Page   8     of   January   2018,   more   than   40,000   customers   had   linked   their   myIR   login   to   a   RealMe   account.   New   migrants   can   now   register   with   Inland   Revenue   as   part   of   their   visa   application   process.   To   the   end   of   December   2017,   more   than   35,000   new   migrants,   visa   holders   and   organisations   registered   for   IRD   numbers   through   th e   new   digital   registration   service.   This   helps   to   ensure   that   migrants   are   ready   for   work   when   they   arrive,   making   it   easier   for   them   to   settle   into   New   Zealand.   Some   of   the   found ations   for   the   remainder   of   transformation   were   also   put   in   place.   Some   foundational   technology   was   replaced   to   set   Inland   Revenue   up   fo r   the   future,   including   new   data   ce ntres   and   the   workflow   management   system   used   by   contact   centres.   Inland   Revenue   remains   on   track   to   realise   the   benefits   committed   from   the   implementation   of   Stage   1.   These   are   improved   experiences   for   customers,   compliance   cost   reductions   for   small–medium   sized   businesses   and   administrative   savings   for   Inland   Revenue :    Customers   using   their   accounting   software   to   manage   their   GST   obligations   are   providing   positive   feedback   on   their   experience   an d   on   other   enhancements   to   Inland   Revenue’s   services.    Customers   perceive   that   the   level   of   effort   in   meeting   their   GST   obligations   has   reduced   since   2013.     Administrative   savings   are   being   achieved   as   customers   increasingly   self ‐ manage   and   use   digit al   channels.   The   diagram   below   shows   Inland   Re venue’s   current   progress   in   realising   the   benefits   committed   from   Stage   1.    Stage   1   benefit   realisation Target $43m ‐ $47m   \[by   23/24\] Current   status $64m   \[by   23/24\] Target \[9   hours   effort   saving   by   23/24\] $490m ‐ $840m Current   status \[10   hours   effort   saved\] $560m ‐ $940m   by   23/24  Target   “some   improvement   in   agility” Current   status “on ‐ track”   effo t   educt on   based   on   2016   SME   tax   compl ance   su vey Reduced   time   and   cost   to   implement   policy Administrative   savings   to   Inland   Revenue Easier   for   customers   A   Gateway   0   (strategic   assessment)   and   4   (readiness   for   service)   review   completed   in   March   2018   found   that   the   benefit   realisation   framework   for   transformation   “...   continues   to   be   an   excellent   example   of   good   practice   across   government   in   New   Zealand,   Australia   and   the   UK” .   While   noting   that   there   is   always   room   for   residual   improvement,   they   note d   that   “...   the   outcom e s   and   benefits   management   framework   is   world   class...”     Changing   policy   and   legislative   settings   In   confidence   Page   9     Work   on   policy   and   legislative   settings   is   continuing.    Legislative   improvements   to   the   collection   and   use   of   PAYE   and   investment   income   information   are   currently   before   Parliament.                              .   Social   p olicy        Groups   met   with   face ‐ to ‐ face   included:                                  As   well   as   wid ening   en gagement   beyond   the   audiences   who   would   traditionally   res pond   to   policy   consultation,   Inland   Revenue   looked   at   what   could   be   done   differently   to   encourage   feedback   from   as   many   people   as   possible.   This   included   making   information   available   in   languages   other   than   English,   using   animations   to   simply   explain   the   proposals,   and   raising   awareness   amongst   th ose   without   internet   access   at   home.   As   many   social   policy   customers   are   not   native   English   speakers,   summary   information,   videos   and   a   short   survey   were   translated   into   nine   oth er   languages.   The   languages   were   Cantonese,   Hindi,   Khmer,   Korean,   Mandarin,   Samoan,   Tongan   and   Vietnamese.   Translations   also   included   Te   Reo   M ā ori   and   New   Zealand   sign   language.   The   langua ges   chosen   were   based   on   those   most   commonly   spoken   by   customers,   groups   with   low   levels   of   English   speakers,   and   which   of   those   langua ge   speakers   were   most   likely   to   receive   Working   for   Families,   child   support,   or   have   student   loans.   Animations   explaining   the   proposals   were   developed   and   published   on   the   Ma king   tax   simpler   website.   Written   transcripts   were   also   published   and   Deaf   Radio   created   a   sign   language   version   for   hear ing   impaired   audiences.   “Wobblers”   were   used   to   raise   awareness   amongst   people   without   internet   access   at   home.   They   were   placed   in   the   computer   area   of   public   libraries   so   people   could   check   out   the   online   c onsultation   forum   using   the   library   computers.   The   phot o   below   shows   one   of   the   wobblers   in   Miramar   Library,   in   Wellington.     To   ensure   that   people   were   aware   of   the   social   policy   proposals   and   that   submissions   were   representative   of   the   people   who   would   be   affected   by   them,   Inland   Revenue   met   face ‐ to ‐ face   with   a   variety   of   groups   around   the   country.   Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIAWithheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Making   it   easier   for   people   to   manage   their   obligations   and   entitlements   In   confidence   Page   10     The   four   broad   stages   in   transformation   are   digital   services,   tax,   social   policy   and   a   final   wrap   up.   From   now   on   there   will   be   more   than   one   release   in   each   stage   so   that   the   amount   of   change   being   introduced   for   both   customers   and   Inland   Revenue   can   be   carefully   managed.     Transformation   has   moved   to   a   series   of   re leases   within   stages.   The   remaining   stages   of   transformation   will   be   implemented   in   a   series   of   rel eases   from   2018   to   2021.   The   release   plan   (please   refer   to   appendix   2)   is   Inland   Revenue’s   current   view   of   the   sequence   in   which   remaining   taxes   and   entitlements   will   be   moved   to   new   systems   and   processes.   It   was   endors ed   by   Inland   Revenue’s   Portfolio   Governance   Committee   (PGC)   on   24   Au gust   2017.   Moving   to   a   release   based   approach   means   the   four   stages   will   overlap.   Taxes   and   entitlements   will   be   moved   to   START   in   smaller   steps,   reducing   risk   and   business   and   customer   impacts.   At   the   same   time,   transformatio n   will   move   into   social   policy   products   (Stage   3)   earlier   than   planne d.   Working   for   Families   will   be   aligned   with   income   taxes.   This   will   minimise   the   difficulties   for   both   customers   and   Inland   Revenue   from   having   to   work   off   both   old   and   new   systems.   Major   releases   will   typically   occur   on   an   a nnual   cycle   in   each   of   the   next   four   years   to   align   with   the   beginni ng   of   the   tax   year.   Other   releases   will   be   te chnical   only,   i.e.   not   visible   to   customers   and   staff,   some   will   be   legislative   only,   some   will   implement   new   systems   and   processes,   some   will   provide   Inland   Revenue   staff   with   new   capabilities,   and   some   will   be   a   combination.   Stage   2   will   be   delivered   in   two   major   releases   ove r   2018   (release   2)   and   2019   (release   3).   Moving   th e   remaining   taxes   to   new   systems   and   processes   will   be   split   across   two   major   releases   in   2018   and   2019   to   minimise   the   impact   on   customers.   Proposed   improvements   to   how   PAYE   and   investment   income   information   are   collecte d,   and   the   implementation   of   the   automatic   exchange   of   information   (AEO I)   with   international   tax   treaty   partners   will   be   made   progressively,   beginning   from   release   2   in   April   2018.   Based   on   current   thinking,   the   first   release   in   Stage   3   –   Working   for   Families  ‐   will   be   included   in   the   April   2019   release.   Stages   2   and   3   will   run   conc urrentl y   for   a   period   given   the   strong   inter ‐ dependencies   between   them.   Calculation   of   Working   for   Families   tax   credits   is   highly   dependent   on   information   about   family   circumstances   and   family   income   information.   Customers   are   actively   involved   in   release   2   and   the   remaining   sta ges   of   transformation.      Inland   Revenue   recognised   the   nee d   for   better   design   input   from   tax   agents   in   particular,   so   agents   have   been   seconded   from   a   range   of   businesses,   from   the   big   four   through   to   smaller   firms.   Tax   agents   and   design   and   development   teams   working   together   on   a   daily   basis   has   hel ped   to   give   Inla n d   Revenue   a   better   understanding   of   what   works,   what   doesn’t,   and   why.   The   tax   agents   who   have   joined   transformation   are   co ‐ designing   certain   aspects   of   the   system   as   well   as   testing   it   to   see   if   it   works   as   expected.   A   similar   approach   will   be   ado pted   with   payroll   professionals.   This   will   help   to   ensu r e   that   businesses   and   their   representatives   can   interact   smoothly   with   government   to   meet   their   PAYE   filing   obligations   through   their   software.   Opportunities   for   customers,   including   tax   agents,   to   validate   the   new   services   being   introduced   in   release   2   are   being   provided   throughout   the   testing   process.     Inland   Revenue   has   adopted   a   more   collaborative   approach   to   design   based   on   the   lessons   learned   from   implementing   GST.    In   confidence   Page   11     Inland   Revenue   is   on   track   to   implement   release   2   in   April   2018.   Release   2   will   include:    Introducing   the   accounting   income   method   (AIM)   option   for   calculating   provisional   tax.    Implementing   the   automatic   exchange   of   information   with   international   tax   treaty   partners.    Enabling   employers   to   send   their   information   to   Inland   Revenue   on   pay day   if   they   choose   to   do   so. 5    Moving   withholding   taxes,   fringe   benefit   tax,   payroll   subsidy,   and   gaming   machine   duty   to   new   systems   and   processes.    Collecting   income   information   in   START   so   that   pre ‐ population   of   individuals’   information   can   begin.    FIRST   will   process   income   tax   returns   for   the   2017/18   tax   year   and   process   all   prior   period   returns   until   31   March   20 19.   Once   release   2   has   been   implemented   customers   will   be   able   to   choos e   a   pay ‐ as ‐ you ‐ go   option   for   paying   their   provisional   tax,   employers   can   choose   to   meet   their   PAYE   obligations   at   the   same   time   they’re   completing   their   payroll   processes,   and   it   will   be   quicker   and   easier                                                                      5   Subject   to   legislation.   for   customers   to   meet   more   of   their   obligations   with   more   on ‐ line   services   for   a   wider   range   of   taxes.   Release   3   in   April   2019   will   include:    Moving   all   income   tax   products   and   Working   for   Families   to   new   systems   and   processes.    Enabling   customers   to   enrol   digitally   for   products   and   services.    Enabling   pa yers   of   investment   income   to   send   detailed   recipient   informati on   to   Inland   Revenue   every   month,   or   the   months   in   which   income   is   paid,   if   they   choose   to   do   so. 6    Employers   being   required   to   send   their   PAYE   information   to   Inland   Revenue   on   payday. 7    More   businesses   will   be   required   to   file   electronically   following   the   reduction   in   the   electronic   filing   threshold. 8   Any   challenges   with   historical   income   tax   and   related   data   will   be   resolved   in   FIRST   before   being   migrated   to   START   on   1   April   2019.   The   2020/21   year   will   be   the   first   full   year   of   pre ‐ populated   information   for   PAYE                                                                      6   Ibid.   7   Ibid.   8   Ibid.   and   investment   income.   Once   release   3   has   been   implemented   employers   will   have   integrated   tax   and   business   processes   making   it   quicker   and   easier   for   them   to   meet   their   obligations,   and   all   customers   will   have   access   to   faster,   more   accurate   tax   information,   providing   near   real ‐ time   visibility   of   all   their   tax   obligations.   Customers   will   have   a   lot   more   certa inty   as   there   will   be   much   les s   chance   of   them   going   into   debt   and   any   refunds   will   be   paid   more   quickly.   Costs   and   benefits   are   in   line   with   expectations.   Costs   for   the   implementation   of   Stage   2   in   a   series   of   releases   over   2018   and   2019   are   within   the   fu nding   approved   by   Cabinet   in   November   2015 .   Stage   2,   once   complete   following   the   implementation   of   releases   2   and   3,   will   deliver   bot h   financial   and   non ‐ financial   benefits.   The   non ‐ financial   benefits   are:    Customer   experiences   will   improve   as   a   result   of   more   online   services,   more   integrated   tax   and   business   processes,   and   fast er   more   accurate   tax   information.    The   resilience   of   the   revenue   system   will   improve.   However,   co ‐ existence   between   the   old   and   new   systems   means   the   inherent   risk   profile   remains   high   until   transformation   is   complete.    Government   will   have   greater   agility   for   tax   products.   However   the   complex   inter ‐ relationships   between   income   and   so cial   policy   will   place   some   limits   on   agility.   Full   policy   agility   will   be   provided   once   transformatio n   is   complete.    In   confidence   Page   12     The   financial   benefits   are:    Administrative   savings   for   Inland   Revenue   resulting   from   being   a   smaller,   more   efficient   organisation.    Increases   in   assessed   Crown   revenue   as   a   result   of   improved   customer   compliance.   Inland   Revenue   will   have   a   greater   focus   on   helping   customers   get   it   right   from   the   start,   and   there   will   be   gre ater   integration   between   customers’   natural   business   systems   and   Inland   Reven ue’s   systems.   Opportunities   for   non ‐ compliance   will   reduce   as   Inland   Revenue   will   receive   core   accounting   transactions   through   accounting   software.    The   effort   required   for   businesses   to   meet   their   obligations   will   further   reduce.   Testing   for   release   2   is   well   underway.   Business   system   testing   beg an   in   July   2017   and   involves   Inland   Revenue   staff   testin g   the   functionality   within   START   and   how   it   interacts   with   other   systems.   This   phase   of   testing   is   progressing   well   and   tracking   to   plan,   and   will   continue   until   early   2018.   The   next   phase   of   testing   is   scaled   business   simulation   testing.   It   began   in   early   201 8   and   will   continue   up   until   go ‐ live   on   17   April   2018.   This   phase   practices   the   go ‐ live   step   by   step   including   the   migration   of   data,   and   processes   following   go ‐ live   such   as   return   filing.   Preparing   and   verifying   data   is   an   on ‐ going   activity   and   will   continue   right   up   un til   go ‐ live   on   17   April   2018.   To   date,   no   major   issues   with   customer   data   have   been   identified.   The   lessons   learned   from   Stage   1   have   informed   Inland   Revenue’s   approach   to   testing   for   release   2:    Opportunities   for   customers   to   validate   new   services   will   be   provided   throughout   the   testing   process.    Formal   arrangements   for   testing   ha ve   been   established   with   organisations   whose   systems   integrate   with   Inland   R evenue’s   systems.    Testing   is   being   increasingly   automated   for   external   customer   facing   services   and   services   used   by   Inland   Revenue’s   contact   centre.    Professional   testing   resources   are   working   directly   with   the   design   and   development   teams.    Management   of   de fects   has   been   enhanc e d   to   improve   the   detection,   testing   and   resolution   of   incidents.    There   is   a   larger   volume   of   testing   required   for   release   2   compared   to   implementing   GST.   The   testing   effort   is   approximately   four   times   as   great   in   terms   of   time   for   release   2,   and   the   number   of   scenarios   to   be   te sted   is   approximately   five   times   that   required   for   GST.   Custom er   exp eriences   will   improve   over   2018   and   2019,   complementary   to   the   major   releases.   Frequent   releases   of   solutions   and   enhancements   will   make   compliance   easier,   simpler   and   more   efficient   for   both   customers   and   Inland   Revenue.   While   there   is   a   particular   focus   on   improving   digital   experiences,   the   experiences   of   all   customers   will   be   enhanc ed   regardless   of   how   they   choose   to   interact   with   Inland   R evenue.   Work   is   underway   in   a   number   of   areas   to:    Reduce   the   time   and   effort   customers   spend   in   finding   the   right   information,   and   then   understanding   it.    Help   customers   understand   what   the y   need   to   do   to   meet   their   obligations   and   mak ing   it   easy   for   them   to   do   so.   Work   on   the   look   and   feel   and   integration   with   www.ird.govt.nz   is   progressing   for   a   digital   solution   to   the   “what’s   my   IRD   number”   customer   pain   point.    A   Business   Survival   Guide   has   been   developed   for   young   businesses.   In   September   and   October   2017,   just   under   100,000   customers   received   information   about   the   site.   Work   is   underway   with   the   Community   Compliance   team   who   provide   Inland   Revenue’s   face ‐ to ‐ face   services   in   the   community,   to   determin e   how   it   might   be   used   as   a   frontline   support   tool   in   the   futu re.   As   the   site   has   recently   been   launched,   customer   reaction   and   feedback   is   not   yet   available.         In   confidence   Page   13     Over   the   2018   and   2019   period,   customer   experiences   will   be   further   improved   as:    More   information   and   returns   will   be   able   to   be   filed   through   software   as   new   gateway   services   are   made   available.    Customers   will   more   easily   be   able   to   find   the   information   they   need   following   a   re ‐ design   of   Inla nd   Revenue’s   website.    It   will   be   easier   for   customers   to   talk   to   the   right   person   in   Inland   Revenue   and   have   their   query   resolved   first   time   as   a   result   of   improved   contact   centre   technology   and   the   implementation   of   a   new   organisation   design.    Regardless   of   how   they   contact   Inland   Revenue,   customers   wil l   have   their   queries   resolved   more   quickly   as   chan nels   will   be   bet ter   integrated.    Customers   will   receive   their   GST   refunds   more   quickly   as   Inland   Revenue   invests   in   analytical   tools   to   enable   improved   decision   making.    Work   continues   on   building   Inland   Revenue’s   analytical   and   knowledge   management   capabilities.   Improved   analytical   capabilities   will   enable   Inland   Revenue   to   better   use   th e   information   and   data   it   has   about   customers   to   deliver   more   timely   and   targeted   services.   Releases   of   analytical   capabilities   can   be   made   independently   of,   however   are   complementary   to,   major   releases   of   the   core   tax   and   social   policy   system.   One   key   component   of   being   intelligence ‐ led   is   having   a   fit ‐ for ‐ purpose   analytics   te chnology   platform   –   one   that   will   help   Inland   Revenue   make   sense   of   big,   disparate   data   sets   and   view   customers   from   many   perspectives.   A   proof   of   concept   for   an   advanced   analytics   platform   was   completed   in   December   2017   to   better   inform   and   de ‐ risk   future   investment.    The   proof   of   con cept   confirmed   there   is   value   in   such   an   investment,   and   in   December   2017   Inland   Revenue   began   the   procurement   process   for   an   advanced   analytics   platform.   Implementation   of   a   new   analytics   platform   is   expected   to   be   complete   by   the   end   of   2018.   This   will   give   Inland   Revenue   a   better   view   of   a   customer’s   rel ationships   or   network,   their   obligations,   entitlements   and   interactions.   Decision   ma king   will   be   enhanced,   as   Inland   Revenue   will   better   understand   why   customers   are   calling   and   what   is   needed   to   help   them   get   things   right   from   the   start.     By   the   end   of   2019,   Inland   Revenue   intends   to   integrate   the   analyti cs   platform   with   START.   This   will   provide   Inland   Revenu e   with   b etter   insights   into   customer   behaviour   and   compliance,   enabling   more   targeted   activities   where   compliance   needs   addressing.   Where   customers   are   consistently   compliant,   any   on ‐ going   interactions   with   Inland   Revenue   will   be   increasingly   straightforward   and   automated.   A   pilot   of   an   enterprise   content   management   solution   bega n   in   October   2017   wi th   Inland   Revenue’s   legal   functions.   This   will   provide   staff   with   multiple   ways   to   search   for   and   access   information   and   help   to   ensure   customers   receive   consistent   and   timely   advice.   A   phased   roll   out   to   all   of   Inland   Revenue   will   begin   in   2018.   This   will   make   customer   and   business   infor mation   more   readily   accessible   to   Inland   Re venue   staff,   enabling   them   to   provide   more   consistent   customer   service.   Major   releases   will   occur   annually   until   2021.   Releases   4   (2020)   and   5   (2021)   will   move   the   remaining   social   policies   Inland   Revenue   administers   to   new   systems   and   processes.   The   current   sequencing   has   KiwiSaver   and   Stud ent   Loans   being   implemented   in   2020,   and   Child   Support   bei ng   implemented   in   2021.   Alternative   sequencing   is   possible.   As   major   releases   are   implemented,   customers   will   increasingly   be   able   to   manage   their   taxes   and   entitlements   themselves   as   they’ll   be   able   to   do   more   and   more   using   online   services.           The   release   sequence   may   change   as   Inland   Revenue   becomes   more   experienced   in   deploying   the   new   system,   as   new   opportunities   are   identified,   and   as   government   priorities   change.   The   current   release   plan   is   Inland   Revenue’s   view   of   the   sequence   that   best   balances   delivery   risk,   cost   to   deliver,   and   impacts   on   customers   at   this   point   in   time.    In   confidence   Page   14     The   release   plan   will   be   regularly   reviewed   to   ensure   the   optimal   plan   is   being   delivered.   This   will   take   into   consideration:    government   priorities    customer   experience   and   benefits    co ‐ existence    business   needs.    Inland   Revenue   is   also   continuing   to   explore   options   to   accelerate   the   modernisation   of   its   enterprise   support   systems   (E SS).   In   January   2018,   Inla n d   Revenue   released   an   expression   of   interest   to   the   market   for   ESS.    Transformation   is   the   key   vehicle   for   delivering   Inland   Revenue’s   contribution   to   wider   government   outcomes.   Transformation   will   make   a   major   contribution   to   making   it   easier   for   New   Zealanders   to   interact   with   government.   As   a   result   of   th e   changes   being   made   businesses   will   be   able   to   spend   more   time   on   running   their   businesses   with   tax   as   a   secondary   consideration.   Both   businesses   and   individuals   will   have   greater   confidence   that   they   are   paying   and   receiving   the   right   amounts,   with   the   minimum   of   effort   required   on   their   part.   Inland   Revenue   is   an   act ive   contribut o r   to   cross ‐ government   initiatives,   most   recently   being   involved   in   the   development   of   Te   Hokianga  ā  Wairua   –   end   of   life   services.      Inland   Revenue   is   moving   to   a   more   open   approach   to   information ‐ sharing.   Protecting   taxpayers’   confidentiality   and   privacy   is   still   vital.   However   Inland   Revenue   can   make   life   easier   for   customer s,   support   “tell   government   only   once”,   help   protec t   peo ple   from   crime,   and   become   a   more   intelligence ‐ led   organisation   by   sharing   information   across   government.   Work   with   other   agencies   continues   to   ensure   that   existing   information   sharing   arrangements   continue   to   operate   following   go ‐ live   of   release   2   in   April   2018.     Supporting   customers   to   adapt   to   release   2   changes   In   confidence   Page   15     Release   2   has   implications   predominantly   for   business   customers,   particularly   employers,   tax   agents,   bookkeepers,   payroll   intermediaries,   software   developers,   and   financial   institutions.   The   release   plan   delivers   changes   in   smaller   steps   for   customers.   Compared   to   GST,   the   significantly   larger   scope   and   complexity   of   tax   types   and   proposed   legislative   changes   for   release   2,   means   there   are   much   wider   implications   for   customers.   Reportin g   requirements   will   increase.   Emp l oyers   will   be   required   to   provide   PAYE   information   to   Inland   Revenue   on   payday,   on   a   voluntary   basis   as   a   first   step. 9   Financial   institutions   will   also   be   required   to   report   more   information   about   non ‐ residents.   Implementing   more   products   in   START   will   require   more   customers   to   work   between   the   old   and   new   systems.    Building   on   the   successes   and   lessons   learnt   from   Stage   1,   Inland   Revenue   is   committed   to   supporting   customers   to   prepare   for   the   chan ges   earlier   by   providing   them   with   relevant   information   in   a   timely   manner.    Existing   chann els   that   achieved   good   awareness   will   be   used   again   for   release   2   to   help   customers   understand   the   changes.   New   approaches   will   be   introduced   to   help   target   groups   who   may   need   more   support.   Inland   Revenue   will   provide   information   to   other   grou ps   such   as   industry   associations,   service   providers   and   tax                                                                       9   Subject   to   legislation.   professional   bodies   to   help   reach   a   wider   audience.   These   advocacy/industry   groups   will   play   an   important   change   leadership   role   in   their   respective   industries.   The   change   approach   for   all   groups   of   customers   is   twofold:    Getting   ready   for   the   changes   being   introduced   in   release   2   (from   now   until   March   2018).    Encouraging   adoption   of   ne w   services   (from   now   and   also   from   April   2018   onward s ).   Communications   and   engagement   will   vary   by   customer   group   depending   on   their   needs.    Business   customers,   tax   intermediaries,   and   software   developers   will   experience   the   most   change.   Release   2   will   implement   legislation,   the   myIR   service,   and   how   these   customer   groups   interact   with   Inland   Revenue.   There   will   be   an   increased   ne ed   for   these   customers   to   work   across   two   systems.   Busines s   customers   The   key   changes   for   business   customers   in   release   2   are:    Proposed   changes   to   legislation   mean   PAYE   information   will   need   to   be   provided   to   Inland   Revenue   every   payday   –   businesses   can   choose   to   do   so   from   Ap ril   2018   and   must   do   so   from   Apr il   2019. 10    Larger   businesses   with   in ‐ house   IT   systems   will   need   to   start   thinking   about   changes   to   their   customised   software   as,   under   current   proposals,   PAYE   information   will   need   to   be   reported   to   Inland   Revenue   every   payday   from   April   2019.    An   enhanced   myIR   service   will   enable   businesses   to   correct   payroll   errors   themselves   once   th ey   have   adopted   payday   filing,   and   also   to   manage   withholding   taxes,   gaming   mac hine   duty,   and   fringe   benefit   tax.    The   introduction   of   the   accounting   income   method   option   for   calculating   provisional   tax.   In   the   lead   up   to   the   go ‐ live   of   release   2   in   April   2018,   Inland   Revenue   will   work   directly   with   the   businesses   that   nee d   to   make   the   most   changes.   This   will   include   working   closel y   with   large   enterprises   with   customised   payroll   systems   including   government   agencies,   and   communicating   directly   with   businesses   still   filing   on   paper.   In   addition,   Inland   Revenue   will:    Leverage   established   relationships   with   customers   through   existing   account   management   arrangements    Work   with   in dustry   association   groups,   software   developers   and   tax   agents   to   provide   content   an d   information   for   their   members   and   clients.   Inland   Revenue   recognises   that   businesses   rely   on   others   to   provide   advice   and   support.                                                                      10   Ibid    In   confidence   Page   16      Increase   the   visits   made   to   businesses   by   the   Community   Compliance   team.    Communicate   directly   with   businesses   about   changes   they   need   to   be   aware   of   –   this   will   be   targeted   to   their   situation   and   needs.    Increase   the   use   of   social   media,   such   as   making   videos   available   on   YouTube.   Prior   to   go ‐ live,   opport unities   will   be   provided   for   customers   to   validate   the   new   services   being   introduced   in   release   2.   Government   a gencies   who   share   information   with   Inland   Revenue   will   have   early   visibility   of   specifications   and   test   plans   to   ensure   that   existing   information   shares   continue   to   work   effectively   after   go ‐ live.   Financial   institutions   From   1   July   20 17,   financial   institutions   have   been   required   to   identify   accounts   held   by   non ‐ residents,   collect   infor mation,   and   report   this   information   annually   to   Inland   Revenue.   The   information   collected   includes   identity   details,   account   balance,   and   income   and   payment   information.   From   April   2018,   financial   institutions   will   have   three   different   options   for   submitting   their   information   to   Inland   R evenue   (based   on   volume).   They   will   need   to   provide   their   inf ormation   to   Inland   Revenue   by   30   June   2018.   The   technology   development   is   progressing   well   and   testing   is   underway.   Financial   institutions   are   also   impacted   by   a   number   of   other   changes   being   introduced   over   2018   and   2019.   These   include   the   investment   income   and   employment   income   proposals,   and   cha nges   to   resident   withholding   tax   and   non ‐ resident   withholding   tax.   Inland   Revenue   is   working   closely   with   financial   institutions,   the   major   banks   in   particular,   to   ensure   these   are   implemented   as   smoothly   as   possible.   Software   developers   Accounting   and   payroll   software   developers   will   need   to   make   cha nges   to   their   products   to   accommodate   the   introduction   of   the   account i ng   income   method   (AIM)   option   for   calculating   provisional   tax   as   well   as   the   move   to   payday   reporting 11 .      To   ensure   changes   are   introduced   smoothly,   Inland   Revenue   will   provide   software   developers   with   a   fully   integrated   test   environment   to   enable   new   services   to   be   tested   end ‐ to ‐ end   before   release.   From   now   until   go ‐ live   of   release   2,   Inland   Revenue   will   meet   frequently   with   key   developers,   continue   workshops   to   discuss   ch anges   and   issues   as   they   arise,                                                                      11   Subject   to   legislation.   and   provide   content   for   them   to   communicate   to   their   customers.   Following   go ‐ live,   Inland   Revenue   will   work   with   software   developers   to   drive   uptake   of   filing   through   software.    Further   work   with   software   developers   is   required   to   develop   PAYE   filing   through   software   and   to   develop   alternative   solutions   to   providing   tax   agents   with   transactional   data.   Tax   agents,   payroll   inte rmediaries   and   book keepers   will   need   to   make   changes   to   how   they   operate.   These   groups   are   key   influencers   with   their   clients   regarding   uptake   of   digital   services,   use   of   software   and   the   adoption   of   the   accounting   income   method   option   for   calculating   provisional   tax.   The   release   2   changes   for   ta x   agents,   intermediaries   and   bookkeep ers   in clude:    The   introduction   of   payday   reporting,   initially   on   a   voluntary   basis. 12    The   introduction   of   the   accounting   income   method   option   for   calculating   provisional   tax.    Improved   functionality   and   some   navigation   changes   for   myIR   for   PAYE,   withholding   taxes,   gaming   machine   duty,   fringe   benefit   tax,   and   provisional   tax   (including   the   accounting   income   method   option).    There   will   be   continued   impacts   resulting   from   working   in   two   systems   for   tr ansf e rs   until   April   2019.   This   is   an   issue   for   tax   agents   in   particular.                                                                      12   Ibid.   Software   developers   have   a   critical   role   to   play   in   communicating   change   and   providing   education/training   to   their   customers.    In   confidence   Page   17     In   the   lead   up   to   go ‐ live   of   release   2   in   April   2018,   Inland   Revenue   is   continuing   to:    attend   industry   conferences,   forums   and   road ‐ shows    meet   regularly   with   professional   bodies    hold   webinars,   and    communicate   through   existing   newsletters   such   as   Agents   Answers.   Since   early   2018,   Inland   Revenue   has:    Communicat ed   directly   with   all   tax   agents,   intermediaries   and   boo kkeepers.    Increased   the   use   of   social   media,   such   as   making   videos   available   on   YouTube.    Held   seminars   regionally   to   ensure   tax   agents,   intermediaries   and   bookkeepers   are   aware   of   what   they   need   to   do   on   day   1.   Manuals,   guides,   “how   to”   videos   and   system   demos   will   be   devel oped   and   made   available   during   these   sem i nars.    Increased   the   number   of   on ‐ site   visits   made   by   the   Community   Compliance   team.      Tax   agents   There   is   an   approximate   60/40   split   between   tax   agents   who   are   members   of   professional   bodies,   such   as   Chartered   Accountants   Australia   and   New   Zealand   (CA   ANZ) ,   and   those   who   are   not.   Agents   who   are   members   of   professional   bodies   will   receive   communications   from   both   Inland   Revenue   and   from   the   body   they   are   a   member   of.   Inland   Revenue   will   provide   content   to   tax   professional   bodies   to   communicate   to   their   members.   This   will   be   co ‐ ordinated   so   th at   communications   are   comp lementary.   Tax   agents   who   are   not   represented   by   a   professional   body   will   have   the   opportunity   to   have   more   one ‐ on ‐ one   contact   (as   appropriate)   with   Inland   Revenue’s   Community   Compliance   team   and   will   receive   communications   from   software   developers.   Further   work   with   tax   agents   is   required   to   develop   alternative   sol utions   for   how   they   access   transactional   data,   and   with   intermediaries   on   gatewa y   services.   Other   customers   are   less   affected   however   they   will   still   need   to   be   aware   of   the   changes   being   made.   For   the   majority   of   customers,   there   will   be   no   major   changes   in   2018.   Customers   will   continue   to   use   myIR   for   online   services   and   th ere   will   be   more   time   for   them   to   become   familiar   with   the   new   system   and   prepare   for   fut ure   releases.   Now   that   consultation   has   concluded,   proposals   to   make   individuals’   tax   obligations   simpler   and   more   certain   will   be   finalised   for   Ministers   to   consider.   Engagement   with   key   stakeholders   and   in dustry   groups   has   focussed   on   the   release   pla n   in   recent   months.   Tax   agent   professional   bodies   Inland   Revenue   continues   to   work   closely   with   tax   professional   bodies   including   CA   ANZ,   the   Accountants   and   Tax   Agents   Institute   of   New   Zealand   (ATAINZ)   and   the   New   Zealand   Bookkeepers’   Association.   The   key   focus   in   recent   months   has   been   en surin g   thes e   groups   understand   the   release   plan   and   what   it   means   for   them   and   their   members.   Regular   meetings   are   underway   with   CA   ANZ   members   in   various   locations   around   the   country   to   ensure   they   understand   what   changes   are   being   introduced   when.    Inland   Revenue   continues   to   attend   conferences,   having   had   representatives   at   both   the   CA   ANZ   fraud   confere nce   and   the   Bookkeepers’   Association   annu al   conference.   In   addition,   the   department   attended   the   ATAINZ   board   meeting.   The   department   also   presented   at   the   New   Zealand   Payroll   Practitioners   Association’s   (NZPPA)   annual   summit.   Members   of   both   CA   ANZ   and   ATAINZ   have   had   the   opportunity   discuss   the   improvements   to   GST   online   services,   the   ac counting   income   method   option   for   calculating   pr ovisional   tax,   and   payday   reporting.   Submissions   on   the   proposals   for   Modernising   the   Tax   Administration   Act   Discussion   Document   have   been   discussed   with   the   CA   ANZ   Tax   Advisory   Group.     Focus   groups   have   been   established   to   assess   and   provide   advice   about   the   readiness   of   tax   agents,   payroll   intermediaries   and   bookkeepers   for   go ‐ live.    In   confidence   Page   18     Business   and   industry   groups   Inland   Revenue   continues   to   be   actively   involved   in   the   MYOB   Employer   Essentials   series,   MBIE   small   business   road ‐ shows,   and   Tax   Management   New   Zealand   road ‐ shows.   MBIE’s   small   business   road ‐ shows   have   also   provided   the   opportunity   to   engage   with   M ā ori   businesses   in   Kaitaia   and   Whakatane,   and   Chinese   businesses   in   Au ckland,   to   better   understand   their   difficulties   with   estimating   provisional   tax   and   amending   returns   in   particular.   The   E   RERE!   –   The   Future   of   the   M ā ori   Economy   –   conference   in   Rotorua,   jointly   hosted   by   MBIE   and   Te   Puni   K ō kiri,   provided   another   opportunity   to   discuss   business   tax.    Meetings   with   software   providers   and   pa yroll   developers   are   continuing   to   ensure   that   the   changes   to   payday   reporting 13   and   the   introduction   of   the   accounting   income   method   option   for   calculating   provisional   tax   are   successfully   implemented.   A   key   focus   in   recent   months   has   been   working   with   them   to   ensure   they   understand   the   release   plan.                                                                      13   Subject   to   legislation   Inland   Revenue   has   made   good   progress   on   the   development   of   options   for   making   the   accounting   income   method   concept   available   to   larger   businesses.   Phil   O’Reilly,   formerly   Business   NZ,   has   worked   with   Inland   Revenue,   to   help   test   the   issues   identified   with   relevant   medium ‐ sized   businesses.   A   two ‐ week   series   of   workshops   was   held   in   Christchur ch,   Dunedi n,   Tauranga ,   Wellington   and   Auckland   in   late   June   to   early   July   2017   with   key   stakeholders   and   their   medium ‐ sized   business   clients.    Following   this   successful   series   of   workshops,   Inland   Revenue   held   a   Service   Innovation   Lab   to   look   at   possible   solutions   to   the   problems   that   have   been   defined.   Financial   sector   The   departm ent   continues   to   work   with   financial   industr y   representatives   to   help   ready   them   for   the   changes   being   introduced.   A   lot   of   work   has   already   been   done   to   ready   financial   institutions   for   the   automatic   exchange   of   information   with   international   tax   treaty   partners,   and   this   will   continue   in   the   lead   up   to   the   first   reporting   deadline   on   30   J une   2018.    Around   150   people   att ended   financial   industry   information   sessions   in   early   June   2017   to   help   prepare   institutions   for   the   account   holders’   due   diligence   procedures   that   took   effect   from   1   July   2017.   The   sessions   took   place   in   Wellington,   Auckland   and   via   teleconference.   Guidance   material   for   financial   institutions   was   published   in   June   20 17,   and   brochures   were   also   produ ced   and   distributed   to   industry   associations.   A   list   of   participating   jurisdictions   was   published   in   the   Gazette   at   the   end   of   June   2017   and   in   the   July   2017   edition   of   the   Tax   Information   Bulletin.    A   targeted   public   awareness   campaign   ‘Sharing   information   to   combat   glo bal   tax   evasion’   ran   from   1   June   until   14   July   20 17.   The   campaign   highlighted   the   responsibilities   of   account   holders   and   how   the   information   collected   will   be   used.   The   campaign   attracted   approximately   10,000   visits   to   its   landing   page.   Facebook   and   LinkedIn   advertisements   also   provided   good   exposure   with   approximately   3   million   impressions   (the   number   of   tim es   the   post   was   displayed),   and   more   than   4,000   clicks.   A   video   explaining   the   a utomatic   exchange   of   information   was   viewed   about   1,000   times   in   the   English   language   version   and   approximately   9,000   times   in   the   Chinese   version.   Engagement   with   small ‐ to ‐ medium ‐ sized   financial   institutions,   large   financial   institutions,   and   industr y   associations   continues.   Inland   Revenue   is   actively   seeking   their   inv olvement   to   provide   feedback   on   both   the   technology   solution   and   the   legislative   guidance   tools   being   developed.    In   confidence   Page   19     The   major   banks   and   Inland   Revenue   are   also   exploring   the   opportunities   arising   from   a   more   digital   environment.   Several   workshops   have   been   held   with   the   major   banks   to   discuss   automation   opportunities   for   requests   for   information   under   section   17   of   the   Tax   Administration   Act,   and   requests   for   deduction   of   tax   from   payments   under   section   1 57.   Government      This   means   working   collaboratively   with   other   government   agencies   to   en sure:    They   are   well   informed   about   the   changes   being   introduced.    They   are   on   track   to   meet   legislative   requirements   such   as   payday   reporting. 14    The   relationships   they   have   with   their   customers   can   be   leveraged   so   that   customers   receive   messages   from   sources   they   are   familiar   with   and   trust.   There   has   been   a   particular   focus   in   recent   months   on   meeting   regularly   with   the   agencies   most   critical   to   the   changes   being   made.   These   are   the   Accident   Compensation   Corporation   (ACC ),   the   Ministry   of   Educ ation /Education   Payroll   Limited,   the   Ministry   of   Social   Development   (MSD)   and   Statistics   New   Zealand.                                                                      14   Subject   to   legislation   Inland   Revenue   and   Education   Payroll   Limited   meet   regularly   to   discuss   PAYE   changes.   On ‐ going   meetings   are   taking   place   with   MSD   to   discuss   how   the   benefit   management   and   revenue   systems   can   work   together   to   ensure   people   are   paid   their   correct   entitlements.   Statistics   New   Zealand   and   Inland   Revenue   are   working   together   to   ensure   existing   inform ation   sharing   arrangements   continue   to   wo rk   effectively   following   the   go ‐ live   of   release   2.   Information   sharing   arrangements   have   also   been   discussed   with   the   Treasury   and   the   Ministry   of   Justice.   In   addition,   regular   meetings   continue   with   MSD   and   ACC   to   align   transformation   programmes.   At   this   stage,   there   is   no   cause   for   con cern   about   the   readiness   of   any   these   agencies   for   release   2   in   April   2018.   Inland   Revenue   will   contin ue   to   work   alongside   ACC,   MSD,   Education   Payroll   Limited,   and   Statistics   New   Zealand   to   ensure   that   any   issues   are   highlighted   and   dealt   with   early.   Communications   and   marketing   activity   is   raising   awareness   of   the   Acco unting   Income   Method.   Communicatio n s   and   marketing   activity   is   continuing   to   raise   awareness   of   AIM.    Five   AIM   webinars   were   run   in   late   2017,   listened   to   by   around   3,500   people,   and   a   further   three   webinars   were   held   in   February   and   March   2018,   one   for   businesses   and   two   for   tax   agents.   Inland   Revenue   also   co ‐ presente d   at   two   webinars   hosted   by   Xero   in   earl y   February   2018   for   their   tax   agents.    General   information   about   AIM   was   published   on   Inland   Revenue’s   website   in   late   September   2017,   and   has   received   about   9,500   unique   views.   Information   is   being   provided   to   small   business   publications   and   newsletters,   and   industry   groups   are   be ing   asked   to   promote   AIM   through   social   media   and   on   their   own   websites.    The   focus   of   communications   is   to   continue   to   provide   information   to   tax   agents,   particularly   to   emphasise   that   AIM   is   easy   and   not   complicated.   There   is   also   a   focus   on   raising   awareness   among   small   businesses,   encouraging   them   to   seek   more   information   from   their   tax   age nt,   if   they   have   one.   Marketin g   AIM   to   customers   began   in   late   February   2018.    Around   250   seminars   will   be   held   around   New   Zealand   to   update   tax   agents   and   businesses   on   the   changes   happening   in   April   2018,   including   AIM.   About   16,000   customers   in   total   are   expe cted   to   attend   one   of   the   seminars,   which   began   in   F ebruary   and   run   until   early   May   2018.   Plans   for   readying   staff   to   support   customers   with   release   2   changes   are   well   in   hand.   Inland   Revenue   people   will   need   to   be   ready   to   support   customers   to   adapt   to   the   changes   being   introduced   in   release   2.   There   will   be   a   strong   focus   on   providing   educ ation   and   information,   either   proactively   through   the   community   compliance   and   acco unt   management   teams   or   reactively   through   cu stomer   contacts.   Inland   Revenue   is   working   across   the   public   sector   to   ensure   that   New   Zealanders   continue   to   receive   the   services   they   do   today,   following   the   changes   being   introduced   by   transformation.    In   confidence   Page   20     A   total   of   4,700   people   will   experience   the   release   2   changes   and   for   many   this   will   mean   a   change   to   some   part   of   their   jobs:    Many   people   will   need   to   work   across   both   FIRST   and   START.     More   than   700   people   will   use   START   for   the   first   time.    A   large   portio n   of   employer   information   work   will   move   into   START.   This   is   a   core   information   source   for   most   tax   types.   Making   amendments   and   resolving   errors   will   require   working   across   two   systems.    The   look   and   feel   and   navigation   for   employer   information   in   START   is   very   different   to   FIRST   and   will   take   time   to   learn.    There   will   be   ch anges   to   how   cases   are   managed.    There   will   be   new   workflow   and   security   permissions   in   START   based   on   the   new   roles   that   are   part   of   the   new   customer   facing   organisation   groups   and   the   associated   new   delegations.     People   have   been   segmented   into   four   groups   based   on   the   level   of   change   they   will   experience:    Individuals   and   groups   who   could   not   continue   to   work   if   they   were   not   ready   for   go ‐ live   (group   A).    Individuals   whose   work   would   be   disrupted   if   they   were   not   ready   for   go ‐ live   (group   B).    Individuals   whose   work   coul d   be   disrupted   if   they   were   not   ready   for   go ‐ live   (grou p   C) .    All   other   non ‐ customer   facing   people   (group   D).   To   ready   people   for   release   2,   Inland   Revenue   will:   1. Deliver   training   –   on ‐ line,   on ‐ the ‐ job   and   classroom   training:   the   latter   will   be   delivered   close   to   go ‐ live.   2. Put   in   place   us er   support  ‐  on ‐ line   help.    3. Introduce   key   users  ‐  to   embed   the   changes.   4. Tailor   communications.   5. Undertake   change   readiness   assessments.   6. Provide   early   life   support  ‐  help   following   go ‐ live.   This   approach   builds   on   the   lessons   learned   from   Stage   1.   The   key   adaptations   are   the   introductio n   of   key   users,   providing   more   time   for   informal   and   on ‐ the ‐ jo b   learning,   focusing   on   the   big   things   people   need   to   know   well   for   day   1   and   week   1,   and   providing   more   time   to   practice   with   START   before   go ‐ live.   Each   group   will   require   different   levels   of   training,   communication   an d   support.   At   the   same   time,   many,   if   not   all,   of   the   4,70 0   people   who   will   experience   release   2   changes   will   be   moving   into   a   new   organisation   design.   People   will   be   moving   into   new   roles   and   teams   in   a   new   structure,   and   may   be   responding   to   increased   customer   contacts   at   the   same   time.    Moving   a   large   num ber   of   people   into   new   structures,   teams   and   roles,   at   the   same   time   as   ch anging   the   processes   and   systems   they   use   to   do   their   work,   is   not   without   its   challenges.   This   will   continue   to   consume   significant   amounts   of   management   attention.    Implementing   a   new   organisational   design   for   Inland   Revenue   In   confidence   Page   21     Inland   Revenue   implemented   the   first   wave   of   its   new   organisation   design   in   February   2018.   This   is   focused   mostly   on   customer   facing   areas   and   is   an   important   step   in   becoming   more   agile   and   intelligence ‐ led,   and   built   around   the   needs   of   customers.   Those   delivering   customer   services   will   be   enabled   and   empowered   to   make   more   decisions   and   resolve   customers’   iss ues   more   quickly.   Five   key   shifts   underpi n   the   new   organisati on   design   as   shown   below.     A   new   organisation   design   will   enable   people   at   Inland   Revenue   to:    Apply   their   skills   more   broadly   to   a   range   of   work.    Work   together   more   closely.    Provide   better   services   to   customers.    Make   the   most   of   a   ne w   and   evolving   working   environment,   supported   by   technology.     In   July   2017,   the   first   steps   towards   a   new   organisation   design   were   confirmed.   In   May   2017,   Inland   Revenue   consulted   with   all   staff   on   the   proposed   design   for   three   new   organisation   groups   and   the   propo sed   process   for   moving   people   into   roles   within   these   gr oups.   The   final   design   was   confirmed   in   July   2017,   with   changes   made   based   on   the   feedback   received.   Three   new   groups   were   implemented   from   12   February   2018:    Customer   and   Compliance   Services   –   Individuals,   Customer   and   Compliance   Services   –   Businesses    Information   and   Intelligence   Services.   Selection   processes   for   senior   leaders,   team   leads,   specialists   and   business   support   roles   in   these   grou ps   were   completed   by   Decemb er   20 17.   Staff   in   customer   facing   roles   received   an   offer   to   appoint   or   confirmation   to   a   role   in   October   2017.   Changes   are   being   made   to   Inland   Revenue’s   working   environment   to   support   the   new   organisa tion   design.   To   support   the   new   or ganisation   design   and   the   implementation   of   release   2,   how   Inland   Revenue   works   will   change:    A   new   decision   making   model   and   broader   delegations   will   be   introduced   so   people   are   clear   about   what   decisions   they   can   make   and   how   to   get   help   if   th ey   need   it.    New   internal   organisation   measures   will   be   developed   that   show   the   impact   of   the   chang es   being   made.    Workflows   will   be   configured   to   new   roles   so   that   people   get   work   relevant   to   their   customer   segment,   skills   and   abilities.    Programmes   will   be   developed   for   new   leaders   and   tailored,   on ‐ go ing   support   provided   for   leaders   at   all   levels.    Performance,   recognition   and   pay   approaches   will   be   redesigned.   New   delegations,   combined   with   broader   roles,   means   that   customers   will   have   their   queries   responded   to   more   quickly   and   will   be   able   to   talk   to   one   person   to   get   more   of   their   queries   resolved.   Inland   Revenue   will   coac h   and   train   people   to   be   able   to   pr ovide   better   service   to   customers.   Inland   Revenue   is   investing   in   its   people   to   grow   their   capabilities.   The   new,   broad   roles   focus   on   the   outcomes   that   need   to   be   achieved   and   the   capabilities   required   for   a   role.   Capabilities   are   a   person’ s   unique   mix   of   skills,   knowledge,   experience   and   attitudes.   Inland   Revenu e   has   identified   12   people   capabilities   that   describe   what   is   important   for   the   future,   transformed   organisation.   They   are:    business   acumen   and   partnering    change   management    complex   compliance   management    customer   advisory    In   confidence   Page   22      data,   analytics   and   insight    design   and   integration    digital   literacy    information   and   knowledge   management    leadership    policy   quality   and   agility    quality   decision   making,   and     workforce   management.   Help   will   be   provided   so   that   people   develop   the   skills   and   capabilities   they   need   now   and   in   the   future.   Sup ported   by   their   leader,   people   will   grow   and   build   their   capabilities   over   time,   mostly   as   they   gain   experience   in   their   role.   A   range   of   learning   opport unities   will   be   available:    On   the   job   –   for   example   through   taking   on   new   things,   trying   new   ways   of   working,   working   in   a   project   team,   acting   in   a   hig her   level   role,   reviewing   how   something   went   and   work i ng   out   what   could   be   done    differently   next   time.    Self ‐ directed   learning   –   for   example   having   a   coach   or   mentor,   buddying   up   with   someone   or   looking   at   information   online.    Training   –   for   example   through   face ‐ to ‐ face   courses ,   e ‐ learning,   workshops   and   w ebinars.   The   most   significant   part   of   people’s   learning   and   development   will   be   on   the   job.   Inland   Revenue   will   provide   tools   to   support   people   to   do   that,   and   has   already   made   resources   available   to   give   people   more   information   about   the   capabilities   and   how   they   can   be   developed.     Furthe r   change   will   occur   in   2019.   Once   tra nsformation   is   complete,   Inland   Revenue   will   be   a   smaller,   different   and   more   efficient   organisation.   The   overall   workforce   is   expected   to   reduce   by   25–30%,   although   total   workforce   numbers   are   not   expected   to   change   significantly   until   2019/20.   Implementing   a   new   organisation   design   will   enable   delivery   of   the   administrative   savings   committed   to   as   part   of   Inland   Revenue   fu nding   contributio n   towards   transformation.   The   changes   being   introduced   by   transformation   will   mean   that   Inland   Revenue   will   need   fewer   people   in   the   future.    Customers   will   be   easily   able   to   get   their   tax   and   social   policy   payments   right   first   time,   avoid   erro rs   and   have   a   clear   view   of   what   they’ve   paid   and   what   they   ow e   during   the   year.   They’ll   spend   far   less   time   and   effort   ensuring   they   meet   their   obligations   and   receive   their   correct   social   policy   entitlements,   as   tax   will   be   correctly   withheld   and   assistance   provided   at   the   time   it   is   needed.     As   much   as   possible,   any   re ductions   in   the   numbers   of   people   workin g   in   partic ular   roles   will   be   managed   through   attrition   and   flexible   workforce   arrangements.    Since   mid ‐ 2016,   Inland   Revenue   has   adopted   a   deliberate   approach   of   filling   the   majority   of   vacancies   with   fixed ‐ term   employees.   As   at   31   December   2017,   the   departme nt   had   approximately   560   people   on   fixed   term   agreements   representing   around   10%   of   the   total   workforce.   The   conclusion   of   fixed ‐ term   arrangements   will   contribute   significantly   to   the   future   reduction   in   workforce.   If   there   is   a   need   to   reduce   the   number   of   people   in   particular   roles,   Inland   Revenue   will   look   at   optio ns   for   doing   that   and   will   discuss   them   with   staff   and   th e   unions   as   appropriate.   Inland   Revenue   continues   to   work   with   the   unions   to   implement   the   new   organisation   design,   although   this   is   not   without   its   challenges.   During   the   change   process,   the   Public   Service   Association   (PSA)   initiated   legal   proceedings   regarding   aspects   of   the   process   for   moving   peo ple   into   new   roles.   A   ruling   by   the   Employment   Court   on   21   De cember   2017,   the   Employment   Court   resolved   some   aspects   of   the   process.   In   January   2018,   Inland   Revenue   and   the   PSA   had   good   discussions   about   the   process   for   and   concerns   of   the   members   the   PSA   represent,   and   reached   agreement   on   the   way   forwa rd.   The   agre eme nt   includes   commitments   about   the   relationship   generally   as   well   as   a   specific   way    In   confidence   Page   23     forward   in   support   of   implementing   the   three   new   organisation   groups.   A   further   hearing   in   the   Employment   Court   is   scheduled   for   14 ‐ 28   May   2018   regarding   aspects   of   the   selection   process   for   some   roles.   As   a   result   of   the   PSA   challenge,   the   selection   process   for   these   roles   was   amended   so   that   the   th ree   new   groups   could   be   established   as   planned   on   12   February   2018 .   However,   Inland   Revenue   understands   that   the   PSA   has   since   withdrawn   proceedings.   Procuring   the   products   and   services   required   for   transformation   In   confidence   Page   24     All   procurement   processes   continue   to   be   consistent   with   Government   Rules   of   Sourcing.   Since   the   July   2017   update,   Inland   Revenue   has   completed   further   procurement   activity   to   select   the   services   and   products   required   for   transformation.   A   number   of   agreements   have   been   signed   in   recent   months.   These   include:    A   support   contract   with   Deloitte   which   consolidates   the   ma nagement   of   Deloitte   support   ac tivities   acros s   IT.    Contracts   with   Assurity   and   Team   Asparona   –   our   testing   and   information   and   knowledge   management   solution   partners   respectively.    Two   new   statements   of   work   (SoW)   with   Prismac   and   Ebit   Asia   Pacific   to   continue   progressing   changes   to   the   cheque   payment   processing   system   and   an   Automa ted   Remittance   Processing   solution   (ARP   Solution).   A   number   of   commercial   ag reements   have   also   been   progressed.   These   include:    The   scope   of   Assurity   test   services   was   confirmed   following   the   finalisation   of   the   release   plan.    The   advanced   analytics   proof   of   concept   request   for   proposal   (RFP)   was   awarded   to   PWC   and   Smar t   Associates.    The   customer   experience   RFP   was   awarded   to   two   New   Zealand   s uppliers,   Davanti   and   Alphero.   Market   engagement   is   underway   in   a   number   of   areas:      requests   for   proposals   (RFP)   for   a   web   content   management   and   an   advanced   analytics   platform    an   expression   of   interest   (EOI)   document   for   enterprise   supp ort   services.   Inland   Revenue   continues   to   consum e   common   capabilities   and   ICT   capabilities   where   they   exist,   meet   the   department’s   business   needs   and   are   cost ‐ effective.     Infrastructure ‐ as ‐ a ‐ Service   (IaaS),   Software   Framework   Agreements   and   Telecommunications ‐ as ‐ a ‐ Service   (TaaS)   are   being   used   by   Inland   Revenue.   Inland   Revenue   has   selected   Vodafone   to   provide   network   co nnectivity   and   move   additional   serv i ces   to   the   all ‐ of ‐ government   (AoG)   common   capability   (TaaS).   A   memorandum   of   understanding   has   been   signed   between   Inland   Revenue   and   the   Government   Chief   Digital   Officer   for   Inland   Revenue   to   adopt   the   AoG   Cloud   Framework   Agreement   for   the   provision   of   Amazon   Web   Services.   The   AoG   Co nsultancy   Services   panel   is   expected   to   be   established   in   December   2017 .   In   the   meantime,   Inland   Revenue   has   joined   the   New   Zealand   Defence   Force   ICT   Professional   Services   syndicated   panel.   This   provides   an   interim   solution   and   allows   the   department   to   access   specialist   ICT   services   quickly.   New   Zealand   businesses   have   secured   a   considerable   amount   of   tra nsformation   work .   Inland   R evenue   seeks   a   wide   range   of   providers   for   transformation   and   will   continue   to   do   so.   Opportunities   are   actively   promoted   to   the   market   place,   including   New   Zealand   businesses   –   for   example,   advertising   on   GETS   and   communications   with   vendors.     From   1   July   2014   to   31   December   2017,   $303m   has   been   spent   on   comp anies   and   indi vidual   contractors   providing   services   to   transformation,   of   which   $221m   (73%)   has   been   spent   on   New   Zealand   resident   businesses.    Both   delivery   partners,   FAST   and   Accenture,   have   recruited   New   Zealand   staff.   FAST   has   employed   23   New   Zealanders   as   START   developers   out   of   65   total   employees   in   New   Zealand.   Ac centure   have   employed   in   excess   of   40.   Inland   Reven ue   continue s   to   share   its   commercial   expertise   with   other   agencies.   Lessons   learned   have   been   shared   with   the   Ministry   of   Health   and   Land   Information   New   Zealand   (LINZ).   Inland   Revenue   also   shared   insights   with   the   Ministry   and   LINZ   regarding   improved   vendor   segmentation,   vendor   management   processes   an d   partner   governance.   Inland   Revenue   contin ues   to   work   with   DIA   and   MBIE   to   explore   options   for   a   single   integrated   solution   for   vendor   sourcing,   contract   management,   purchasing   and   payments   for   vendor   relationship   management.   The   Ministry   of   Education   and   Inland   Revenue   are   continuing   to   work   closely   together   to   help   the   Minis try   reduce   the   time   it   takes   to   pay   vendor   invoices.   Managing   and   governing   transformation    In   confidence   Page   25     Transformation   is   tracking   to   plan.   Release   2   is   on   schedule   and   costs   are   tracking   as   expected.   Monitoring   focuses   on   delivery   progress   and   realisation   of   benefits.    Inland   Revenue   and   the   Treasury   have   worked   together   to   agree   the   key   performance   indicators   (KPIs)   and   outcome   measures   that   will   be   used   to   monitor   progress   in   realising   the   benefits   and   outc o mes   from   transformation.   Unlike   the   single   product   implemented   in   Stage   1,   future   stages   will   overlap   and   be   implemented   through   a   series   of   releases.   To   reflect   this,   progress   is   being   monitored   through   a   set   of   time ‐ bound   indicators,   rather   than   indicators   related   to   a   particular   stage.   There   are   three   main   measures   of   success   for   transformatio n:    easier   for   customers    reduced   time   and   cost   to   i mplement   policy   (policy   agility),   and    administrative   savings   to   Inland   Revenue.   Progress   towards   achieving   these   outcomes   will   be   measured   against   a   number   of   lead   and   lag   indicators   (please   refer   to   appendix   3),   and   th rough   case   studies   (please   refer   to   appendix   4).   Case   studies   will   be   used   to   show   observable   changes   for:    improved   outcomes   for   customers   from   more   secure   sharing   of   information    agility,   and    revenue/compliance   uplift.   Transformation   remains   inherently   high   risk.   Transformation   is   complex   and   challenging.   Inland   Revenue   is   now   operating   two   systems   and   the   departme nt’s   risk   profile   has   increased.   It   will   remain   high   until   the   completion   of   transformatio n   due   to   the   need   for   old   and   new   systems   to   co ‐ exist.      The   key   risks   facing   transformation   were   identified   and   communicated   to   Ministers   as   part   of   the   2015   business   case.   The   most   significant   risks   and   the   ris k   profile   for   transformation   are   reported   regularly   to   the   Portfolio   Governance   Committee   and   to   the   Ministers   of   Finance   and   Revenue.   At   the   end   of   January   2018,   the   risk   profile   for   transformation   was   amber.   The   change   since   the   July   2017   update,   which   reported   a   light   amber   risk   profile,   is   due   to   the   work   required   to   confirm   the   release   plan   for   future   stages.    An   am ber   profile   means   that   risks   and   mitigations   are   reasonably   define d   and   un derstood,   and   support   is   needed   from   senior   leaders   to   actively   manage   specific   issues   in   defined   areas.    Current   risks   reported   to   the   Portfolio   Governance   Committee   relate   to:    The   need   for   legislative   change   that   has   not   been   anticipated,   resulting   in   Inland   Revenue   bein g   unable   to   meet   legislated   timing.    Changes   to   scope,   timescales   and   funding.    The   scale   of   change   impacting   revenue   distribution   and   collection,   Inland   Revenue’s   ability   to   achieve   performance   targets,   and   source   and   retain   peo ple   with   the   right   skills.    Inland   Re venue   not   meeting   expect ations   regarding   the   realisation   of   benefits,   adoption   and/or   delivery   of   all ‐ of ‐ Government   capabilities.    Government   losing   confidence   in   Inland   Revenue’s   ability   to   deliver.    Co ‐ existence.   Please   refer   to   appendix   5   for   a   summary   of   the   most   significant   risks   for   transform ation   as   at   January   2018.   The   risk   profile   has   been   refreshed   following   the   endorsement   of   the   release   plan   by   the   Portfolio   Governance   Committee   in   August   20 17.   The   most   significant   risks   have   been   re ‐ assessed   on   the   basis   of   release   2,   rather   than   over   the   life   of   the   programme   as   was   previously   the   case.    Four   new   risks   have   been   raised   since   the   last   update ,   two   have   been   closed   and   the   status   of   one   has   changed.   The   new   risks   ra ised   relate   to:    Managing   the   time   demands   on   key   core   resources Transformation   is   recognised   as   a   high   risk   initiative.   Robust   risk   management   approaches   are   in   place,   and   the   assurance   programme   forms   an   important   part   of   management   of   risks.    In   confidence   Page   26      Inland   Revenue’s   ability   to   retain   people   with   the   right   skills    The   Unisys   mainframe,   on   which   FIRST   resides,   becoming   unsupported   and   end   of   life   in   June   2021   (this   is   a   known   risk   that   is   now   reported   to   the   PGC   given   its   approaching   proximity)    Inland   Revenue’s   ability   to   attract   people   with   the   right   skills.   Two   risks   have   been   closed   since   the   July   201 7   update.   One   related   to   disruption   to   transition   processes   caused   by   not   havin g   union   support.   This   has   been   replaced   with   two,   new   separate   risks   regarding   union   disruption   and   loss   of   union   support.   These   risks   are   not   reported   to   the   Portfolio   Governance   Commi ttee.   The   other   closed   risk   related   to   previously   unk nown   anomalies   being   discovered   during   detailed   design.   This   risk   has   been   closed   for   Stage   1   and   release   2,   and   a   new   risk   has   been   raised   for   release   3.   This   risk   is   not   reported   to   the   Portfolio   Governance   Committee.   The   rating   of   one   risk   has   improved   since   the   July   20 17   update.   This   relates   to   insufficient   fundi ng   to   complete   delivery   of   transformation   due   to   competing   priorities.   Following   discussions   in   late   2017   with   the   Investment   Panel   and   Treasury,   Inland   Revenue’s   view   is   that   this   risk   has   a   reduced   likelihood   of   occurring.   While   risks   may   bec ome   issues   from   time   to   time,   this   is   not   unexpec te d.   Should   any   opportunities   or   issues   arise   that   may   impact   timelines,   costs,   benefits   or   risk   profile   these   will   be   highlighted   for   Ministers   to   consider.     Assurance   reviews   are   on ‐ going   to   provide   confidence   that   transformation   continues   to   be   well   managed   and   governed.   Inland   R evenue   undertakes   reg u lar   independent   quality   assurance   (IQA)   and   technical   quality   assurance   (TQA)   reviews.   The   outcomes   of   previous   assurance   reviews   are   included   in   earlier   business   cases   and   transformation   updates.   Three   external   assurance   reviews   have   been   completed   since   the   last   update   in   July ‐ 2017.    A   Gateway   0   (strategic   assessment)   review   was   completed   in   Ju ly   2017.   The   review   team’s   vi ew   was   that   transformation   is   on   a   positive   trajectory,   due   in   large   part   to   the   strength   of   leadership   and   governance.   The   review   team   commented   that   “the   quality   and   capability   of   its   leadership   and   governance   is   first   rate   and   provides   a   basis   for   confidence” .    A   Gateway   0   (strateg ic   assessment)   and   4   (r eadiness   for   service)   review   completed   in   March   2018   found   that   transformation   “...   continues   to   be   strongly   led,   governed   and   managed” .    The   review   team   noted   positive   momentum   within   Inland   Revenue,   “...   there   is   a   high   degree   of   confidence   arising   from   considerable   system   testing   in   readines s   for   release   2   in   April   2018”.   Overall,   the   Gateway   review   team   rated   tran sformation   as   amber/green.    In   their   August   2017   IQA6/TQA5   report,   KPMG   noted   that   “In   general,   the   Programme   overall   continues   to   be   managed   in   accordance   with   good   industry   practice,   and   we   also   noted   some   welcome   improvements   since   our   prior   reviews” .      Fieldwork   for   IQA7/TQA6   is   currently   underway.   This   review   is   assessing   Inland   Reve nue’s   readine ss   for   go ‐ live   of   release   2.   Appendix   1   –   Transformation   roadmap   In   confidence   Page   27         Appendix   2   –   Release   plan   In   confidence   Page   28         Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA