\[ IN CONFIDENCE\] Proactive release: This document has been released by Inland Revenue under section 18(3) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. This release supports the purposes of the Official Information Act 1982 by increasing progressively the availability of official information to the people of New Zealand. Inland Revenue report: Transformation status update: February 2022 Date: 10 March 2022 Priority: Medium Security level: In confidence Report number: IR2022/096 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Finance Note the contents of this report None Minister of Revenue Note the contents of this report None C ontact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Greg James Deputy Commissioner, Transformation Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA 3 IR2022/096: Transformation status update: February 2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 5. Between 1 July 2014 and 30 June 2020, the programme spent $747 million in operating, and $374.9 million in capital. Any under-spending to date has either been moved to later periods or returned to the Crown. 6. The overall budget for the current phase of transformation, Stage 4, is $278 million for operating expenditure and $90.3 million for capital expenditure. Stage 4 delivery operating costs have changed this month to reflect funding approved for some of the change activity we had planned to do, which was deferred due to the impacts of COVID- 19. 7. We have confirmed the amount of funding we expect to hand back at the closure of the programme (IR2022/037 refers). Recommendatio ns 8. I recommend that you note the contents of this report. Noted Noted Greg James Deputy Commissioner, Transformation 10 March 2022 Hon Grant Robertson Hon David Parker Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue / /2022 / /2022 4 IR2022/096: Transformation status update: February 2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Progress updates Decommissioning 9. We are on track with our decommissioning activity. 10. As at February 2022, we had decommissioned approximately 88 % of our heritage systems, and removed about 50% of the infrastructure components from our heritage data centres. There is no direct correlation between applications and infrastructure, as much of the infrastructure supports multiple applications. 11. A key achievement during February 2022 was the successful shutdown and removal of our heritage data warehouse, an application our staff had previously used to analyse data. 12. Our high-level timetable is unchanged and remains: • From 1 December 2021 until early April 2022, we will shut down old heritage systems, archive any data that is to be retained, and then remove the systems and databases. • In April 2022, once all the systems have been removed, the network connections and supporting services will be shut down, and the process of dismantling and disposing of the infrastructure will begin. • We remain on track to e xit our heritage Unisys data centres by 30 June 2022. Independent quality assurance reviews 13. The final Gateway review to be completed on the programme will take place during the week beginning 28 March 2022. This will be a final Gate 0 (Strategic Assessment) review. We expect to report the results of the review to the Minister of Revenue during April 2022. Identity control and print replacement initiatives 14. Last month (IR2022/043 refers), we reported that we were experiencing some challenges with the identity control and administration 1 project and print replacement projects. The identity control and administration initiative is meeting its revised plan and is on schedule, and the print replacement project is now on track. Key risks and issues 15. The transformation programme’s risk profile has improved to light green. A light green profile means that risks are under control and mitigations are effective. 16. There are no new issues (a risk that has been realised) to report. 17. As of February 2022, the programme had a total of six open risks 2 , none of which are reported to the Portfolio Governance Committee (PGC). 18. The one remaining risk previously reported to the PGC was closed during February 2022. The risk relating to delays in decommissioning our heritage data warehouse, an application our staff use to analyse data, has been closed. The warehouse is now available to be decommissioned, with final quality checks and archiving having been completed. 1 Management of user accounts, roles, and access rights for individuals in an organisation. 2 During February 2022, nine programme risks were closed, including one reported to the PGC. 5 IR2022/096: Transformation status update: February 2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Coming up in the next two months 19. Key activities over the next two months include: March 2022 • Continue with decommissioning activity. • Final Gateway review. April 2022 • Continue with decommissioning activity. • Final progress update considered by the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee.