1 Goods and services tax on listed services GST information for drivers, deliverers, and accommodation owners operating in the sharing economy AD277 Online marketplaces (also known as digital platforms) must collect GST on all listed services provided through their online marketplace. Find out what you need to do. The listed services rules Since 1 April 2024, GST registered online marketplaces that facilitate the sale of listed services by sellers must collect and pay GST of 15% when the service is performed, provided, or received in New Zealand. These GST rules do not apply to services that do not use an online marketplace. For example, services you sell through your own website, over the phone, by email or in person. Websites or apps supplying their own services directly to customers, are not online marketplaces. These rules do not affect them. For example, a platform that provides delivery services directly to customers. If you are hired by one of these websites or apps, either as an employee or an independent contractor, these rules will not apply to you. If you are unsure whether you are using an online marketplace, please check with them. What listed services are Listed services are: • ride-sharing and ride-hailing • food and beverage delivery • short-stay and visitor accommodation. Listed services do not include supplies of residential rental accommodation that are exempt from GST. This will generally be the case if the accommodation is used by the tenant as their home and there is a residential tenancy agreement. Online marketplaces must also collect GST on closely connected services provided by the same seller if they are available through their marketplace. For example, holiday rental cleaning fees charged on top of the accommodation costs. How you are affected If you perform or provide listed services in New Zealand using an online marketplace, how these rules apply to you depend on whether you are GST registered or not. You must tell your online marketplace if you are GST registered or not. If you are registered for another activity, you still need to tell them. Provide your marketplace operator with your: • name • IRD number • GST registration status. What you should do now If you are non-GST-registered, a new flat-rate credit scheme applies. Under this scheme your online marketplace will collect GST at the standard 15% rate. Of this amount, they will pass on 8.5% to you as the flat-rate credit, and pay the remaining 6.5% to us. This flat-rate credit is for you to keep and recognises costs you incur when supplying these services. Jared is not GST registered. He provides driving services in Wellington on a ride-hailing platform. The platform charges a customer a fare of $30 for Jared’s services. The platform adds 15% GST to this fare, charging the customer a total of $34.50. As Jared is not GST registered, the GST amount of $4.50 is accounted for in the following way: • $2.55 (8.5%) is passed on to Jared • $1.95 (6.5%) is paid to Inland Revenue. Jared receives a monthly statement from the platform confirming the flat-rate credits passed on to him. Example – Non-GST-registered seller If you are GST-registered, you must still file GST returns. Treat listed services sold through online marketplaces as zero-rated supplies in your GST returns. To do this, see how to complete your GST returns below. If you also supply goods or services outside of an online marketplace, for example services sold over the phone, by email or in person (even if the booking is recorded on an online marketplace), or as part of a separate activity, you must continue to pay GST on those supplies in your returns. 2 There are opt-out rules for large GST-registered sellers, discussed below. If you meet the criteria, you can carry on being responsible for the GST obligations including providing taxable supply information to customers, for example an invoice. When to register for GST If you are not registered for GST, you will need to register if you have earned, or will earn more than $60,000 from all your taxable activities in any 12-month period. This includes sales provided directly to customers, for example through your own website, and supplies made through an online marketplace. You may also register voluntarily if you earn less than this. It is important to tell your online marketplace if your GST registration status changes. How to complete your GST returns To complete your GST returns using myIR, choose the total sales and purchases filing option. Include the value of listed services before GST in both total sales and income and zero-rated supplies. If you are filing using a paper return, include the value of listed services before GST in box 5 and 6. Include the full amount before GST, not the net amount you receive after deducting any marketplace fees or commission. You can continue to claim GST on your costs to make these supplies. For example, some online marketplaces include GST on their fees or commission. If they do, you can claim the GST on these. Amy is GST-registered. She rents out a property on an online marketplace for $100 per night. The property is in New Zealand and is available for short-stay holiday accommodation. The online marketplace adds 15% GST to the nightly rate, charging guests $115. They include $115 as sales and income in their GST return. In Amy’s GST return, she includes: • $100 as total sales and income (box 5) • $100 as zero-rated supplies (box 6). The zero-rated supplies are subtracted from sales and income resulting in $0 total GST collected (box 7). Amy can also claim back GST on any purchases and expenses incurred to rent out her property as short-stay accommodation (in box 11 of the paper return). Example – GST-registered seller What to do if you incorrectly receive flat-rate credits The flat-rate credit scheme cannot apply to you if you are GST registered. If you receive flat-rate credits when you are GST registered, you will need to pay them to us by making a debit adjustment in your GST return. You must also tell your online marketplace you are GST registered. If you continue to receive flat-rate credits incorrectly, penalties may apply to you. Taxable supply information You do not need to provide your customers with taxable supply information, for example an invoice. Online marketplaces must do this. You also do not need to provide taxable supply information to your online marketplace for supplies of listed services through their marketplace. When you must collect and pay GST on your sales If you’re GST-registered and providing services that are not facilitated through an online marketplace, the ordinary GST rules apply and you will have to collect and pay GST. Opt-out rules There are opt-out rules for large GST-registered sellers. Sellers who opt-out remain responsible for the GST obligations including providing taxable supply information to customers. The online marketplace does not need to collect and pay the G ST. 3 You can opt-out if 1 of the following applies. • You’re a non-individual and make more than NZ$500,000 of supplies in a 12-month period. You need to tell your online marketplace in writing, for example by email, you are opting out. Online marketplaces will have different methods for doing this. • You list, or can reasonably expect to list, more than 2,000 nights of accommodation on an online marketplace in a 12-month period. You can enter into an agreement with the online marketplace to opt out. • You make more than $60,000 of supplies of accommodation in a hostel or motel in a 12-month period. You can enter into an agreement with the online marketplace to opt out. To qualify, you must have been registered for GST before 1 April 2024 and provide accommodation through both an online marketplace and directly to your guests. The 2,000-night threshold can be satisfied by a group of related companies. But it is not possible to combine accommodation nights across multiple online marketplaces. Note: For an opt-out agreement to be valid, there must be a written agreement the seller will be responsible for the tax obligations under the GST Act for the supplies of listed services. This includes: • providing customers with taxable supply information, if required • identifying the seller as the supplier • filing GST returns • collecting and paying GST to us. Keep all information relating to opt-outs in your records. Selling a house or vehicle used for listed services If you are GST-registered, the sale of your house or vehicle used to supply listed services will generally be subject to GST. You will also have to pay GST if you stop using your house or vehicle for this purpose. However, you can choose to treat the sale of your house or vehicle as not being subject to GST if: • you have not previously claimed a GST deduction for the house or vehicle • the house or vehicle was not acquired or used for the principal purpose of making taxable supplies • the house or vehicle was not acquired as a zero-rated supply. An exception to this applies if before you sell the asset, you make a debit adjustment for the GST you would have been charged if the sale to you was not zero-rated. If you are non-GST-registered, the sale of your house or vehicle used to supply listed services will generally not be subject to GST, except in situations where you intend to make supplies of more than $60,000 in the next 12-months other than from the sale of the asset. Visit us at ird.govt.nz/sharing-economy These publications contain useful information. To read them, go to taxtechnical.ird.govt.nz • Determination (DET) 24/02: GST on accommodation supplied through electronic marketplaces – opt-out agreement criteria • Tax Information Bulletin (TIB), Vol 35, No 6 (July 2023) pages 66 – 71 More information