IN CONFIDENCE Investment Income Information Withholding tax on Interest (IPS) Gateway Services Business use cases Date: 14 th Dec 2018 Version: v0.02 IN REVIEW Page 2 IN CONFIDENCE Contents Investment income information – Interest pay-as-you-earn (IPS) withholding tax use cases .............................................................................................................. 3 How to use this document ................................................................................. 3 Summary of IPS withholding tax use cases ......................................................... 3 Use Case 01: File a single IPS return for a month period (Single filer) ................... 4 Use Case 02: File multiple IPS returns for a month period (Multi-filer) .................. 9 Use Case 03: Amend IPS return for a specific period (Single filer) ...................... 14 Use Case 04: Amend IPS return line items for a specific period (Multi-filer) ......... 18 Use Case 05: Replace all data in an IPS return (Reverse Replace) ...................... 22 Use Case 06: Intermediary files an IPS return on behalf of a payer (Single filer) .. 25 Use Case 07: IPS return reassessment – retrieve return (Single filer) ................. 29 Use Case 08: IPS return reassessment – retrieve return (Multi-filer) ................... 32 Page 3 IN CONFIDENCE Investment income information – Interest pay-as-you-earn (IPS) withholding tax use cases A selection of IPS withholding tax use cases relevant to investment income information (III) business outcomes are provided on this document. How to use this document The IPS withholding tax business use cases show sequences of IR’s gateway return service operations that could be used to achieve a specific business outcome. They do not comprise a comprehensive list of all required business outcomes, nor are they prescriptive or intended to inhibit software innovation in any way. Additionally the processes described to invoke the return service operations should not inhibit innovation to combine calls across the Gateway Services to achieve the same outcome or solve business needs not described here. Summary of IPS withholding tax use cases # Business use case File Retrieve Status Retrieve Return 1 File a single IPS return for a month period and optionally retrieve return status 1 2\* 2 File multiple IPS returns for a month period and optionally retrieve return status 1 2\* 3 Amend one or more line items in an IPS return as a single filer 1 4 Amend one or more line items in an IPS return as a multi filer. 1 5 Replace all data in an IPS return (Reverse Replace) - optionally retrieve IPS return status for a specified period, file an amended single IPS return the same period for all transactions. 1 6 Intermediary files an IPS return on behalf of a payer for a specific period and optionally retrieve return status 1 2\* 7 Retrieve IPS return as a single filer for the specific period. 1 8 Retrieve IPS return as a multi filer for a specific period. 1\* 2 Note - “\*” indicates optional process steps. Page 4 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 01: File a single IPS return for a month period (Single filer) File a single IPS return for a month period IR Gateway Services Payer Payer Software myIR Services Period after deductions made Optionally Optionally on the next day 1. Confirm IPS transactions are ready to be filed 2. File IPS return 3. Invoke File operation 4. Process IPS return, allocate submission key and confirm response code 6. Request IPS return status 7. Submit IPS return status request 5. Receive IPS return submission key and response code 10. Receive IPS return status and submission key and response code 9. Get data 11. View IPS return status 12. Access IPS account In myIR 13. View IPS account balance for period End Start 8. Invoke retrieveStatus operation Page 5 IN CONFIDENCE Page 6 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 01 details - File a single IPS return for a month period Primary actor Payer Secondary actors Payer software Returns service Description • Payer files a single IPS return for a month period for all investors including single and joint account holders. • Optionally on the next day, the payer retrieves return status of the previous month’s IPS return to confirm if it has been processed. Pre-conditions • Payer is authenticated, authorised and logged into Payer software. • Payer has a logon for myIR. • Payer is enrolled for IPS account as a single filer. • Payer pays investors interest on their investment accounts and deducts withholding tax on the interest. • Payer software collates transactions for all investors of the month period after the month end date. Post-conditions • Payer’s request is accepted and responded to • IR processes the filed IPS return and o posts the submitted investors account holder details on their income tax account in myIR on the next day. o posts the summary return totals for the previous month on the payer’s IPS account in myIR on the next day. • Optionally, the payer accesses the payer’s IPS account in myIR and reconciles the account debit due. • Payer makes payment by due date to IR for the payer IPS account. Constraints • The request must be sent using the Payer software. • To file a valid IPS return, details must be provided for: o the payer’s ird number, o the account type stated as IPS, o the filing period end date, o each account holders name, and at least one contact detail of email, phone or postal address, o at least one set of income information per line item. Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow 1.1 Payer confirms the IPS return for the period is ready to be filed. 1.2 Payer software files a single IPS return for a month period. 1.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the unique submission key. 1.4 Payer software receives the response code and the unique submission key for the IPS return. Optional process to confirm the payer IPS return status, on the next day 1.5 Payer initiates a status request of the IPS return for the specified period. 1.6 Payer software requests the status of the previously filed IPS return using either the period end date or the submission key allocated to that IPS return. 1.7 Returns service ‘RetrieveStatus’ operation is invoked. Page 7 IN CONFIDENCE 1.8 Returns service responds with a response code of “0” (success), the status of the previously filed IPS return and the original submission key. 1.9 Payer software receives the response code and the original submission key for the IPS return. 1.10 Payer views the status of the IPS return. 1.11 Use case ends. 2. Alternative flow – file using gateway to file, then using myIR to view status and debit owed on Payer IPS account 2.1 Payer confirms the IPS return for the period is ready to be filed. 2.2 Payer software files a single IPS return for a month period. 2.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the unique submission key. 2.4 Payer software receives the response code and the unique submission key for the IPS return. Optional process to confirm the payer IPS return status. 2.5 Payer accesses IPS account in myIR 2.6 Payer views status of the IPS return to confirm if it has been processed. 2.7 If processed, payer is able to view the total posted IPS account debit due for payment. 2.8 Use case ends. 3. Exception Flow – message fails schema or other validation 3.1 Payer confirms the IPS return for the period is ready to be filed. 3.2 Payer software files the single IPS return for a month period. 3.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked. 3.4 Returns service processes and invalidates the IPS return payload data due to one or more reasons including • Unrecognised XML request • XML request failed validation • data invalidations e.g. period end date is not a date that exists e.g. 31st September, 31st November or account holder line items are missing for at least one contact detail. 3.5 Returns service returns an error response to the Payer software; with one or more error codes, up to a maximum of 200. (Please see section 5.1 and 5.2 for the response codes in Returns service build pack - III) 3.6 Payer software receives the error response code for the IPS return. 3.7 Payer reviews the error message and makes amendments to the payload format or data then confirms the Payer IPS return is ready to be filed. Note: Even if one or more line items are in error the complete return containing all line items needs to be filed. 3.8 Payer software files a single IPS return for a month period. 3.9 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and a unique submission key. 3.10 Payer software receives the response code and the unique submission key for the IPS return 3.11 Use case ends. Page 8 IN CONFIDENCE 4. Exception Flow – Payer is not registered for service 4.1 Payer is not registered for the ‘Returns’ service. 4.2 Identity and Access services returns an error response to the Payer software due to • Unauthorised access • Unauthorised delegation 4.3 Use case ends. 5. Exception – Payer is not Authorised to use Service 5.1 The payer is valid, however doesn’t have the correct permissions to use this service. 5.2 Returns service fails to authorise the payer and returns an error response to the Payer software (please refer section 5 ‘Response codes’ in the Returns service build pack - III) due to • Unauthorised delegation • Unauthorised vendor • Account type not supported 5.3 Payer software displays the error message 5.4 Payer views the error message 5.5 Use case ends. 6. Exception – Authentication token is expired 6.1 Identity and access services validates and finds the authentication token has expired. 6.2 Identity and access services returns an error response to the Payer software for the authentication failure (please refer section 2 in the Identity and Access Services build pack). 6.3 Identity and access services validate credentials and generates a new token. 6.4 Identity and access services records a new token generation request. 6.5 Use case ends. Page 9 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 02: File multiple IPS returns for a month period (Multi-filer) File multiple IPS returns for a month period IR Gateway Services Payer Payer Software myIR Services Month after deductionsMonth with deductions Optionally 1. Confirm IPS transactions are ready to be filed 2. File IPS return 3. Invoke File operation 4. Process IPS return, allocate submission key and confirm response code 6. Request IPS return status for all submitted returns 7. Submit IPS returns status request by period end date 8. Invoke retrieveStatus operation 5. Receive IPS return submission key and response code 10. Receive IPS return status and submission key and response code 9. Get data 11. View IPS return status for all submitted returns 12. Access IPS account In myIR 13. View IPS account balance for period End Start Reoccurrng Optionally On or after 20 th of month Page 10 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 02 details - File multiple IPS returns for a month period (multi-filer) Primary actor Payer Secondary actors Payer software Returns service Description • Payer files multiple IPS returns for a month period for all investors including single and joint account holders. Example: o IPS Return 1 has line items 1-100,000, o IPS Return 2 has line items 100,001-200,000 and o IPS Return 3 has line items 200,001-250,00 • As a registered multi-filer the payer can file the multiple IPS returns at any time during the month period and up to the 20 th of the month following e.g. they can be filled o at the same time as the IPS withholding tax is deducted on investors account o as a combined filing of all the returns at a point in time. • Optionally, the payer retrieves the return status of the previous month’s IPS return to confirm to confirm if it has been processed. Note: for a multi-filer the return will only be processed on the 20th of the month following the period end date. Pre-conditions • Payer is authenticated, authorised and logged into Payer software. • Payer has a logon for myIR. • Payer is enrolled for IPS account as a multi-filer. • Payer pays investors interest on their investment accounts and deducts withholding tax on the interest. Post-conditions • Payer’s request is accepted and responded to. • IR processes the filed IPS return and posts the submitted investors IPS details on their income tax account in myIR on the next day. • On the 20 th of the month following IR processes and posts single summary return totals for the previous month on the Payers IPS account in myIR on the next day. • Optionally on or after the 20 th of the month following the payer accesses the payer’s IPS account in myIR and reconciles the account debit due. • Payer makes payment to IR for the payer IPS account. Constraints • The request must be sent using the payer’s Payer software. • To file a valid IPS return, details must be provided for: o the payer’s ird number, o the account type stated as IPS, o the filing period end date, o each account holders name, and at least one contact detail of email, phone or postal address, o at least one set of income information per line item. Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow At a filing pattern determined by the payer after withholding deductions on interest accounts has been made. 1.1 Payer confirms a IPS return for the period is ready to be filed. Page 11 IN CONFIDENCE 1.2 Payer software files an IPS return for a defined period for all investor accounts that have had withholding tax on interest deducted. 1.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the unique submission key. 1.4 Payer software receives the response code and the unique submission key for the IPS return. This filing pattern is repeated for multiple IPS returns within the month period. Optional process to confirm the payer IPS return status 1.5 Payer initiates a status request of the IPS returns for the specified period end date. 1.6 Payer software requests the status of the previously filed IPS return using either • the period end date to retrieve the status of all returns • or the unique submission key to retrieve the status of a single IPS return. 1.7 Returns service ‘RetrieveStatus’ operation is invoked. 1.8 Returns service responds with a response code of “0” (success), the status of the previously filed IPS return and the original submission key. 1.9 Payer software receives the status of each requested IPS return. 1.10 Use case ends. 2. Alternative flow – file using gateway to file, then using myIR to view status and debit owed on Payer IPS account At a filing pattern determined by the payer after withholding deductions on interest accounts has been made. 2.1 Payer confirms an IPS return for the period is ready to be filed. 2.2 Payer software files an IPS return for a defined period for all investor accounts that have had withholding tax on interest deducted. 2.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the unique submission key. 2.4 Payer software receives the response code and the unique submission key for the IPS return. This filing pattern is repeated for multiple IPS returns within the month period. Optional processes, normally on the 20 th of the month following 2.5 Payer accesses IPS account in myIR 2.6 Payer views status of all filed IPS returns to confirm if they have been processed. 2.7 If all have processed, payer is able to view the total posted IPS account debit due for payment. 2.8 Use case ends. 3. Exception Flow – message fails schema or other validation 3.1 Payer confirms an IPS return for the period is ready to be filed. 3.2 Payer software files an IPS return for a month period. 3.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked. Page 12 IN CONFIDENCE 3.4 Returns service processes and invalidates the IPS return payload data due to one or more reasons including • Unrecognised XML request • XML request failed validation • data invalidations e.g. period end date is not a date that exists e.g. 31st September, 31st November or account holder line items are missing at least one contact detail. 3.5 Returns service returns an error response to the Payer software; with one or more error codes, up to a maximum of 200. (Please see section 5.1 and 5.2 for the response codes in Returns service build pack - III) 3.6 Payer software receives the error response code for the IPS return. 3.7 Payer reviews the error message and makes amendments to the payload format or data then confirms the Payer IPS return is ready to be filed. Note: Even if one or more line items are in error the complete return containing all line items needs to be filed. 3.8 Payer software files the IPS return for a month period. 3.9 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the unique submission key. 3.10 Payer software receives the response code and a unique submission key for the IPS return. 3.11 Use case ends. 4. Exception Flow – Payer is not registered for service 4.1 Payer is not registered for the ‘Returns’ service. 4.2 Identity and Access services returns an error response to the Payer software due to • Unauthorised access • Unauthorised delegation 4.3 Use case ends. 5. Exception – Payer is not Authorised to use Service 5.1 The payer is valid, however doesn’t have the correct permissions to use this service. 5.2 Returns service fails to authorise the payer and returns an error response to the Payer software (please refer section 5 ‘Response codes’ in the Returns service build pack - III) due to • Unauthorised delegation • Unauthorised vendor • Account type not supported 5.3 Payer software displays the error message 5.4 Payer views the error message 5.5 Use case ends. 6. Exception – Authentication token is expired 6.1 Identity and access services validates and finds the authentication token has expired. Page 13 IN CONFIDENCE 6.2 Identity and access services returns an error response to the Payer software for the authentication failure (please refer section 2 in the Identity and Access Services build pack). 6.3 Identity and access services validate credentials and generates a new token. 6.4 Identity and access services records a new token generation request. 6.5 Use case ends. Page 14 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 03: Amend IPS return for a specific period (Single filer) Amend line items for a IPS return (Single filer) IR Gateway Services Payer Payer Software Period during deductions or after deductions made 4. Process IPS return, provide original submission key and confirm response code 5. Receive IPS return submission key and response code 1. Confirm Amended IPS transactions are ready to be filed 2. File IPS amendment return with updated line items only 3. Invoke File operation Sta rt End Page 15 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 03 details - Amend IPS return line items for a specific period (Single filer) Primary actor Payer Secondary actors Payer software Returns service Description • Payer determines an amendment is required to one or more line items in the previously filed IPS return for a specific period. • Payer files an amended IPS return for the same period which includes only the updated line items. Pre-conditions • Payer is authenticated, authorised and logged into Payer software. • Payer has a logon for myIR. • Payer is enrolled for an IPS account as a single or multi filer. • Payer pays investors interest on their investment accounts and deducts withholding tax on the interest. • Payer has filed an IPS return for a previous period for all investors including single and joint account holders Post-conditions • Payer’s request is accepted and responded to. • IR processes the filed IPS return and o posts the submitted investors account holder details on their income tax account in myIR on the next day. o posts the summary return totals for the previous month on the Payers IPS account in myIR on the next day. • Optionally, the payer accesses the IPS account in myIR and reconciles the account debit due. • Payer makes payment by due date to IR for the payer IPS account. Constraints • The request must be sent using the payer’s Payer software. • As the payer is registered as a single filer in order to file amendments they can either provide: o the payer’s ird number, the account type stated as IPS and the period end-date or o the submission key from a previously filed IPS return. • Additionally, to file a valid IPS return amendment, details must be provided for: o “isAmended” to confirm this is an amended return plus optionally the amend reason (KEY / MATH / OTHER / TRNSPO) and amend details, o for each updated line item ▪ the reference ID they have previously assigned to the line item or ▪ if no assigned reference ID they must supply the line item ID assigned to the processed return by IR. o To retrieve the line item ID they will need to invoke the “retrieveReturn” operation – refer to Use Case 07 for process steps. Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow Amendment is ready to be filed for an IPS return 1.1 Payer confirms the Payer IPS return amended line items are ready to be filed. Page 16 IN CONFIDENCE 1.2 Payer software files an amended IPS return for a specific period with the updated line items. 1.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the original return submission key. 1.4 Payer software receives the response code and the original return submission key for the amended IPS return. 1.5 Use case ends. 2. Exception Flow – Submission Key unknown for the IPS return Optionally to confirm return status and or submission key 2.1 Payer initiates a status request of the previously submitted IPS return for a specified period end date. 2.2 Payer software requests the status of the previously filed IPS return using the payer name and period end date. 2.3 Returns service ‘RetrieveStatus’ operation is invoked. 2.4 Returns service responds with the status of the previously filed IPS return and the submission key. Amendment is ready to be filed for an IPS return 2.5 Payer confirms the Payer IPS return amended line items are ready to be filed. 2.6 Payer software files an amended IPS return for a specific period. 2.7 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a status code of “0” (success) and the original return submission key. 2.8 Payer software receives the response code and the original return submission key for the amended IPS return. 2.9 Use case ends. 3. Exception Flow – Line item ids required to submit amendments 3.1 Payer initiates a retrieve return request of the previously submitted IPS return for a specified period end date. 3.2 Payer software requests the status of the previously filed IPS return using the payer name and period date. 3.3 Returns service ‘RetrieveStatus’ operation is invoked. 3.4 Returns service responds with a response code of “0” (success), the status of the previously filed IPS return and the original submission key. Amendment is ready to be filed for an IPS return 3.5 Payer confirms the Payer IPS return amended line items are ready to be filed. 3.6 Payer software files an amended IPS return for a specific period. 3.7 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the original return submission key. 3.8 Payer software receives the response code and the original return submission key for the amended IPS return. 3.9 Use case ends. 4. Exception Flow – message fails schema or other validation 4.1 Payer confirms the Payer IPS return amended line items are ready to be filed. 4.2 Payer software files an amended IPS return for a specific period. 4.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked. Page 17 IN CONFIDENCE 4.4 Returns service processes and invalidates the IPS return payload data due to one or more reasons including • Unrecognised XML request • XML request failed validation • data invalidations e.g. period end date is not a date that exists e.g. 31st September, 31st November 4.5 Returns service returns an error response to the Payer software; with one or more error codes, up to a maximum of 200. (Please see section 5.1 and 5.2 for the response codes in Returns service build pack - III) 4.6 Use case ends. 5. Exception Flow – Payer is not registered for service 5.1 Payer is not registered for the ‘Returns’ service. 5.2 Identity and Access services returns an error response to the Payer software due to • Unauthorised access • Unauthorised delegation 5.3 Use case ends. 6. Exception – Payer is not Authorised to use Service 6.1 The payer is valid, however doesn’t have the correct permissions to use this service. 6.2 Returns service fails to authorise the payer and returns an error response to the Payer software (please refer section 5 ‘Response codes’ in the Returns service build pack - III) due to • Unauthorised delegation • Unauthorised vendor • Account type not supported 6.3 Payer software displays the error message 6.4 Payer views the error message 6.5 Use case ends. 7. Exception – Authentication token is expired 7.1 Identity and access services validates and finds the authentication token has expired. 7.2 Identity and access services returns an error response to the Payer software for the authentication failure (please refer section 2 in the Identity and Access Services build pack). 7.3 Identity and access services validate credentials and generates a new token. 7.4 Identity and access services records a new token generation request. 7.5 Use case ends. Page 18 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 04: Amend IPS return line items for a specific period (Multi- filer) Amend line items for a IPS return (Multi-filer) IR Gateway Services Payer Payer Software Period during deductions or after deductions made 4. Process IPS return, provide original submission key and confirm response code 5. Receive IPS return submission key and response code 1. Confirm Amended IPS transactions are ready to be filed 2. File IPS amendment return with original submission key for updated line items only 3. Invoke File operation Sta rt End Page 19 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 04 details - Amend IPS return line items for a specific period (Multi-filer) Primary actor Payer Secondary actors Payer software Returns service Description • Payer determines an amendment is required to one or more line items in the previously filed IPS return for a specific period. Payer files an amended IPS return for the same period which includes only the updated line items. Pre-conditions • Payer is authenticated, authorised and logged into Payer software. • Payer has a logon for myIR. • Payer is enrolled for an IPS account as a single or multi filer. • Payer pays investors interest on their investment accounts and deducts withholding tax on the interest. • Payer has filed an IPS return for a previous period for all investors including single and joint account holders Post-conditions • Payer’s request is accepted and responded to. • IR processes each filed IPS return and posts the updated investors IPS details on their income tax account in myIR • On the 20 th of the month following IR processes and posts the summary return totals from all IPS returns for the previous month on the Payers IPS account in myIR. • Optionally on or after the 20 th of the month following the payer accesses the payer’s IPS account in myIR and reconciles the account debit due. • Payer makes payment by due date to IR for the payer IPS account. Constraints • The request must be sent using the payer’s Payer software. • As the payer is registered as a multi-filer they must provide a submission key from a previously filed IPS return in order to file amendments for an IPS return. • To file a valid IPS return amendment, details must be provided for: o “isAmended” to confirm this is an amended return plus optionally the amend reason (KEY / MATH / OTHER / TRNSPO) and amend details, o For each updated line item ▪ the reference ID they have previously assigned to the line item or ▪ if no assigned reference ID they must supply the line item ID assigned to the processed return by IR. o To retrieve the line item ID the payer will need to invoke the “retrieveReturn” operation – refer to Use Case 07 for process steps. Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow Amendment is ready to be filed for an IPS return 1.1 Payer confirms the Payer IPS return amended line items are ready to be filed. 1.2 Payer software files an amended IPS return for a specific period with the updated line items. Page 20 IN CONFIDENCE 1.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the original IPS return submission key. 1.4 Payer software receives the response code and the original return submission key for the amended IPS return. 1.5 Use case ends. 2. Exception Flow – Submission Key unknown for the IPS return To confirm submission key of a filed IPS return 2.1 Payer initiates a single status request of all filed IPS return for the specified period. 2.2 Payer software requests the return status the previously filed IPS returns using the payer name and period end date. 2.3 Returns service ‘RetrieveStatus’ operation is invoked. 2.4 Returns service responds with a response code of “0” (success), the status of all previously filed IPS return and their submission keys. Amendment is ready to be filed for an IPS return 2.5 Payer confirms the Payer IPS return amended line items are ready to be filed. 2.6 Payer software files an amended IPS return for a specific period. 2.7 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the original return submission key. 2.8 Payer software receives the response code and the original return submission key for the amended IPS return. 2.9 Use case ends. 3. Exception Flow – message fails schema or other validation 3.1 Payer confirms the Payer IPS return amended line items are ready to be filed. 3.2 Payer software files an amended IPS return for a specific period. 3.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked. 3.4 Returns service processes and invalidates the IPS return payload data due to one or more reasons including • Unrecognised XML request • XML request failed validation • data invalidations 3.5 Returns service returns an error response to the Payer software; with one or more error codes, up to a maximum of 200. (Please see section 5.1 and 5.2 for the response codes in Returns service build pack - III) 3.6 Use case ends. 4. Exception Flow – Payer is not registered for service 4.1 Payer is not registered for the ‘Returns’ service. 4.2 Identity and Access services returns an error response to the Payer software due to • Unauthorised access • Unauthorised delegation 4.3 Use case ends. 5. Exception – Payer is not 5.1 The payer is valid, however doesn’t have the correct permissions to use this service. Page 21 IN CONFIDENCE Authorised to use Service 5.2 Returns service fails to authorise the payer and returns an error response to the Payer software (please refer section 5 ‘Response codes’ in the Returns service build pack - III) due to • Unauthorised delegation • Unauthorised vendor • Account type not supported 5.3 Payer software displays the error message 5.4 Payer views the error message 5.5 Use case ends. 6. Exception – Authentication token is expired 6.1 Identity and access services validate and find authentication token expired 6.2 Identity and access services returns an error response to the Payer software for the authentication failure (please refer section 2 in the ‘Identity and Access Services’ build pack) 6.3 Identity and access services validate credentials and generate new token. 6.4 Identity and access services records new token generation request 6.5 Use case ends. Page 22 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 05: Replace all data in an IPS return (Reverse Replace) Replace all data in an IPS return (Reverse Replace) IR Gateway Services Payer Payer Software Period during deductions or after deductions made 5. Process IPS return, allocate Submission Key and confirm response code 6. Receive IPS return Submission Key and response code 1. Make amendments to all line items in the IPS return 2. Confirm amended IPS transactions are ready to be filed 3. File IPS amendment return (Reverse Replace) 4. Invoke File operation Start End Page 23 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 05 details - Replace all data in an IPS return (Reverse Replace) Primary actor Payer Secondary actors Payer software Returns service Description • Payer determines an amendment is required to all line items in the previously filed IPS return for a specific period • Payer files an update of a previously filed IPS return with includes a complete set of updated line items for the same period. Pre-conditions • Payer is authenticated, authorised and logged into Payer software. • Payer has a logon for myIR. • Payer is enrolled for an IPS account as a single or multi filer. • Payer pays investors interest on their investment accounts and deducts withholding tax on the interest. • Payer has filed a IPS return for a previous period for all investors including single and joint account holders. Post-conditions • Payer’s request is accepted and responded to. • IR processes the filed IPS return and posts summary return totals for the previous month on the Payer’s IPS account in myIR. • Payer accesses the payer’s IPS account in myIR and reconciles the account debit due. • Payer makes payment by due date to IR for the payer IPS account. Constraints • The request must be sent using the payer’s Payer software. • If the payer is registered as a single filer they can either provide: o the payer’s ird number, the account type stated as IPS and the period end-date or o the submission key from a previously filed IPS return. • If the payer is registered as a multi-filer they must provide a submission key from a previously filed IPS return in order to file amendments. Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow 1.1 Payer makes amendments to all line items in the previously filed IPS return for a specific period. 1.2 Payer confirms all line items of a previous Payer IPS return are ready to be filed. 1.3 Payer software files an amended IPS return for a month period. This contains • “isAmended” to confirm this is an amended return plus optionally the amend reason (KEY / MATH / OTHER / TRNSPO) and amend details • “isReverseReplace” to confirm this is a full resubmission of a previous return • updated lines items 1.4 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the unique submission key. 1.5 Payer software receives the response code and the unique submission key for the IPS return. 1.6 Use case ends. Page 24 IN CONFIDENCE 2. Exception Flow – Invalid payload or data 2.1 Payer confirms the complete amended Payer IPS return is ready to be filed. 2.2 Payer software files an amended IPS return for a specific period. 2.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked. 2.4 Returns service processes and invalidates the IPS return payload data due to one or more reasons including • Unrecognised XML request • XML request failed validation • data invalidations e.g. period end date is not a date that exists e.g. 31st September, 31st November or account holder line items are missing for at least one contact detail. 2.5 Returns service returns an error response to the Payer software; with one or more error codes, up to a maximum of 200. (Please see section 5.1 and 5.2 for the response codes in Returns service build pack - III) 2.6 Payer software receives the error response code for the IPS return 2.7 Use case ends. 3. Exception Flow – Payer is not registered for service 3.1 Payer is not registered for the ‘Returns’ service. 3.2 Identity and Access service returns an error response to the Payer software due to • Unauthorised access • Unauthorised delegation 3.3 Use case ends. 4. Exception – Payer is not Authorised to use Service 4.1 The payer is valid, however doesn’t have the correct permissions to use this service. 4.2 Returns service fails to authorise the payer and returns an error response to the Payer software (please refer section 5 ‘Response codes’ in the Returns service build pack - III) due to • Unauthorised delegation • Unauthorised vendor • Account type not supported 4.3 Payer software displays the error message 4.4 Payer views the error message 4.5 Use case ends. 5. Exception – Authentication token is expired 5.1 Identity and access services validates and finds the authentication token has expired. 5.2 Identity and access services returns an error response to the Payer software for the authentication failure (please refer section 2 in the Identity and Access Services build pack). 5.3 Identity and access services validate credentials and generates a new token. 5.4 Identity and access services records a new token generation request 5.5 Use case ends. Page 25 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 06: Intermediary files an IPS return on behalf of a payer (Single filer) File a single IPS return for a month period as an Intermediary IR Gateway Services Intermediary Intermediary Software myIR Services Period after deductions made 1. Confirm IPS transactions are ready to be filed 2. File Payer IPS return 3. Invoke File operation 4. Process IPS return, allocate Submission Key and confirm response code 6. Request Payer IPS return status 7. Submit Payer IPS return status request 8. Invoke retrieveStatus operation 5. Receive IPS return submission key and response code Optionally on the next day 10. Receive IPS return status and submission key and response code 9. Get data 11. View Payer IPS return status 12. Access myIR IPS account 13. View Payer IPS account balance for period Optionally End Start Page 26 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 06 details - Intermediary files an IPS return on behalf of a payer (Single filer) Primary actor Intermediary Secondary actors Intermediary software Returns service Payer Description • Intermediary files a single IPS return for a month period for all investors including single and joint account holders. • Optionally on the next day, the payer retrieves return status of the previous month’s IPS return to confirm if it has been processed. Pre-conditions • Intermediary is authenticated, authorised to act on behalf of the Payer and logged into intermediary software. • Payer is enrolled for IPS account as a single filer. • Intermediary has a logon for myIR. • Intermediary has an intermediary account link to the clients IPS account • Intermediary has File or Full account access to the IPS account (this is controlled by the client list security settings) • Payer or intermediary pays investors interest on their investment accounts and deducts withholding tax on the interest. • Intermediary collates transactions for all investors of the month period after the month end date. Post-conditions • Intermediary’s request is accepted and responded to • IR processes the filed IPS return and o posts the submitted investors account holder details on their income tax account in myIR on the next day. o posts the summary return totals for the previous month on the Payers IPS account in myIR on the next day. • Optionally o the intermediary accesses the payer’s IPS account in myIR and reconciles the account debit due. o Intermediary makes payment by due date to IR for the payer IPS account. • Alternatively o the intermediary accesses the payer’s IPS account in myIR and reconciles the account debit due. o Intermediary informs the payer to make payment by due date to IR for the payer IPS account. Constraints • The request must be sent using the Intermediary software. • To file a valid IPS return, details must be provided for: o the payer’s ird number, o the account type stated as IPS, o the filing period end date, o each account holders name, and at least one contact detail of email, phone or postal address, o at least one set of income information per line item. Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow 1.1 Intermediary confirms the IPS return for the period is ready to be filed. 1.2 Intermediary software files a single IPS return for a month period. Page 27 IN CONFIDENCE 1.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the unique submission key. 1.4 Intermediary software receives the response code and the unique submission key for the IPS return. Optional process to confirm the IPS return status, on the next day 1.5 Intermediary initiates a status request of the IPS return for the specified period. 1.6 Intermediary software requests the status of the previously filed IPS return using either the period end date or the submission key allocated to that IPS return. 1.7 Returns service ‘RetrieveStatus’ operation is invoked. 1.8 Returns service responds with a response code of “0” (success), the status of the previously filed IPS return and the original submission key. 1.9 Intermediary software receives the response code and the unique submission key for the IPS return. 1.10 Intermediary views the status of the IPS return. 1.11 Use case ends. 2. Exception Flow – message fails schema or other validation 2.1 Intermediary confirms the IPS return is ready to be filed 2.2 Intermediary software files a single IPS return for a month period. 2.3 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked. 2.4 Returns service processes and invalidates the IPS return payload data due to one or more reasons including • Unrecognised XML request • XML request failed validation • data invalidations e.g. period end date is not a date that exists e.g. 31st September, 31st November or account holder line items are missing for at least one contact detail. 2.5 Returns service returns an error response to the Payer software; with one or more error codes, up to a maximum of 200. (Please see section 5.1 and 5.2 for the response codes in Returns service build pack - III) 2.6 Intermediary software receives the error response code for the IPS return. 2.7 Intermediary reviews the error message and makes amendments to the payload format or data then confirms the IPS return is ready to be filed. Note: Even if one or more line items are in error the complete return containing all line items needs to be filed. 2.8 Intermediary software files a single IPS return for a month period. 2.9 Returns service ‘File’ operation is invoked and responds with a response code of “0” (success) and a unique submission key. 2.10 Intermediary software receives the response code and the unique submission key for the IPS return. 2.11 Use case ends. Page 28 IN CONFIDENCE 3. Exception Flow – Intermediary is not registered for service 3.1 Intermediary is not registered for the ‘Returns’ service. 3.2 Identity and access services returns an error response to the Intermediary software due to unauthorised access OR unauthorised delegation 3.3 Use case ends. 4. Exception – Intermediary is not authorised to use Service 4.1 The intermediary is valid, however doesn’t have the correct permissions to use this service, eg they only have ‘read only’ access rights or are not linked to the correct client list as an intermediary 4.2 Returns service fails to authorise the payer and returns an error response to the Payer software (please refer section 5 ‘Response codes’ in the Returns service build pack - III) due to • Unauthorised delegation OR • Unauthorised vendor OR • Account type not supported 4.3 Intermediary software displays the error message 4.4 Intermediary views the error message 4.5 Use case ends. 5. Exception – Authentication token is expired 5.1 Identity and access services validates and finds the authentication token has expired. 5.2 Identity and access services returns an error response to the Intermediary software for the authentication failure (please refer section 2 in the Identity and Access Services build pack). 5.3 Identity and access services validate credentials and generates a new token. 5.4 Identity and access services records a new token generation request. 5.5 Use case ends. Page 29 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 07: IPS return reassessment – retrieve return (Single filer) Retrieve previous IPS return (Single filer) IR Gateway Services Payer Payer Software Period during deductions or after deductions made 4. Process IPS request, send IPS return payload and confirm response code 5. Receive previous IPS return data and response code 1. Retrieve IPS return is initiated 2. Retrieve IPS return is submitted with period end date or submission key 3. Invoke retrieveReturn operation Sta rt End Page 30 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 07 details - IPS return reassessment – retrieve return (Single filer) Primary actor Payer Secondary actors Payer software Returns service Description • Payer determines a return reassessment is required an amendment is required for a previously filed IPS return for a specific period • Payer submits a retrieve return request to retrieve all line items from a previously file IPS return. Pre-conditions • Payer is authenticated, authorised and logged into Payer software. • Payer is enrolled for an IPS account as a single filer. • Payer pays investors interest on their investment accounts and deducts withholding tax on the interest. • Payer has filed a IPS return for a previous period for all investors including single and joint account holders. Post-conditions • Payer’s request is accepted and responded to. Constraints • The request must be sent using the payer’s Payer software. • As a single filer the payer can either provide o the payer’s ird number, the account type stated as IPS and period end-date or o the submission key from a previously filed IPS return. Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow 1.1 Payer initiates the request to retrieve a previous Payer IPS return. 1.2 Payer software submits a retrieve IPS return for a specified period. 1.3 Returns service ‘retrieveReturn’ operation is invoked. 1.4 Returns service collates the IPS return data. 1.5 Returns service responds with a response code of “0” (success) and the IPS return data payload for the specified period. 1.6 Payer software receives the response code and the IPS return data payload. 1.7 Use case ends. 2. Exception Flow – message fails schema or other validation 2.1 Payer initiates the request to retrieve a previous Payer IPS return. 2.2 Payer software submits a retrieve IPS return for a specified period. 2.3 Returns service ‘retrieveReturn’ operation is invoked. 2.4 Returns service processes and invalidates the request due to one or more reasons including • Unrecognised XML request • XML request failed validation • data invalidations e.g period end date is not a date that exists e.g. 31st September. 2.5 Returns service returns an error response to the Payer software; with one or more error codes. (Please see section 5.1 and 5.2 for the response codes in Returns service build pack - III) Page 31 IN CONFIDENCE 2.6 Payer software receives the error response code for the IPS return. 2.7 Use case ends. 3. Exception Flow – Payer is not registered for service 3.1 Payer is not registered for the ‘Returns’ service. 3.2 Identity and access services returns an error response to the Payer software due to • Unauthorised access • Unauthorised delegation 3.3 Use case ends. 4. Exception – Payer is not Authorised to use Service 4.1 The payer is valid, however doesn’t have the correct permissions to use this service. 4.2 Returns service fails to authorise the payer and returns an error response to the Payer software (please refer section 5 ‘Response codes’ in the Returns service build pack - III) due to • Unauthorised delegation • Unauthorised vendor • Account type not supported 4.3 Payer software displays the error message 4.4 Payer views the error message 4.5 Use case ends. 5. Exception – Authentication token is expired 5.1 Identity and access services validates and finds the authentication token has expired. 5.2 Identity and access services returns an error response to the Payer software for the authentication failure (please refer section 2 in the Identity and Access Services build pack). 5.3 Identity and access services validate credentials and generates a new token. 5.4 Identity and access services records a new token generation request. 5.5 Use case ends. Page 32 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 08: IPS return reassessment – retrieve return (Multi-filer) Retrieve previous IPS return (Multi-filer) IR Gateway Services Payer Payer Software Period during deductions or after deductions made 10. Process request, send IPS return payload and confirm response code 1. Request IPS return status 2. Submit IPS return status request 3. Invoke retrieveStatus operation 11. Receive previous IPS return data and response code 5. Receive all IPS returns status and original submission keys 4. Get data 6. View all IPS returns status and original submission keys 7. Retrieve IPS return is initia ted with original submission key 8. Retrieve IPS return is submitted with original submission key 9. Invoke retrieveReturn operation Start Optionally confirm return status End Page 33 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 08 details - IPS return reassessment – retrieve return (Multi-filer) Primary actor Payer Secondary actors Payer software Returns service Description • Payer determines a return reassessment is required an amendment is required for a previously filed IPS return for a specific period • Optionally - user retrieves IPS return status for the specified period to confirm the submission key, • Payer submits a retrieve return request to retrieve all line items from a previously file IPS return. Pre-conditions • Payer is authenticated, authorised and logged into Payer software. • Payer is enrolled for an IPS account as a multi-filer. • Payer pays investors interest on their investment accounts and deducts withholding tax on the interest. • Payer has filed a IPS return for a previous period for all investors including single and joint account holders. Post-conditions • Payer’s request is accepted and responded to. Constraints • The request must be sent using the payer’s Payer software. • As a multi-filer the payer must provide a submission key from a previously filed IPS return in order to retrieve the return. Use case scenarios 1.1 1. Normal flow Optional process to confirm the payer IPS return status 1.1 Payer initiates a status request of the IPS return for the specified period. 1.2 Payer software requests the status of the previously filed IPS return using either the period end date or the submission key allocated to that IPS return. 1.3 Returns service ‘RetrieveStatus’ operation is invoked. 1.4 Returns service responds with a response code of “0” (success), the status of the previously filed IPS return and the original submission key. 1.5 Payer software receives the response code and the original submission key for the IPS return. 1.6 Payer views the status of the requested IPS return. Process to request the previous IPS return 1.7 Payer initiates the request to retrieve a previous Payer IPS return using the original submission key. 1.8 Payer software submits a retrieve IPS return with the original submission key. 1.9 Returns service ‘retrieveReturn’ operation is invoked. 1.10 Returns service collates the IPS return data. 1.11 Returns service responds with the IPS return data payload for the specified period and response code of “0” (success). 1.12 Payer software receives the response code and the IPS return data payload. 1.13 Use case ends. Page 34 IN CONFIDENCE 2. Exception Flow – Invalid request 2.1 Payer initiates the request to retrieve a previous Payer IPS return. 2.2 Payer software submits a retrieve IPS return for a specified period. 2.3 Returns service ‘retrieveReturn’ operation is invoked. 2.4 Returns service processes and invalidates the request due to one or more reasons including • Unrecognised XML request • XML request failed validation 2.5 Returns service returns an error response to the Payer software; with one or more error codes. (Please see section 5.1 and 5.2 for the response codes in Returns service build pack - III) 2.6 Use case ends. 3. Exception Flow – Payer is not registered for service 3.4 Payer is not registered for the ‘Returns’ service. 3.5 Identity and Access service returns an error response to the Payer software due to • Unauthorised access • Unauthorised delegation 3.6 Use case ends. 4. Exception – Payer is not Authorised to use Service 4.1 The payer is valid, however doesn’t have the correct permissions to use this service. 4.2 Returns service fails to authorise the payer and returns an error response to the Payer software (please refer section 5 ‘Response codes’ in the Returns service build pack - III) due to • Unauthorised delegation • Unauthorised vendor • Account type not supported 4.3 Payer software displays the error message 4.4 Payer views the error message 4.5 Use case ends. 5. Exception – Authentication token is expired 5.1 Identity and access services validates and finds the authentication token has expired. 5.2 Identity and access services returns an error response to the Payer software for the authentication failure (please refer section 2 in the Identity and Access Services build pack). 5.3 Identity and access services validate credentials and generates a new token. 5.4 Identity and access services records a new token generation request. 5.5 Use case ends.