http://btsharepoint.ed.ird.govt.nz/sites/PMO/admin/BT%20Reporting%20Guidelines.docx?Web=1 28/06/2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] RAG Status Definitions Key Red Light Red Amber Light Amber Light Green Green Headline Highly problematic Problematic Problematic Problematic in defined areas Not problematic Not problematic Overall status Not on target to succeed. ‘Extreme’ priority rated issues, from which it is only possible to recover from with significant executive management intervention and focussed implementation of the mitigating actions. Risks are rated as ‘Extreme’ at residual level AND Mitigations are not effective. Risks are expected to eventuate. Escalation to Programme Senior Responsible Owner (SRO). Not on target to succeed. ‘Very High’ priority rated issues, from which it is predicted it is only possible to recover from with significant senior management focus to implement the mitigating actions. The profile of risks includes several ‘Extreme’ at current level and ‘Very High’ at residual level AND Mitigations are slipping or poor. Escalation to DC Transformation May not be on target to succeed. ‘High’ priority rated issues, from which it is predicted that with support, appropriate mitigation and focus will not impact the critical path. The profile of risks includes several ‘Very High’ at current level and ‘High’ at residual level. Mitigations in place but are at risk of slipping. Escalation to Release Programme Manager Deviating from target in some specific and non- critical areas. Minor / “medium level” issues with remedial actions in progress that with project/workstream lead support and focus are expected to be successful and not impact key dates There are risks that are rated as ‘Medium’ at the residual level with appropriate mitigations in place. Escalation to Project/Workstream Lead Generally, on target. Low’ level issues with effective mitigations or treatments. Some minor intervention is required in non-critical areas but expected to stay on track. There are risks that are rated as ‘Low’ at the residual level, with some rated as ‘‘Very High’ or, ‘High’ at current level - appropriate mitigations are in place. No escalation required On target. Low’ level issues with effective mitigations or treatments. Can be managed without intervention on a day to day basis. All risks relevant to this work-stream are rated as ‘Negligible’ at the residual level and none of these are rated as ‘Very High’, ‘High’ at current level. No escalation required Scope The scope or work is not well defined, documented or controlled, and it is highly likely/almost certain that the scope cannot be delivered. It is predicted that it is not possible to recover from this situation with suitable mitigation or focus, and the critical path will be impacted. The scope o f work is not well defined, documented or controlled. Scope issues are creating some very high to extreme risks to agreed approval dates, quality standards and resource levels that will impact the delivery plan. It is predicted that with concerted focus and mitigation, it may be possible to recover from the situation; however, significant delivery dates will be impacted and/or missed. The sc ope issues are creating moderate to high level risk to agreed and approved dates, quality standards or resource levels. This is however not expected to impact the critical path. The scope is somewhat defined and documented and controlled at a high level. There is risk that the scope will not be delivered. The scope of the work is well defined, documented and controlled and there is minimal risk that the defined scope will not be delivered. Any minor issues can be resolved by the lead. The scope of work is well defined, documented and controlled and is on track. http://btsharepoint.ed.ird.govt.nz/sites/PMO/admin/BT%20Reporting%20Guidelines.docx?Web=1 28/06/2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Risks - Programme / Sub- Programme The risk health indicators presented in the PLT Report and PGC Programme Status Report have the following definitions: The Programme’s risk profile includes risks at “Extreme” residual level There are programme risks, which will impact the Programme’s critical path. Programme risks are expected to eventuate. The Programme’s risk profile includes risks at “Extreme” current level or “Very High” residual level It is predicted that it may be possible to recover from the situation. The Programme’s critical path may be impacted and/or missed. The Programme’s risk profile includes risks at “Very High” current level or” High” residual level. Some mitigation strategies are in place; however, some of these may not be effective. This is not currently expected to impact the Programme’s critical path. The Programme’s risk profile includes risks at “High” current level or “Medium” residual level. Some mitigation strategies are in place; however, some of these may not be effective. The Programme’s risk profile includes risks at “Medium” current level or “Low” residual level. Risks are under control and contained within normal day-to-day management activity The Programme’s risk profile includes risks at “Low” current level or “Negligible” residual level Risks are under control and contained within normal day-to-day management activity Risks - Workstream / Project The risk health indicators presented in the Fortnightly Workstream / Project Report have the following definitions: The Workstream’s risk profile includes risks at “Extreme” residual level The Workstream owns risks at Programme level, with these risks currently rated at Very High or above. The risk is expected to eventuate. The Workstream’s risk profile risks at “Extreme” current level or “Very High” residual level The Workstream owns risks at Programme level, with these risks currently rated at “High” or above. It is predicted that it may be possible to recover from the situation; however significant delivery dates will be impacted and/or missed. The Workstream’s risk profile includes risks at “Very High” current level or “High” residual level The Workstream owns risks at Programme level, with these risks currently rated at “Medium” or above. Some mitigation strategies are in place; however, some of these may not be effective This is not currently expected to impact the Workstream delivery dates. The Workstream’s risk profile includes risks at “High” current level or “Medium” residual level Some mitigation strategies are in place; however, some of these may not be effective. The Workstream’s risk profile includes risks at “Medium” current level or “Low” residual level Risks are under control and contained within normal day-to-day management activity The Workstream’s risk profile includes risks at “Low” current level or “Negligible” residual level Risks are under control and contained within normal day-to-day management activity Issues - Programme / Sub- Programme The issue health indicators presented in the PLT Report and PGC Programme Status Report have the following definitions: The profile of Programme issues includes Extreme level rated issues. It is predicted that it is only possible to recover from the situation with significant senior management intervention The profile of Programme issues includes Very High-level rated issues. It is predicted that it may be possible to recover from the situation; however, the Programme’s critical path may be impacted and/or missed. The profile of Programme issues includes a number of High-level rated issues. Some mitigation strategies are in place; however, some of these may not be effective. This is not currently expected to impact the Programme’s critical path The profile of Programme issues includes a number of Medium level rated issues. Some mitigation strategies are in place; however, some of these may not be effective. The profile of Programme issues includes a number of Low-level rated issues. Issues are under control and contained within normal day-to-day management activity The profile of Programme issues includes no and/or minimal number of Low-level issues Issues are under control and contained within normal day-to-day management activity http://btsharepoint.ed.ird.govt.nz/sites/PMO/admin/BT%20Reporting%20Guidelines.docx?Web=1 28/06/2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Issues- Workstream / Project The issue health indicators presented in the Fortnightly Workstream Report have the following definitions: The profile of issues relevant to this Workstream includes Extreme level rated issues. The Workstream owns issues at a Programme level, with these issues rated at High or above It is predicted that it is only possible to recover from the situation with significant programme management intervention. The profile of issues relevant to this Workstream includes Very High-level rated issues. The Workstream owns issues at a Programme level, with these issues rated at High or above It is predicted that it may be possible to recover from the situation; however, significant delivery dates will be impacted and or missed. The profile of issues relevant to this Workstream includes High level rated issues. The Workstream owns issues at a Programme level, with these issues rated at Medium or above Some mitigation strategies in place; however, some of these may not be effective. This is not currently expected to impact the workstream delivery dates. The profile of issues relevant to this Workstream includes Medium level rated issues. Some mitigation strategies in place; however, some of these may not be effective. The profile of issues relevant to this Workstream includes Low-level rated issues. Issues are under control and contained within normal day-to-day management activity The profile of issues relevant to this Workstream includes no and/or minimal number of Low-level rated issues. Issues are under control and contained within normal day-to-day management activity Inter- dependencies Dependencies (internal and external to the Programme) are not well understood or documented in the Sub- programme /project/workstream schedule, and this requires management at Programme level. There are known issues with current schedule dependencies, and these are expected to affect critical path dates. It is predicted that it is not possible to recover from this situation without significant mitigation and focus. Dependencies (internal and external to the Programme) are not well understood or documented in the schedule and this requires management at PLT-level. There are known issues with current dependencies in the schedule that will impact on the scope, costs and key milestones. These are expected to affect the delivery plan. It is predicted that, with concerted focus and mitigation, it may be possible to recover from the situation; however significant delivery dates will be impacted and or missed. Dependencies (internal and external to the Programme) are not well understood or documented in the Sub Programme/workstream schedule, and this requires management at Programme level. There is a risk that dependent projects will have a material impact on the Programme scope, costs and key milestones. However, this is not expected to impact the critical path or delivery dates. Interdependencies internal to the Programme are well understood and documented in the Sub Programme/workstream schedule. More focus is needed to understand external dependencies. There is moderate risk that dependent projects will have a material impact on the Programme scope, costs and key milestones. However, this risk can be managed below PLT- level. Interdependencies internal and external to the Programme are well understood and documented in the Sub Programme/workstream schedule. There is minimal risk that dependent projects will have a material impact on the Programme scope, costs and key milestones. However, these risks are not problematic, and mitigations are being implemented. Inter-dependencies internal to the Programme and external to the Programme are well understood and documented in the Sub Programme/workstream schedule. http://btsharepoint.ed.ird.govt.nz/sites/PMO/admin/BT%20Reporting%20Guidelines.docx?Web=1 28/06/2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Key Red Light Red Amber Light Amber Light Green Green Reporting It is only possible to recover with significant executive management intervention and focussed implementation of the mitigating actions. Escalation to programme senior responsible owner (SRO) It is possible to recover with support from senior management to implement the mitigation actions. Escalation to DC Transformation It is possible to recover with support from programme and/or release management to implement the mitigating actions. Escalation to Release Programme Manager Minor issues that can be managed and resolved at the project/workstream level. Escalation to Project/Workstream Lead Some minor assistance is required in non-critical areas from the workstream lead to stay on track No escalation required Can be managed without intervention on a day to day basis. No escalation required Schedule The sub-programme /project/workstream is poorly planned and documented, with no clear visibility of activities, deliverable dates, interdependencies, the critical path, and with inadequate provision made for contingency and contingency plans. Delays in completing one or more deliverables will impact on the Programme’s critical path and delivery dates, and it is only possible to recover from this situation with significant senior executive management mitigation and focus. The sub-programme /project/workstream is poorly planned and documented. There is lack of visibility of activities, deliverable dates, interdependencies and/or the critical path. There is inadequate provision made for contingency across most milestones and deliverables OR delays in completing significant deliverables will impact on the plan or potentially the Programme’s critical path. It is predicted that it will be difficult, and only possible, to recover from the situation, with significant programme management mitigation and focus. The sub-programme /project/workstream is not planned and documented to an acceptable level. There may not be visibility of all activities, deliverable dates, interdependencies or the critical path. The plan may have inaccuracies, not be up to date, or may have limited information and therefore cannot be relied on for planning purposes. There is inadequate provision made for contingency across some milestones and deliverables in the plan. More than five deliverables are rated as Amber (significantly off track and expected to be late). However, these delays are not currently impacting on the critical path or delivery dates. The sub-programme /project/workstream is planned and documented to an acceptable level, but there is opportunity for further improvement. There is adequate visibility of activities, deliverable dates, interdependencies and the critical path. There is adequate provision made for contingency across most deliverables and milestones. There are between two and five deliverables rated as Amber. These delays are not expected to impact the critical path. The sub-programme /project/workstream is well planned and documented, with clear visibility of activities, deliverable dates, interdependencies and the critical path. There is good provision made for contingency across most deliverables and milestones. However, there may be one or two deliverables rated as Amber, but no impact is expected on the target approval date at this stage. The sub-programme /project/workstream is well planned and documented, with clear visibility of activities and deliverable dates, inter- dependencies, the critical path, and with adequate provision made for contingency. All deliverables are rated Green, and target approval dates are expected to be met. http://btsharepoint.ed.ird.govt.nz/sites/PMO/admin/BT%20Reporting%20Guidelines.docx?Web=1 28/06/2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Key Red Light Red Amber Light Amber Light Green Green Resource Resource requirement is critical. Critical path dates are at risk due to resource issues and it is predicted that it is only possible to recover from this situation with significant senior executive management mitigation and focus. Resource issues are impacting delivery dates across multiple deliverables/ dependencies. It is predicted that, with concerted focus and mitigation, it may be possible to recover from the situation; however, significant delivery dates will be impacted and or missed. There are key vacancies, and/or resources do not have the required skills and capabilities to complete work in accordance with agreed timescales, cost and quality standards. This is not currently expected to impact the critical path or delivery dates. The required resources for the Sub-programme /project/workstream have been identified to some extent. Some vacancies are evident, and there is a concern about required people demand being fulfilled in accordance with agreed capability and timeframe requirements. The performance and capability of the team is not entirely acceptable but can currently be managed with some workarounds. The plan and objectives are not currently at risk. The required resources, together with the required competencies for the Sub-programme /project/workstream, have been identified. These resources are available and have been deployed - with the required skills and capabilities - and are motivated and performing well. Any minor issues can be dealt with by managing resources below PLT- level, and any resource requests have been approved. Stakeholder Engagement The sub-programme /project/workstream have little or no understanding of its internal and external stakeholders. Stakeholder issues, including delays in decision making, are expected to impact on the critical path. It is only possible to recover from this situation with significant senior executive management mitigation and focus. The sub-programme /project/workstream have little understanding of its internal and external stakeholders. Due to stakeholder issues, including delays in decision making and approvals for deliverables, it is expected that the plan will be impacted. It is predicted that it is only possible to recover from this situation with significant senior management focus to implement the mitigating actions. The sub-programme /project/workstream do not have a good understanding of its internal and external stakeholders. D ue to stakeholder issues, there is risk that Programme objectives may not be met, and deliverables may be delayed from achieving the agreed approval date. This includes delays to securing the required decisions and approvals. However, this is not expected to impact the critical path or overall schedule. The sub-programme /project/workstream have a good understanding of its internal and external stakeholders. Stakeholder issues pose some threat to the review and approval of deliverables. However, this is not expected to delay deliverables at this time. The sub-programme /project/workstream has a good understanding of its internal and external stakeholders. There are some isolated problems with individual stakeholders, but there are effective plans in place to manage these. The sub Programme/workstream has a good understanding of its internal and external stakeholders. Plans and tools are in place to effectively manage stakeholders. Stakeholders are happy with progress and there are no known issues. http://btsharepoint.ed.ird.govt.nz/sites/PMO/admin/BT%20Reporting%20Guidelines.docx?Web=1 28/06/2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Key Red Light Red Amber Light Amber Light Green Green Delivery Partners The delivery partner is failing to deliver on time and to agreed quality standards. This is expected to impact the critical path. It is only possible to recover from this situation with significant senior executive management mitigation and focus. The delivery partner is failing to deliver on time and to agreed quality standards. Even with intervention from the DC Transformation, it is expected to impact the plan. It is predicted that, with concerted focus and mitigation, it may be possible to recover from the situation; however, significant delivery dates will be impacted and/or missed. There are significant issues regarding deliverables, resources and the relationship with the delivery partner. This requires intervention from the DC Transformation to resolve but is not expected to impact the critical path or delivery dates. There are some moderate issues with the deliverables, resources and the relationship with the delivery partner. This is requiring proactive intervention from the sub-programme /project/workstream lead and delivery partner lead to resolve. The relationship with the delivery partner is progressing well and there are no notable issues with deliverables or resources. Minor issues can be dealt with by the lead and delivery partner lead below PLT-level. The relationship with the delivery partner is well established and there are no notable issues with deliverables or resources, which are all on track. Financials (in draft) Escalating to Investment Board, risks or issues are emerging that place delivery at risk. Escalating to PGC - the escalation is within PGC’s delegated Board to approve. May need to escalate to PGC, active management is required by the Senior Responsible Owner (SRO). Experiencing minor changes, but this can be managed within SRO tolerance levels. Experiencing minor changes but is within project tolerances. Progressing well within approved project tolerances, no intervention is needed. Benefits (in draft) Escalating to the Investment Board, risks or issues are emerging that place delivery at risk. Escalating to PGC - the escalation is within PGC’s delegated Board to approve. May need to escalate to PGC, active management is required by the Senior Responsible Owner (SRO). Experiencing minor changes, but this can be managed within SRO tolerance levels. Experiencing minor changes but is within project tolerances. Progressing well within approved project tolerances, no intervention is needed. http://btsharepoint.ed.ird.govt.nz/sites/PMO/admin/BT%20Reporting%20Guidelines.docx?Web=1 28/06/2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Key Red Light Red Amber Light Amber Light Green Green Headline Highly problematic Problematic Problematic Problematic in defined areas Not problematic Not problematic QUAL Entry Assessment Readiness Assessment On critical path and currently predicted that it is not possible to recover to be ready on time. It will almost certainly lead to missing the go-live date and in the most serious cases influence a decision to postpone the go-live. Currently not on target to succeed and on the critical path. It needs focussed attention & active management to ensure that the due date is met. Currently not on target to succeed, requires active management to get back on track. With support, focus and the appropriate mitigation this will not impact the critical path. Is deviating from target in some specific but non- critical areas, it’s under active management and is showing signs of heading to green. Generally, on target but needs some minor management attention and/or assistance to be completed within due date On track and likely to be delivered on time. Can be managed without intervention on a day to day basis. Business Readiness Assessment Not complete O n the critical path Forecast that it will not be ready on time and will almost certainly lead to missing the go-live date. This will be a serious situation and will lead to having to postpone the go- live Not complete On the critical path and not on target to succeed. Needs focussed attention & active management to ensure that the due date is met. Not complete Not on target to succeed, requires active management to get back on track. With support, focus and the appropriate mitigation this will not impact the critical path. Not complete yet Progressing but issues starting to impact timelines. Active management is required to keep on track Not completed yet On track to planned dates. There may be minor issues, but these are under control and will have no impact on achieving to plan and schedule. Completed On Track, well within due date, however not fully signed off yet. “Where we planned to be! With no impediments.” Customer Readiness Assessment Not complete. Forecast that Customers will not be ready on time for the Go-Live date. Not complete. Needs more Customer focus to ensure that Customers are aware and ready for Go-Live. Timelines impacted. There is slippage and Customer issues are impacting their awareness and readiness progress. Requires more delivery focus. Progressing but some Customer issues starting to impact timelines. Active management is required to keep on track. Not completed yet but on track to planned dates. There may be minor Customer issues, but these are under control and will have no impact on Customer readiness/awareness at Go Live. Complete and/or On Track - “Where we planned to be! With no impediments.” Service Provider Readiness Assessment Not complete. Forecast that all/some Service Providers will not be ready on time for the Go-Live date. Not complete. Needs more Service Provider focus to ensure that they are aware and ready for Go-Live. Timelines impacted. There is slippage and Service Provider issues are impacting their readiness progress. Requires more delivery focus. Progressing but some Service Provider issues starting to impact timelines. Active management is required to keep on track. Not completed yet but on track to planned dates. There may be minor Service Provider issues, but these are under control and will have no impact on Service Provider readiness at Go Live. Complete and/or On Track - “Where we planned to be! With no impediments.”