\[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Haukāinga (Intelligent Information Project) Change Management & Communications Case Study Domain Principal – Change Management, ED&I BT Communications Specialist 21/12/2021 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] What were we trying to solve? Business transformation had delivered a range of new IKM tools and capability, however there were still some challenges to be addressed to ensure our people could access the information and insights needed to perform their roles more effectively: -Existing intranet platform to be retired and content to be mo ved to new Corporate Space in Sharepoint. -IR Knowledge Base also needing to be transitioned from e xisting platform and START Help did not have the functionality to offer a guided help experience– a new solution needed. -Multiple new systems for managing documents and i nformation but not yet integrated, and confusion about which tools to use for what purpose (e.g. collaboration, short/long term storage). -No effective search engine that could operate across source s ystems or provide intelligent search functionality. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Project objective \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Stage 1 – Developed guided help for a small number of high-use topics. Expanded use of guided help to customer facing website. Stage 2 – Move from IRIS to Corporate Space, and the new homepage ‘Haukāinga’. Connected search functionality to corporate space Sharepoint. Stage 3 – Connected up STAX and other information sources. Stage 4 – Refined and improved the search functionality. Development of Te Mātāwai knowledge centre and move from IRKB. Project stages \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Project Approach •The IR project team worked in partnership with an external vendor, who led the experience design/co-design using an AGILE methodology. •Their experience led approach involved conducting workshops and in terviews with a range of people from different parts of IR. •These were followed by interaction concept testing in which participants w ere observed while using the new tools and changes were made based on their feedback. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Change Management Approach •Haukāinga had a broad impact: all IR staff would see a change, but for most the impact is low-medium – they will still have access to the information and systems to do their job and there are no changes to our core systems. Exceptions to this were for our content editors and owners who needed training in Sharepoint. •The aim of the change management approach was to have an ‘organic’ uptake of Haukāinga by targeting i nfluential groups, team meetings, webinars and word of mouth – ‘actively engage’ rather than be ‘told to use it’. •Our approach was to be business led and to enable people to become familiar with the change in a way that didn’t consume a lot of time or effort by our people, in particular our team leaders and front-line. There were also major releases for START happening in the same timeframes, alongside organisation design changes, building disruptions and Covid. Old sites and tools were still available for a period so low risk as people still had access to what they needed. •Low key did not mean low effort from a change an communications perspective – t here was a significant amount of work put into developing effective communications and stakeholder engagement throughout the project. •The change management method was to do an initial high-level impact assessment based on user groups, then a mini impact assessment and change plan for each phase/launch as the solution was developed e.g. Corporate Space, Guided help, Haukāinga, Connecting Up. This approach meant we were able to adapt and tailor activities for each phase and learn from previous phases. •Engagement with people in the business, particularly CCS/contact centres was critical to determine how big a c hange this was and how much effort needed to be put into supporting people e.g. through training, communications, info packs etc. •Ourch ange manager attended UX sessions to see how people were using the new tools, what they were finding difficult, how they reacted. The new system was shown to be easy to use and navigate, and features could be changed/added easily based on user feedback. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] •The key behaviour change required was to get our people to use the search functionality rather than navigating through links (search first). This is important as the search function can return a lot of information from the different sources that are connected up to Haukāinga, and some existing links would no longer be available (although a number were retained e.g. Links to MIRI, ATEA, START). Up to this point there had not been an effective search engine on the IR intranet, and other repositories such as STAX, sharepoint were not connected. •Based on our impact assessment and user experience testing, we determined that training not required for anyone e xcept content editors -instead we did demo videos and supporting FAQ's for Haukāinga and guided help. The CCS team also did their own videos to support and communicate with their teams. •Work was also done with the IKM team to raise awareness about privacy/security - ens uring source documents were correctly classified in the native systems, being open about the data that is collected by the Haukainga platform e.g. What is being searched for, frequency etc. -a rich source of information to help with refining functionality and seeing how people are using the tools but not at an individual level. •Corporate space - us ed 'content owners' to update content, trained them in how to use Sharepointto edit/maintain their content. •The switch over to Corporate Space, with the launch of new Haukāinga home page and search functionality was the most visible component....but transition was designed in a way that everyone still had what they needed until they got used to the new sites. •We used a ‘soft launch’ approach for guided help initially, choosing a few topics to begin with and encouraging peo ple to try using the new tool. •The full launch of Te Mātāwaii n July 2021 took place with the tax and social policy content transitioned from START help, again with an approach of encouraging use and gradual uptake with START help still available for a period. From October 2021 the Tax Law Community Site was migrated, as well as new sites for Child Support and Tax Technical Quality Assurance. The Child Support cohort were the first group to go through their START training using Te Mātāwai. Change Management Approach \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The communication approach A people-led approach to communications In an organisation already experiencing change fatigue and a busy communication environment with many competing messages, the project was committed to ensuring communication activity was meaningful, engaging, timely and reflected the people-led approach to Haukāinga. This meant: •Focusing on need-to-kn ow over nice-to-know •Making it real for people, e.g. T his is how it will make your work-life easier •Making it interactive and giving people the opportunity to contribute to the design •Working alongside influential teams to reach the right people in the right way O ften this meant thinking outside the box, rather than relying on traditional communication channels. Agile communications A separate communications plan was created for each phase. Communications was the major focus of the change effort. Developing a Haukāinga identity Using the IR branding, a visual identity was created for Haukāinga to ensure communication activity was instantly recognisable as relating to the project. Having already worked with the Mahutonga team to select the name, we sought their guidance on imagery and develop pronunciation resources. Multi-channel approach We knew there’s no such thing as a one-size-fits-all approach, especially with competing – and higher- priority – communication activity. We had a varied approach to suit the masses but also target the high priority groups. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The communication approach Making it real through gamification Haukāinga as a concept was very new for IR, and very different to the traditional concept of an intranet. This meant it was even more important to help people understand the benefits early, so they would be in a good position to adopt the tool. Part of this involved creating an overarching story to help people understand the core concepts of intelligence led, and the how Haukainga would fit in the ecosystem along with Stax, DIP, START, Corporate Space, and O365. The other part was making it real and relatable to IR roles. One way we did this was develop a workshop game for the 2019 people leaders forum. Teams were asked to take on the persona of a ComCom employee and purchase information to help them make a decision. As the game progressed, we moved from traditional information systems (like M: Drive) to our new, more sophisticated systems (like Haukāinga). The information became more valuable to their decision making but cost them less (signifying the evolution of our data and information systems). It also helped to build understanding of how information and knowledge could be connected to users through Haukāinga to ultimately improve quality decision making. In total, around 300 people completed the 45min workshop –leaders, union representatives and information management staff. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The communication approach Facilitating the people-led design Communication activity helped the continue the people-led design of Haukāinga, something that had been important since the inception of Haukāinga. With limited options for interactivity across traditional IR communication channels, the Haukāinga project became an early adopter of Teams Live and was one of the first groups to begin embedding Slidointo its webinars. Each webinar was developed with three purposes: 1.Show previews and recent development –P articularly relating to outcomes of previous polls 2.Address feedback/issues 3.Invite feedback on an upcoming design decision ( D esign decisions related to new functionality, font and colour preferences, and how people prefer to find the information they need. The results of each poll was reported back to the project team to help guide decision making. The webinars were open to all, but particularly geared towards the change champions network as a group who could influence people in their areas of the business. The average live viewership was ~300 people, with several hundred more watching recordings. \[Information redacted\] \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The communication approach Working alongside the influencers As a project team made up predominantly of contractors, it was important that Haukāinga had an IR voice and –like the project – was delivered by IR for IR. In some cases, that meant including quotes or delivery full communications from respected internal stakeholders. This included a one-off video update from CIRand regular updates to IIS. Team leaders were provided with a ‘meeting in a box’ to equip them to talk with their teams about Haukāinga, as part of our ‘leader led’ change approach. Developed by CCS for CCS Some of our most successful activity involved taking a lead from CCS reps. Working with representatives from CCS, we got greater insight into the communication channel and style preference of CCS people. This led to the co-development of a series of in-house videos featuring CCS people, as well as the development of a virtual treasure hunt using puzzle pieces to encourage people to explore Haukāinga using the search functionality. Embedding the right search behaviours with IKM Working with the knowledge management experts within IKM, we were able to develop fun and engaging videos that promoting 'search first' to get people using the search functionality rather than using links/favourites–The Adventures of Barry. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Outcomes •Use of H aukāinga, and the search functionality continues to increase steadily. •Achieved our vision of ‘our true home’ and a seamless tr ansition from the old intranet with very little fuss. •Feedback on guided help/ Te Mātāwaive ry positive and uptake continues to grow. •Now have ability to publish new topics at pace both i nternally and externally. E.g. for Covid related information. •The team continue to refine and improve Haukāinga and T e Mātāwai. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Thank you.