Power BI Desktop Primary transfer pricing method 44% 22% 20% 9% 3% 2% Trans. net margin Cost plus Comp. uncontr. price N/A Trans. profit split Resale price Distribution of Groups: New Thin Capitalisation Calculation (excl Financial Services) Thin Cap Calculation Percentage of Groups 20% or less>20% up to 40%>40% up tp 60%>60% 63% 16% 12% 9% Material structural changes that resulted in reduction of functions, assests risks of NZ operations NZ group aggregate amount of expenditure on goods and/or services over $30 million NRAP transactions in any of HK, IE, LU, NL, SG or CH Cross-border supplies to related parties >20% of Gross Revenue Cross-border supplies from related parties >20% of Gross Revenue Australia 144 Japan 71 USA 178 Highest Ultimate Ownership (excl. Foreign Syndicates) 802 foreign-owned groups 100% response rate (banks and insurers excluded) International Questionnaire 2023 income year summary Out of how many responded YES to... 802 Largest Industries Distributors / Wholesalers ManufacturingProfessional and Technical Services 22 61 93 266 groups groups groups groups 33% 12% 8% 3% (329 Immediate) (27 Immediate) (71 Immediate) 27% 20% 7% Power BI Desktop Primary transfer pricing method 43% 24% 19% 9% 3% 2% Trans. net margin Cost plus Comp. uncontr. price N/A Trans. profit split Resale price Distribution of Groups: New Thin Capitalisation Calculation (excl Financial Services) Thin Cap Calculation Percentage of Groups 20% or less>20% up to 40%>40% up to 60%>60% 63% 15% 13% 9% Material structural changes that resulted in reduction of functions, assests risks of NZ operations NZ group aggregate amount of expenditure on goods and/or services over $30 million NRAP transactions in any of HK, IE, LU, NL, SG or CH Cross-border supplies to related parties >20% of Gross Revenue Cross-border supplies from related parties >20% of Gross Revenue Australia 140 Japan 75 USA 170 Highest Ultimate Ownership (excl. Foreign Syndicates) 794 foreign-owned groups 100% response rate (banks and insurers excluded) International Questionnaire 2022 income year summary Out of how many responded YES to... 794 Largest Industries Distributors / Wholesalers ManufacturingProfessional and Technical Services 22 56 98 264 groups groups groups groups 33% 12% 7% 3% (322 Immediate) (27 Immediate) (66 Immediate) 27% 21% 7% Power BI Desktop Primary transfer pricing method 40% 25% 20% 10% 3% 3% Trans. net margin Cost plus Comp. uncontr. price N/A Trans. profit split Resale price Highest Ultimate Ownership (excl. Foreign Syndicates) USA 163 Japan 72 Australia 124 International Questionnaire income year summary 755 foreign-owned groups 100% response rate 2021 (27 Immediate) (63 Immediate) (299 Immediate) (excl. Financial Services) (banks and insurers excluded) Distribution of Groups: New Thin Capitalisation Calculation Thin Cap Calculation Percentage of Groups 20% or less>20% up to 40%>40% up to 60%>60% 66% 13% 13% 8% 0 50 100 150 200 Distributors / Wholesalers ManufacturingProfessional and Technical Services Largest Industries 26% 21% 7% Out of 755 how many responded YES to... 1% groups Material changes to transfer pricing due to COVID-19 5 Financial performance impacted by COVID-19 24% groups 184 93 Cross-border supplies to related parties >20% of Gross Revenue 12% groups Cross-border supplies from related parties >20% of Gross Revenue 32% groups 239 / Transactional profit split method used Distribution of Groups: New Thin Capitalisation Calculation 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% Thin Cap Calculation Frequency 0%50%100% 0 50 100 150 200 Distributors / Wholesalers ManufacturingOther Services Primary transfer pricing method 37% 27% 20% 11% 3% 2% Trans. net margin Cost plus Comp. uncontr. price N/A Trans. profit split Resale price Highest Ultimate Ownership (excl. Foreign Syndicates) USA 150 Japan 71 Australia 123 International Questionnaire income year summary 713 foreign-owned groups 100% response rate Out of 713 how many responded YES to... Guarantee fee paid to a non-resident associated person Restructured in response to anti-BEPS measures 25 groups 27 groups groups 77 2020 Largest Industries 26% 22% 9% 4% 4%11% (27 Immediate) (66 Immediate) (316 Immediate) (excl. Financial Services) (banks and insurers excluded) 11/24/2020Infographic IQ19 1/1 0 50 100 150 200 Distributors / Wholesalers Manufacturing (excl. Food and Beverage) Food and Beverage Highest Ultimate Ownership (excl. Foreign Syndicates) USA 142 Japan 64 Australia 122 International Questionnaire income year summary 663 foreign-owned groups (banks and insurers excluded) 100% response rate Out of 663 how many responded YES to... Transactions with associated persons resident in low tax jurisdictions Tax governance specifically for New Zealand Guarantee fee paid to a non-resident associated person Restructured in response to anti-BEPS measures 58 groups 182 groups 27 groups groups 128 2019 Largest Industries 24% 14% 8% 9% 4% 27%19% (26 Immediate) (54 Immediate) (293 Immediate) Distribution of Groups: New Thin Capitalisation Calculation 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% Thin Cap Calculation Frequency 0%20%40%60%80%100% (excl. Financial Services) Data represents multinational groups (176) with financial years that started on or after 1 July 2018 and ended on or before 30 September 2019. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 2018 income year summary 623 foreign-owned groups - 100% response rate (banks and insurers excluded) 168 6 Distribution of groups by thin cap percentage of New Zealand Group International Questionnaire Out of 623 how many responded YES to... Hybrid entities 29 groups 5% Transactions with associated persons resident in certain low tax jurisdictions 60 groups 10% Guarantee fee paid to a non- resident associated person 21 groups 3% 131 U.S.A. 68 JAPAN 127 AUSTRALIA HIGHEST ULTIMATE OWNERSHIP Distributors & Wholesalers Manufacturing (excl. Food & Beverage) Professional & Technical Services Material structural changes in the 2018 income year 3% 18 groups 24% 16% 8% 62 groups were rated high using the 25% rule 7% Food & Beverage \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 2017 income year summary 166 6 646 foreign-owned groups - 100% response rate (banks and insurers excluded) Distribution of groups by thin cap percentage of New Zealand Group International Questionnaire Out of 646 how many responded YES to... Hybrid entities 19 groups 3% Transactions with associated persons resident in certain low tax jurisdictions 60 groups 9% Global group participates in Country-by-Country Reporting 432 groups 67% HIGHEST ULTIMATE OWNERSHIP 137 U.S.A. 68 JAPAN 127 AUSTRALIA Distributors & Wholesalers Manufacturing (excl. Food & Beverage) Professional & Technical Services 21% 16% 8% 78 Material structural changes in the 2017 income year 4% 24 groups ~ groups were rated high using the 25% rule 8% Food & Beverage \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 2016 income year summary Foreign owned $30-$80 million Foreign owned $80 million + $13 billion $82 billion $145 billion TURNOVER BY POPULATION New Zealand owned $80 million + 594 foreign-owned groups - 100% response rate 336 groups with turnover greater than $80 million 258 groups with turnover between $30 million - $80 million (banks and insurers excluded) Distributors & Wholesalers Manufacturing (excl. Food and Beverage) Professional and Technical Services International Questionnaire HIGHEST ULTIMATE OWNERSHIP 133 U.S.A. 63 JAPAN 134 AUSTRALIA Out of 594 how many responded YES to... Incurring tax losses in each of the last three income years Transactions with associated persons resident in certain low tax jurisdictions % of groups with turnover greater than $80 million % of groups with turnover between $30 million - $80 million Material structural changes in the 2016 income year 53 groups 22 groups Hybrid instruments equal to or exceeding $30m 15 groups Hybrid entities 22 groups 37 groups Total number of groups by thin cap percentage of New Zealand Group (excludes financial services) Total R&D/Gross Revenue 0.30% Total Intangibles/Total Assets 11.71% \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 46 International Questionnaire 2015 income year summary 314 foreign-owned groups - 100% response rate (banks and insurers excluded) HIGHEST ULTIMATE OWNERSHIP 59 U.S.A. 39 JAPAN 77 AUSTRALIA Distributors & Wholesalers Manufacturing (excl. Food and Beverage) Food and Beverage How many responded YES to... Material structural changes in the 2015 income year Transactions with associated persons resident in certain low tax jurisdictions Hybrid instruments equal to or exceeding $30m Hybrid entities Cost contribution/sharing arrangement 97 2% 5% 4% 12% 1% Total R&D/Gross Revenue 0.13% Total Intangibles/Total Assets 17.34% \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Distributors & Wholesalers Manufacturing (excl. Food and Beverage) Food and Beverage How many responded YES to... 79% Transfer pricing documentation 48% Tax governance documentation 17% Cash pooling arrangement 15% Cost contribution/sharing arrangement 10% Material structural changes in the last 3 income years 5% Hybrid instruments with a face value of $30m or over Hybrid entities within the group 4% 1% Factoring or securitisation arrangement International Questionnaire 2014 income year summary 292 foreign-owned groups (banks and insurers excluded) response rate HIGHEST ULTIMATE OWNERSHIP 55 U.S.A. 39 JAPAN 77 AUSTRALIA 198 14 Total Insurance or Re-insurance/Gross Revenue 0.11% Total R&D/Gross Revenue 0.15% Total Intangibles/Total Assets 17.18%