Hon Simon Watts, Minister of Revenue Information Release Ministerial Response to the Petition of Alisha Riley on Increase the GST threshold June 2024 Availability This information release is available on Inland Revenue’s tax policy website at https://www.taxpolicy.ird.govt.nz/publications/2024/leg-24-sub-0108 Documents in this information release # Reference Type Title Date 1 LEG-24-SUB-0108 Cabinet paper Ministerial Response to the Petition of Alisha Riley on Increase the GST threshold 23 May 2024 2 LEG-24-MIN-0108 Minute Ministerial Response to the Petition of Alisha Riley to Increase the GST threshold 23 May 2024 3 CAB-24-MIN-0188 Minute Report of the Cabinet Legislation Committee: Period Ended 24 May 2024 27 May 2024 Additional information The Cabinet paper was considered by the Cabinet Legislation Committee on 23 May 2024 and confirmed by Cabinet on 27 May 2024. One attachment to the Cabinet paper is not included in this information release as it is publicly available on the parliament website: •Ministerial Response to the referral of the Petition of Alisha Riley on Increase the GST threshold: https://bills.parliament.nz/v/4/afc0c2c3-4ead-4528-cf38-08dc7eae9552 Inform ation withheld •Not in scope Accessibility Inland Revenue can provide an alternate HTML version of this material if requested. Please cite this document’s title, website address, or PDF file name when you email a request to policy.webmaster@ird.govt.nz Copyright and licensing Cabinet material and advice to Ministers from the Inland Revenue Department and other agencies are © Crown copyright but are licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). In Confidence Office of the Minister of Revenue Chair, Cabinet Legislation Committee Ministerial Response to the Petition of Alisha Riley on Increase the GST threshold Proposal 1This paper seeks approval of the Minister of Revenue’s response to the Petitions Committee’s referral of the Petition of Alisha Riley. Background 2The Petition of Alisha Riley was presented to the House on 23 February 2024. 3The petition requests that the House of Representatives urge the Government to increase the GST registration threshold in its 2024 tax policy work programme. 4The petitioner proposes increasing the GST registration threshold from $60,000 to $130,800. This figure was derived by calculating the proportional increase in the minimum wage since GST was introduced in 1986. 5The petitioner also provided a written submission to support their petition. The submission outlines the petitioner’s argument that wage inflation is the main driver of expenses for low GST input businesses, and consequently these businesses are adversely impacted by the existing GST registration threshold. 6The Petitions Committee has also requested the Minister of Revenue consider and comment on the possibility of legislation or a regulation that would allow the GST threshold to be updated on an annual basis in line with inflation. Comment on petition’s request and Ministerial response 7On 11 March 2024, the Petitions Committee referred the petition to a Minister for response. 8Upon reflection, I recommend the GST registration threshold is not increased at this time. Increasing the registration threshold would likely have consequences for other small and medium sized businesses and would likely impose a significant fiscal cost. 9Currently, businesses with an annual turnover of $60,000 or more are required to be registered for GST. They are required to charge and collect GST on their sales, and they can claim back GST they have paid on their business costs. 10 The purpose of the registration threshold is to strike a balance between applying a broad-based GST system to almost all forms of consumption, not distorting business competition, and ensuring compliance costs are minimised where possible (especially 1 3yj46e8jvz 2024-05-21 08:34:34 Item 01 for small businesses). While inflation may be indirectly considered when evaluating the impact of compliance costs, inflation or changes to the minimum wage are not explicitly considered when setting the registration threshold. 11 New Zealand’s GST system is highly regarded internationally, in part, because it broadly applies to a wide range of goods and services with very few exemptions. The GST system’s broad base means there is a reduced risk of market distortion between GST registered and GST unregistered suppliers, as it’s likely sale prices are subject to GST. Increasing the registration threshold to $130,800 would narrow the GST base because it would apply to fewer goods and services sold in New Zealand. Furthermore, the costs of complying with GST have decreased for small businesses since the threshold was last increased in 2009. 12 There are concerns that adjusting the registration threshold annually may drive commercial behaviour and interfere with natural business growth. This is because some unregistered businesses whose annual turnover is approaching the registration threshold may choose to reduce their growth in the understanding they will remain under the increased threshold for another 12 months. 13 In the 2023 calendar year, GST registered taxpayers with an annual turnover between $60,000 and $130,800 accounted for approximately $463.38 million of GST collected (or 1.7% of total GST collected). Although it is unlikely that all taxpayers would consequently deregister if the registration threshold was increased, these figures provide an indication of the potential impact if taxpayers were otherwise able to delay registering for GST. 14Although adjusting the registration threshold by only inflation or minimum wage would not be the most appropriate methodology, as they do not take into account the considerations noted above, inflation would be the more appropriate measure given it relates to a broader range of costs for all businesses. When GST was introduced in 1986, the registration threshold was $24,000. If the original threshold was inflation- adjusted to March 2024, it would be approximately $65,774. 15 Micro and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) face the highest compliance costs relative to the amount of tax paid by them. There are several potential policy initiatives which seek to remove barriers and reduce compliance costs for SME taxpayers. These will be considered for prioritisation as part of setting the Government’s Tax and Social Policy Work Programme. Timing of the response 16 The Ministerial response must be presented to the House by 5 June 2024, in accordance with Standing Order 380. Consultation 17 This Cabinet paper was prepared by Inland Revenue. Treasury was informed of this Cabinet paper. 2 3yj46e8jvz 2024-05-21 08:34:34 Communications 18 The Minister of Revenue will present the Minister’s response to the petition in the House of Representatives. No further publicity is required. Proactive Release 19 The Minister proposes to release this paper proactively following the presentation of the Ministerial response. 3 3yj46e8jvz 2024-05-21 08:34:34 Recommendations The Minister of Revenue recommends that the Cabinet Legislation Committee: 1note that on 11 March 2024 the Petitions Committee referred the Petition of Alisha Riley to a Minister for response; 2note the petitioner’s request, that the Government increases the GST registration threshold to $130,800; 3note the submission of the Minister of Revenue and in particular their advice that the GST registration threshold should not be increased, as a higher registration threshold would likely have consequences for other small and medium sized businesses and would likely impose a significant fiscal cost; 4approve the Ministerial response to the Petition of Alisha Riley, attached to this submission; 5note that the Ministerial response must be presented to the House by 5 June 2024; 6invite the Minister of Revenue to present the Ministerial response to the House in accordance with Standing Order 380; 7invite the Minister of Revenue to write to the petitioner enclosing a copy of the Ministerial response to the petition, after the response has been presented to the House. Hon Simon Watts Minister of Revenue 4 3yj46e8jvz 2024-05-21 08:34:34 LEG-24-MIN-0108 Present:Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters Hon Chris Bishop (Chair) Hon Dr Shane Reti Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Tama Potaka Hon Nicole McKee Hon Casey Costello Hon Simon Watts Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Penny Simmonds Hon Andrew Hoggard Jamie Arbuckle, MP Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for LEG 2 3yj46e8jvz 2024-05-24 11:17:44