ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Business Ngā Ūmanga 1 IR330C April 2019 Tax rate notification for contractors Use this form if you’re a contractor receiving schedular payments. If you’re receiving salary or wages as an employee, you’ll need to use the Tax code declaration (IR330) form. If you receive schedular payments you will receive an invoice for your ACC levies directly from ACC. Once completed: Contractor Give this form to the person paying you. Payer Don’t send this form to Inland Revenue. You must keep this completed IR330C with your business records for seven years following the last schedular payment you make to the person or entity. 1. Your details Full Name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) If you don’t have: • your IRD number you can find it in myIR or on letters or statements from us. • an IRD number go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: IRD number) to find out how to apply for one. 2. Your tax rate You must complete a separate Tax rate notification for contractors (IR330C) for each source of contracting income. Refer to the flowchart on page 2 and enter your tax rate to one decimal point here. % Refer to the table on page 3 and enter your schedular payment activity number here. Your tax code will always be: WT 3. Declaration Name Designation or title (if applicable) For example, director, partner, executive office holder, manager, duly authorised person Signature 2 0 Day Month Year Give this completed form to your payer. If you don’t complete sections 1 and 3 your payer must deduct tax from your pay at the no-notification rate of 45%, except for non-resident contractor companies where it’s 20%. Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities or your entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you don’t. We may also exchange information about you with: • some government agencies • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask to see the personal information we hold about you, we’ll show you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Contact us on 0800 377 774 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keyword: privacy). RESET FORM IR1036 | August 2022 You have certain tax and legal responsibilities when you hire entertainers. If you hire them under a contract for service, you usually have to deduct tax in the form of schedular payments. What you need to know If the band members are operating as individuals you need a completed Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C from each of them. The payments you make to the entertainers differ from wages because they're paid to independent contractors. How to deduct income tax from their fee Step 1. Deduct income tax from their payment at the rate chosen on their IR330C. If they don’t select a tax rate, use the standard rate on the last page of the IR330C. Step 2. Include the gross schedular payment amount and total tax deducted on your Employment information - IR348. Note: An individual may have a certificate of exemption. This means you don't have to deduct tax from their payment. You need to see the original certificate and check that it's current. You won't need to make other deductions such as KiwiSaver or student loan repayments because these are the entertainer's responsibility. Different tax rules apply to non-resident entertainers. For more information please go to ird.govt.nz/nr-entertainers Entertainers operating as a partnership or company If the band has its own IRD number you need a completed Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C in the band's name. You won't need an IR330C or to deduct tax from the payment if the band: • holds a current certificate of exemption, or • is a limited liability company. If they're non-resident entertainers you must still deduct tax from their payment. For more on non-resident entertainers go to ird.govt.nz/nr-entertainers Special tax rate certificate An entertainer may give you a special tax rate certificate. It will tell you to deduct tax at a special rate, or to deduct no tax. Paying the band from door charges Payments you make to the band from door charges are treated in two ways: 1. The entertainer takes the door money - you're responsible for deducting income tax from these payments at the rate shown on the IR330C and paying them the difference. 2. The entertainer takes the money jointly with an employee of the venue and keeps the money as their fee - you don't deduct income tax from these payments. Payments made to entertainers - your tax responsibilities If you hire bands or entertainers, this factsheet will help you work out if you need to deduct tax. ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. GST and taxing schedular payments If the entertainers are GST registered, deduct schedular tax from their payment, using the GST-exclusive amount. Example Cost of services $ 500 (Put this figure on your IR348) Plus GST @15% $ 75 Total $ 575 Calculate tax at 20% of $500 (the GST-exclusive amount) Less tax of $ 100 (Put this figure on your IR348) $ 400 Plus GST from above $ 75 Total payment to entertainer $ 475 How to tax payments you make to entertainers Don't deduct tax from the entertainer's payments Yes Yes No No Ask them for a Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C Deduct tax at the no-notification rate (see the IR330C) Did you get a fully completed IR330C? Deduct tax at the entertainers' rate on the IR330C Does the entertainer hold a special tax rate certificate? Deduct tax at the rate shown on the certificate No Yes Enter the details on your Employment information - IR348. If the entertainer doesn't have a valid certificate of exemption, record their name, start date, IRD number, the amount of the gross payment and the tax deducted. Include the gross schedular payment details in the "Gross earnings and/ or schedular payments" and "Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners' levy" columns in your employer monthly schedule. Has the entertainer shown you a valid certificate of exemption? Is the entertainer a limited liability company? Yes No www.ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online from the myIR login screen and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you. FREE ADVISORY SERVICE Our community compliance officers run free tax seminars and workshops for new businesses and organisations. For more information or to register to attend one of these sessions go to ird.govt.nz/seminars or phone 0800 377 774.