Page 1 Parties to the agreement • • The parties are a receiving carer and a liable parent. • • By registering the agreement you are cancelling any child support formula assessment from the date we accept the form. Receiving carer's details 1 IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 2 Name (Tick one) Mr Mrs Miss Ms First name(s) Surname 3 Address Street address or PO Box Town or cityPostcode 4 Contact details ( ) ( ) ( ) Day Evening Mobile Email 5 Bank account to pay child support into Account name Bank Branch Account number Suffix Liable parent's details 6 IRD number 7 Name (Tick one) Mr Mrs Miss Ms First name(s) Surname 8 Address Street address or PO Box Town or cityPostcode 9 Contact details ( ) ( ) ( ) Day Evening Mobile Email Child Supportird.govt.nz/childsupport When to use this form: •• when you can agree on the amount of child support but would like Inland Revenue to administer the payments •• when you already have a voluntary agreement for child support and would like to change the amount Read the notes at the end before completing this form IR102 Registration of voluntary agreement for child support July 2023 Page 2 Voluntary agreement details Your agreement must be: • • for a child who is under 18 years of age or 18 years of age and enrolled at and attending a registered school in New Zealand or an overseas school, a New Zealand citizen or ordinarily resident in New Zealand, is not financially independent and not living with another person in a marriage, civil union or de facto relationship • • for regular payments, and for at least $10 per week ($520 per year) • • signed by both the liable parent and receiving carer. Agreed payments will be collected from the liable parent and passed on to the receiving carer monthly. If you have a separate written agreement please attach a copy to this form. If a child does not have an IRD number, you’ll need to apply for one. You can do this by completing an IRD number application - resident individual - IR595 form. If there are more than three children, please write their details on the back of this form. 10 First child First name(s) Surname Date of birthIRD number Day Month Year Amount payable Each week month year (Tick one) Agreement start dateCannot be a date in the past, if it is, we use the date we receive this form 11 Second child First name(s) Surname Date of birthIRD number Day Month Year Amount payable Each week month year (Tick one) Agreement start dateCannot be a date in the past, if it is, we use the date we receive this form 12 Third child First name(s) Surname Date of birthIRD number Day Month Year Amount payable Each week month year (Tick one) Agreement start dateCannot be a date in the past, if it is, we use the date we receive this form Declaration Both parties to the agreement must sign this form. To the best of my knowledge the information given is true and correct. Receiving carer To the best of my knowledge the information given is true and correct. Liable parent Please send this completed form to: Child Support, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045 Child Supportird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 3 Notes about voluntary agreements • • If the receiving carer is getting an unsupported child’s benefit they can only register a voluntary agreement if the amount is equal to or more than the amount payable under a child support formula assessment. • • If another person is also a carer of the child or children in a child support formula assessment, they must agree to cancel the child support formula assessment. This can be done by all carers of the child by completing a Cancellation of child support - IR107 form. Privacy Meeting your child support obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities and entitlements under the Child Support Act 1991. We may also exchange information about you with: • • some government agencies • • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them • • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask for the personal information we hold about you, we will give it to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Call us on 0800 221 221 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to ird.govt.nz/privacy Child Supportird.govt.nz/childsupport