You can use this fact sheet to help you with the following in myIR: • complete an Individual tax return – IR3 • complete a Non-resident individual tax return – IR3NR • respond to a request for more information for an automatically issued income tax assessment • change the details in an income tax return or assessment. Before you start you will need: • what income you have received during the year • how much tax you have paid on your income • expenses to be claimed. Your reportable income will prepopulate in myIR by the end of May. We recommend you wait until June to complete your return if you receive any of the following types of reportable income: • salary and wages • benefits • taxable pensions • taxable allowances • interest • dividends • portfolio investment entity (PIE) income (for example KiwiSaver). Navigation Use the Previous and Next buttons ( and on some devices) to move through the return. As you go through your return, the breadcrumb trail at the top of the page will show you what stage you are up to. You can click on an earlier stage if you need to go back to it. Saving a draft You can save a draft of your return at any time by clicking the Save Draft button ( on some devices) at the bottom of the page. To continue with a draft you have saved previously, go to I want to, select Search submissions, Income tax return, then Continue editing. If you are unable to make changes to your draft, make sure you have selected Continue editing. Were you a non-resident of New Zealand for tax purposes? This question is not related to your immigration status. If you were away from New Zealand for more than 325 days in any 12-month period and do not have a permanent place of abode in New Zealand, you may be a non-resident of New Zealand for tax purposes. Go to ird.govt.nz/ international-tax/individuals/tax-residency-status-for- individuals to find out your status. Select No if you were a New Zealand tax resident at any time during the tax year. Select Ye s if you were a non-resident taxpayer for the whole tax year. IR1066 | March 2023 This fact sheet explains how to complete an individual income tax assessment in myIR. It covers how to navigate through your return, save and resume a draft, and build your return. Completing an individual income tax assessment in myIR ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Build your return Tick the boxes for the income types that you have received. When you tick a box, that question will become available later in the return. You can use our Individual income tax return guide – IR3G to help determine which boxes you need to tick. If a box is already ticked, it is because we have a record of you receiving that type of income. If a box is ticked but you did not receive that type of income this year, leave the box ticked and enter $0.00 when asked for the amount later in the return. If you are no longer receiving this type of income, you can update your income sources in myIR so that it is not ticked in future returns. Go to Income Ta x, select More..., then My income sources once you have submitted your return. If none of the boxes apply to you, tick the last box This is a nil return. Business industry classification (BIC) code We may ask for your BIC code as we're required to supply the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) with a code for your business or trading activity, for levy classification and calculation. If your BIC code is not showing or is different from the one showing, enter the correct code. To work out your main business or trading activity and its code, go to businessdescription.co.nz If you are not in business, you can leave this field empty. If a BIC code is showing, you can remove it. Secondary forms Tick the box for any secondary forms you will include with your return. These will show later in the return, after you have entered your income and deductions. The amounts you enter in the secondary forms do not prepopulate into the return, so make sure that you also tick the relevant income types on the Build your return page and manually enter the amounts when asked. If you have no secondary forms to submit, tick the last box No secondary forms to submit. Specific situation Tick the box for any specific situations that apply. If none of the specific situations apply, tick the last box No specific situations apply. You’re filing a part year return Tick this box if any of the listed situations apply to you. You will be asked for further details later in the return. If you were a New Zealand tax resident for the full year but only worked part of the year, you do not need to tick this box. You're entitled to an early payment discount An early payment discount is available if you receive self- employed or partnership income and make voluntary payments of income tax either in your first year of business or the year before you start paying provisional tax. You must meet certain criteria to qualify. For more information about early payment discount go to ird.govt.nz/early-payment-discount This return will include attachments Tick this box if you have additional information you want to attach to your return, for example financial statements or correspondence. You will be asked to attach the files later in the return. Disclosures Tick the box for any disclosures you will include with your return. These will show later in the return, after you have entered your income and deductions. The amounts you enter in the disclosures do not prepopulate into the return, so make sure that you also tick the relevant income types on the Build your return page and manually enter the amounts when asked. You can use our Individual income tax return guide – IR3G to help determine if you need to include a CFC/FIF disclosure or a Bright- line residential property sale information - IR833. If you have no disclosures to make, tick the last box You have no disclosure to make. IR3G For more information about completing your return, see our Individual income tax return guide – IR3G. This guide is based on completing a paper return, but the information is still relevant for completing a return in myIR. If you are a non-resident of New Zealand for tax purposes, use our Non-resident income tax return guide – IR3NRG instead. You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides