www.ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Business Ngā Ūmanga While the information in this factsheet is for anyone who has lost their job, there's an additional section for contractors only - see the next column. Assistance for contractors and employees Whether you're a contractor or an employee, you may qualify for an increase in Working for Families Tax Credits, or a reduction in your child support payments. Please contact us as soon as your circumstances changes so we can ensure you receive your full entitlements. Working for Families Tax Credits (WfFTC) WfFTC is paid to families with dependent children aged 18 or under. If you currently receive WfFTC, you may be entitled to an increased payment. You can either update your family income through your myIR secure online services account at www.ird.govt.nz or call us on 0800 227 773 and we'll take your details over the phone. If you don't get WfFTC because you were earning too much, but your income has reduced, it's worth checking to see if you now qualify. Use the "Estimate your Working for Families Tax Credits" calculator at www.ird.govt.nz "Work it out". Make sure you select the calculator for the correct year. You can apply for WfFTC at www.ird.govt.nz "Get it done online". Child support A reduction in income won't automatically change your current child support assessment calculation. If you expect your income, which we based your currect assessment on, to decrease by 15% or more, you may be able to estimate your income or ask for an administrative review. You can update your income details by logging into your myIR account and selecting "income" under the "My family" tab. You'll need to estimate how much you expect to earn for the whole year and provide evidence to support your estimation, eg, payslips or, if you're self- employed, a letter from your accountant. Alternatively, you can fill out an Estimate of income for child support assessment (IR104) form and mail it in to us. Any change in your circumstances may affect the child support payments you receive or make. If there's been a change, please let us know immediately by calling 0800 221 221. Additional assistance for contractors We understand losing a contract unexpectedly can have a big impact on your cashflows. You may be tempted to put your taxes "on hold" for the time being. But the sooner you contact us, the sooner we can take some of the pressure off. We'd like to tell you about the ways we can help. We recommend you discuss your options with your tax advisor before making any decisions. Returns and payments You should continue to pay your taxes by the due date. Late payment penalties and interest apply to late payments. If you're unable to make a payment, call us on 0800 377 771. Together, we'll work out a solution, taking into account your individual circumstances. For example, you may qualify for an instalment arrangement, which allows you to pay the tax over a period of time. If you contact us before the due date, and the arrangement is approved, you'll only pay a late payment penalty of 1%. No further penalties will be charged, provided you keep to the terms of the arrangement. Note that interest charges will still apply. Affected by a receivership? This factsheet is for contractors and employees who were previously working for an organisation now in receivership. If your income for the year will be lower than expected, we can help you manage your tax payments, and claim any financial assistance available to you through the tax system. IR1020 | July 2019 www.ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. www.ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR to manage your tax and entitlements online. • Demonstrations - learn about our services by watching short videos. • Get it done online - complete forms and returns, make payments, give us feedback. • Work it out - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your myIR user ID or password? Request a reminder of your user ID or reset your password online. You'll need to know your IRD number and have access to the email address we hold for you. Our Debt options (IR582) factsheet has more information. It's important to keep filing your returns on time, even if you can't pay the tax owing. GST refunds Are you waiting for a GST refund? If you need the money urgently, please call us on 0800 377 776. We'll make sure your return is processed as quickly as possible. Expecting more refunds in the future? Filing your returns more frequently (one-monthly or two-monthly) will help you get your refunds sooner. To change your filing frequency, call us on 0800 377 776. Provisional tax If your taxable income for the year will be lower than normal, you may wish to re-estimate your provisional tax. You can do it online by using the "Provisional tax estimation and re-estimation" calculator at www.ird.govt.nz "Get it done online". You can re-estimate any number of times up until your last instalment date. But please be careful. Penalties and interest may be charged if your estimate is too low. If you've overpaid your provisional tax, you can ask us to refund the balance. One-on-one assistance If you'd like someone to talk to you or your subcontractors about tax and any of the entitlements discussed in this factsheet, call 0800 377 772. Please ask to speak to the Community Compliance representative for your region. myIR A myIR account lets you manage all your Inland Revenue matters securely online. You can update your address, phone, email or bank account details, check your correspondence, work out your income tax filing options and check your KiwiSaver account. Register for a myIR account today to: • check if you're due a tax refund • check all your details, including your student loan • check and update your Working for Families Tax Credit details • review your KiwiSaver contributions • manage your child support payments • file returns. myIR is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Go to www.ird.govt.nz/myIR to find out more. Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online and we'll send them to the email address we hold for you. Need more information? To read the forms and guides mentioned in this factsheet go to www.ird.govt.nz "Forms and guides". Call us on 0800 377 774 between 8 am and 8 pm Monday to Friday or 9 am and 1 pm on Saturday. Talk to a tax agent (accountant).