Child support Turuki Tamariki IR1023 | July 2023 ird.govt.nz/childsupportThe information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. This factsheet tells you when a non-parent carer can apply for child support. Who is a non-parent carer? You are a non-parent carer if you provide care for a child but you are not the child's parent. For example, • a grandparent • another family member • a family friend • a guardian • any other person who provides ongoing daily care. Being eligible for child support As a non-parent carer, you are eligible for child support if: • you care for the child at least 128 nights a year (at least 35% of the time) • you are not living in a marriage, civil union or de facto relationship with the child's parent • you are not receiving board and lodging payments from Oranga Tamariki—Ministry for Children. If you receive an unsupported child's benefit, you will need to apply for child support when you apply for the benefit from Work and Income. How to apply for a formula assessment You can apply for child support against each parent of the child in your care by completing an Application to assess child support by a non-parent carer - IR954 form. We will assess and collect any child support payable. When you apply for the unsupported child's benefit, you will complete this form at Work and Income and they will send it to us. If your benefit is cancelled or you do not receive an unsupported child's benefit You can do one of the following: • make a private arrangement with the parents and tell us to stop collecting your child support • make a voluntary child support agreement with the parents, which we can administer for you • continue your child support formula assessment. The child support will be paid to you • apply for a child support formula assessment. Child support - non-parent carers Private arrangements You can make a private child support arrangement with either parent or with both parents. You do not need to involve us, as long as you do not receive an unsupported child's benefit for the child. Voluntary agreements Working out your own agreement gives you and the parent(s) certainty, because you decide on an amount of child support that you both agree is fair. You can change the amount payable at any time, but you both have to agree to any changes. You can register your agreement with us and we will administer the payments. To find out more or register a voluntary agreement, complete a Registration of voluntary agreement for child support – IR102 form. Go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Managing your child support If we accept your application to receive child support, we'll create child support records for you, the child and their parents. We will contact you if we need more information. Otherwise, you and the parents will each receive a letter from us confirming that child support records exist and what this means for each of you. ird.govt.nzThe information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Payment waiver Non-parent carers can waive the right to receive child support from one of the parents as long as they are not receiving an unsupported child's benefit for the child. An assessment is still completed for that parent but we will tell them they do not need to make payments. When and how you get paid Child support is usually due to be paid by the liable parents on the 20th of the following month. If they pay on time, we will pay you by the 23rd of the month. For example, a child support payment for August is due on 20 September. If it is paid on time, we will pay you by 23 September. If you receive an unsupported child's benefit for the child in your care, we will pass the payments from the liable parent on to the government to help cover the cost of your benefit. You will receive any amount left over. Example You have two children in your care, Sky and Mia. You are receiving unsupported child's benefit of $800 for Sky only. Your child support entitlement from Sky's parents is $1,000 a month and from Mia's parents is $500 a month. When Sky's parents pay the government will receive $800 and you will get $200 a month. When Mia's parents pay you will receive $500. Cancelling your child support formula assessment You can cancel child support if you are not receiving an unsupported child's benefit. To cancel your child support, you need to complete a Cancelling your child support - IR107 form. Where to find more information If you'd like more information about child support, go to our website ird.govt.nz/childsupport This site offers general child support information. If you register for myIR secure online services at ird.govt.nz/myIR you'll be able to check your child support payments, update your details online and correspond with us by message through myIR whenever you like. You can view copies of all our forms and guides by going to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides How to contact us If you need to contact us including from overseas go to ird.govt.nz/contact-us