IR1035 | April 2023 1 IR330C April 2019 Tax rate notification for contractors Use this form if you’re a contractor receiving schedular payments. If you’re receiving salary or wages as an employee, you’ll need to use the Tax code declaration (IR330) form. If you receive schedular payments you will receive an invoice for your ACC levies directly from ACC. Once completed: Contractor Give this form to the person paying you. Payer Don’t send this form to Inland Revenue. You must keep this completed IR330C with your business records for seven years following the last schedular payment you make to the person or entity. 1. Your details Full Name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) If you don’t have: • your IRD number you can find it in myIR or on letters or statements from us. • an IRD number go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: IRD number) to find out how to apply for one. 2. Your tax rate You must complete a separate Tax rate notification for contractors (IR330C) for each source of contracting income. Refer to the flowchart on page 2 and enter your tax rate to one decimal point here. % Refer to the table on page 3 and enter your schedular payment activity number here. Your tax code will always be: WT 3. Declaration Name Designation or title (if applicable) For example, director, partner, executive office holder, manager, duly authorised person Signature 2 0 Day Month Year Give this completed form to your payer. If you don’t complete sections 1 and 3 your payer must deduct tax from your pay at the no-notification rate of 45%, except for non-resident contractor companies where it’s 20%. Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities or your entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you don’t. We may also exchange information about you with: • some government agencies • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask to see the personal information we hold about you, we’ll show you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Contact us on 0800 377 774 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keyword: privacy). ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Business Ngā Ūmanga Bands and entertainers can start out playing for fun or as a hobby. If your band is successful, your hobby can turn into a business and you'll have legal and tax responsibilities. Is your entertainment activity a business? If you entertain on a regular basis with the intention of making a profit, either as an individual or as a group, it's likely you’re in business. If you charge for your services, the venue owner is usually required to deduct tax from payments made to you. These are known as schedular payments. Example: Your band performs for the Big Grey hotel. You charge $1,000 for the evening. The hotel owner/ manager deducts tax of 20% ($200) and pays your band the rest ($800). Payment can include koha, tips and payment in kind, that is, the same value of money in food, drink or other goods or services. What you need to know There are a few things you need to think about and your answers will determine who's responsible for the tax on the income you receive - you or the venue owner. • Does each band member get paid individually and meet their own costs and tax? Large groups can elect an informal leader to take care of all the business and keep a schedule of payments. • Have you given the venue owner a completed Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C? They'll use this to deduct the correct rate of tax from the payment you receive. • Does the band trade as a partnership or a company? If it does, it should have its own IRD number and file partnership or company tax returns. Note: If you (or the band) trades as a company you only need to complete a Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C if you're also a non-resident entertainer, or if you're performing the work under a labour hire arrangement. If you're a non-resident entertainer, find out about your tax responsibilities at ird.govt.nz/nr-entertainers or call us on 09 984 4329. Certificate of exemption (COE) You may be eligible to get a certificate of exemption. You show this to the venue owner and it tells them to pay you the full fee and not to deduct tax. You're then responsible for paying the tax on this income at the end of the tax year. To find out how to apply for a COE go to ird.govt.nz/apply-for-coe Paying taxes and filing returns Payments you receive for your entertainment activity will, in most cases, be taxable. You should put a portion of each payment into a separate bank account. At the end of each tax year (31 March) you'll need to complete and send us a tax return. If you have a tax agent they'll manage this for you. You still need to give them your business records. Even if venue owners have deducted tax you must still file a tax return. You could consider appointing a tax agent (accountant). They can help you work out your taxes and complete your tax returns. The fee you pay them is tax deductible. Tax information for bands and entertainers If you're an entertainer or in a band, this factsheet will help you work out if you need to pay tax. Mickey J Moose 112211221 ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Keeping business records Keeping the right information is important and, in most cases, a legal requirement. This includes: • having a separate bank account to help you manage your income and expenses and budget for tax and other business costs such as ACC levies • an accounting system to record income and expenses (an accounts book or software package) • assets register for instruments and equipment • keeping all business invoices and receipts for seven years • running a vehicle logbook so you can claim travel costs. Do you need to register for GST? You may need to register for GST. You must register for GST if your turnover (sales from taxable activities), including certain imported services you receive: • was over $60,000 for the last 12 months, or • is expected to go over $60,000 for the next 12 months You can voluntarily register for GST if your turnover is less than $60,000. If you have not already registered for GST and need help deciding, use our guided help - Do I need to register for GST? You can register for GST in myIR If you register for GST you’ll need to provide the venue owner with taxable supply information such as an invoice. You’ll need to work out the GST to pay to us. You can find out more about taxable supply information and calculating and paying GST on our website at ird.govt.nz/gst When you're paid from the door charges If you collect door charges which you later receive as your fee, the tax on them is paid in one of 2 ways. 1. You do this by yourself - the manager or licensee deducts the tax from these payments at the rate shown on the IR330C and pays you the difference. 2. You and an employee of the venue owner collect door charges together and you keep the money as your fee - the manager or licensee doesn't have to make any deductions from these payments, so you have to pay the income tax. You should put some of each payment aside and keep records so you can show this in your tax return at the end of the year. No You're an individual or a member of a band You have a current certificate of exemption You are responsible for your own income tax Yes Put some of your earnings into a separate account File a tax return by 7 July Pay your tax by 7 February the following year The venue deducts tax from your payment. You may still have tax to pay at the end of the year Who pays the tax ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online from the myIR login screen and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you. FREE ADVISORY SERVICE Our community compliance officers run free tax seminars and workshops for new businesses and organisations. For more information or to register to attend one of these sessions go to ird.govt.nz/seminars or phone 0800 377 774.