Page 1 Receiving carer to complete 1 Your IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 2 Your name (Tick one) MrMrsMissMs First name(s) Surname 3 Address Street address or PO Box Town or cityPostcode Country 4 Your contact details ( )( )( ) DayEveningMobile Email 5 Name of liable parent (Tick one) MrMrsMissMs Note: If there’s more than one liable parent, you must complete a form for each and send together with this form. First name(s) Surname If this liable parent is a recognised carer, that is cares for the children at least 28% of the time, they must sign the declaration for recognised carers. 6 Name the child or children you want us to stop child support for First name(s)Surname(s) Is this child still living with, and, dependent on you? If No – what date did they leave your care or become independent? Ye sNo Ye sNo Ye sNo D ay Month Year Do you want these children included as dependents for any other child support assessments? Ye s When to use this form Use this form if you want us to stop your child support. You cannot stop child support for any child you receive an unsupported child’s benefit for. If you are cancelling a child support formula assessment, anyone with at least 28% care of the child must also agree to cancel the child support. If you are living in a relationship with the liable parent, you do not need to complete this form. Contact us with the date you started living together and we can stop your child support. Child Supportird.govt.nz/childsupport Cancelling your child support IR107 July 2023 Child Support Page 2 Stopping child support 7 What date do you want the child support to end? Day Month Year This cannot be a date in the past, if it is, we’ll use the date we receive this form. Collecting child support If this liable parent still owes you child support, let us know if you still want us to collect this. Choose one of the following options: 8 I do not want you to collect any child support owing. Please read the notes below and sign the declaration. I want you to collect all child support payments owed by the liable parent. Please read the notes below and sign the declaration. I want you to collect some of the child support payments owed by the liable parent. Please complete Question 9. 9 Complete this question if you want us to collect some of the child support owed to you by this liable parent. Tell us the amount of child support you want us to collect or the dates you want us to collect payments for. For example: ••collect $3,000 of the debt, or ••collect everything owed between 1 January and 30 June last year. Write here what payments you want collected Notes ••If you ask us to stop collecting payments you cannot ask us to collect them at a later date. However, it’s still possible for you to collect the payments owing by applying through the District Court. ••You cannot ask us to stop collecting child support owed by the liable parent for periods prior to 1 July 2023 if you were receiving a benefit at a sole parent rate. Payments for these periods ••If you have asked us to collect child support owed to you, you will receive the payments once they are collected from the liable parent. Declaration ••I understand I am asking Inland Revenue to cancel my child support. ••I understand any payments I ask you not to collect, cannot be collected by Inland Revenue at a later date. Child Supportird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 3 Declaration—Recognised carer ••I am a recognised carer of one or more of the children named in this form. I understand I am asking Inland Revenue to cancel child support. ••If you are the parent of the child or children named in this form do you want them included as a dependent child or children for any other child support assessments. Ye s First name(s)Surname If you also want us to stop collecting overdue payments owed to you, complete an Authorisation not to collect child support or domestic maintenance - IR129 form. Declaration—Recognised carer ••I am a recognised carer of one or more of the children named in this form, I understand I am asking Inland Revenue to cancel child support. ••If you are the parent of the child or children named in this form do you want them included as a dependent child or children for any other child support assessments. Ye s First name(s)Surname If you also want us to stop collecting overdue payments owed to you, complete an Authorisation not to collect child support or domestic maintenance - IR129 form. Please send the completed form to: Child Support, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045 Privacy Meeting your child support obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities and entitlements under the Child Support Act 1991. We may also exchange information about you with: •• some government agencies •• another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them •• Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask for the personal information we hold about you, we will give it to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Call us on 0800 221 221 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to ird.govt.nz/privacy Child Supportird.govt.nz/childsupport