1 You can apply for an exemption from RLWT if: • y ou're someone who carries on a business of developing land, subdividing land, or building houses, or • i t's your main home in New Zealand being sold/disposed of and you are eligible for the main home exclusion in full. If the seller is a partnership (except for a limited partnership, see note on page 3) or unincorporated club or society, each member that is an offshore RLWT person must complete an IR1103 if they wish to apply for an exemption from RLWT, and show their own IRD number, not that of the partnership, unincorporated club, or society. Details of the person or entity applying for the exemption 1Full nameMrMrsMissMsNon-individual (Tick 1) 2IRD number 3Street address (Do not show a box or bag number) Street address Town or cityPostcode/zip codeCountry 4Postal address, only if it's different from the street address Do not show your tax preparer’s address here Street address, PO Box, Private or Locked Bag number Town or cityPostcode/zip codeCountry 5Contact phone numbers ( )( )( ) DaytimeEveningMobile 6Email address 7.Tick the reason for applying for an exemption Carrying on a business of developing land, subdividing land, or building houses - complete question 7A. See notes on page 3 Main home - complete question 7B. See notes on pages 3 and 4 7AApplying as someone who carries on a business of developing land, subdividing land, or building houses I am:Developing landSubdividing landBuilding houses Description of the property being sold/disposed of, for example, Certificate of Title number. See note on page 3 for Question 7A and 7B. If you have more than 1 property you want this exemption to apply to provide a list of the properties with their descriptions on a separate piece of paper and attach to this form. As the applicant: I have met all tax obligations under the Inland Revenue Acts for the 2 years before applying. If applying as a limited partnership or you are a member of a group of companies see note on page 3 for Question 7A. or I'm able to provide Inland Revenue with security to secure payment of any income tax obligations that might arise from the sale/disposal of the properties listed. See note on page 3 for Question 7A for the types of securities that may be acceptable to Inland Revenue. The security will need to be for an amount that is the greater of: • 10% of the estimated turnover for the sale of the properties this exemption applies to, or • NZ $50,000. Attach: • s upporting documents for the amount of the security being provided • a s olicitor’s certificate as to the execution of the security document, or a non-revocation of power of attorney for the security document (if applicable), and • a s chedule of projected property-related income and costs for the properties this exemption relates to. IR1103 July 2024 Application for exemption from residential land withholding tax (RLWT) 2 7BApplying as the property is my main home Refer to notes for question 7B on pages 3 and 4 Description of the property being sold/disposed of, for example, Certificate of Title. Bright-line start date Day Month Year Bright-line end date Day Month Year For property sold before 1 July 2024, date binding sale and purchase agreement was entered into to buy the property. Day Month Year I confirm the property is eligible for the main home exclusion in full. Dates you lived in the property as your main home, for example, the date you moved in until the date you moved out. Do not include periods where you were not living in the property as your main home, for example, a period between moving out and when the property was sold. If you have more dates show these on a separate piece of paper and attach it to this form. to to to Day Month Year Day Month Year Have you been out of New Zealand since purchasing the property? No DepartureArrival Ye s – show the dates you’ve been out of New Zealand for periods longer than 3 months. If you have more than 3 trips, show the other departure and arrival dates on a separate piece of paper and attach it to this form. to to to Day Month Year Day Month Year Attach a copy of 2 different forms of evidence that show both your name and the address of the property from the period it was your main home. These may include: - a bill from the company who supplies your power, gas, water, phone or internet services - an insurance policy document for contents, car or life. This does not include a letter from friends or family. 8Declaration Name Designation or title (if applicable) For example, director, partner, trustee, executive office holder, manager, duly authorised person SignatureDate I declare that the information given on this form is true and correct. Day Month Year If completing this form online an electronic signature is acceptable Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities or your entitlements under the Acts we administer. For full details of our privacy policy go to ird.govt.nz/privacy Send this form with all supporting documentation to: If applying as someone carrying on a business of developing land, subdividing land, or building houses: If applying as the property is your main home: Email: NR.contractors@ird.govt.nzEmail: RLWTforms@ird.govt.nz Post: Inland Revenue PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 New Zealand Post: Inland Revenue PO Box 39010 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045 New Zealand 3 Notes to help you complete this form Limited partnership If the seller is a limited partnership, apply under its IRD number. A separate application is not needed from each partner. Question 7A – Compliance with tax obligations You, or an associate must have had and met all tax obligations under the Inland Revenue Acts for the 2 years before applying, for example filed tax returns required, met any employer, GST or provisional tax obligations. If applying as a limited partnership or a company that is a member of a group of companies you can apply for an exemption if it has been in existence for less than 2 years. For this to be accepted an associate such as a partner of the limited partnership or another member in the same group of companies needs to have met all their tax obligations under the Inland Revenue Acts for the 2 years before you apply. If this is the case you can tick this option. Question 7A - Types of securities This could include a bank bond, mortgage against real property, or a surety or bond from a finance or insurance entity/provider. You may also have another type of security you'd like to provide. Send us details of your proposed security, and all necessary forms and documents from the entity/provider who is providing the security. We'll consider this and discuss with you if we do not think it's acceptable. Question 7A and 7B - Description of property If the land being disposed of has a Certificate of Title number show this. If there is no Certificate of Title number, show 1 of the descriptions in the following table. Description of propertyInclude with your application a copy of: leasehold titlethe lease allocated number/letterthe plan or similar, for example, subdivision plan, (for example, master, sale or survey plan) showing the property and the part being disposed of with the allocated number/letter other description, for example, a survey plan (not the address) similar documentation to the above that shows the property and the part being disposed of with the description Question 7B - Bright-line start date Use the following table to determine what date to use as the bright-line start date. Type of purchase/acquisitionDate to use Standard purchase of a propertyDate the transfer of the property is registered to you with Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) (usually the settlement date) Subdivided land – property you have subdividedThe original date of registration for the undivided property Off the plans – property acquired relying on the completion of a land development or subdivision Date you entered into a sale and purchase agreement Change of trustee – land transferred from a trustee of a trust to another trustee of the trust Bright-line start date for the original trustee Joint tenancy converted to a tenancy in common or tenancy in common converted to a joint tenancy To the extent the person’s share in the land is unchanged, the bright-line start date for the land before the tenancy was converted Purchase where no registration happens before the sale dateDate you acquired an interest in the property Freehold estate converted from a lease with a perpetual right of renewal Date you were first granted the leasehold estate Land outside New ZealandDate the transfer of the property is registered to you under foreign laws Question 7B - Bright-line end date Use the following table to determine what date to use as the bright-line end date. Type of sale/disposalDate to use Standard sale of a propertyDate you entered into a sale and purchase agreement Gifting of propertyDate the gift was made Compulsory acquisition by the Crown, a local authority, or a public authority Date of compulsory acquisition Mortgagee saleDate the property is disposed of by or for the mortgagee because the mortgagor defaulted (usually the settlement date) Disposals not covered aboveDate you disposed of the property If more than 1 type of disposal applies, use the earliest date. 4 Question 7B - Date binding sale and purchase agreement entered into For property sold before 1 July 2024, the date you acquired the property determines which main home exclusion criteria applies. For tax purposes, a property is generally acquired on the date a binding sale and purchase agreement is entered into (even if some standard conditions like getting finance or a building report still need to be met). Full information on when a property is acquired is found in QB 17/02 on taxtechnical.ird.govt.nz A property acquired on or after 27 March 2021 will be treated as having been acquired before 27 March 2021, if the purchase was the result of an offer the purchaser made on or before 23 March 2021 and that offer could not be withdrawn before 27 March 2021. To support this, please provide a copy of the sale and purchase agreement and any supporting contractual documents (including any tender document). Question 7B - Main home exclusion A main home is the property where you live for most of the time, or if you have more than 1 property it is the one that you have the greatest connection to. To be your main home you need to meet the main home exclusion criteria under the bright-line test. You can apply for a certificate of exemption if the property is eligible for the main home exclusion in full. Property sold on or after 1 July 2024 You can claim the main home exclusion if you: • used more than 50% of the property’s area as your main home (including the yard, gardens, and garage) • used the property for more than 50% of the bright-line period as your main home. Property sold before 1 July 2024 Different criteria apply depending on when you acquired the property (generally the date a binding sale and purchase agreement is entered into). Use the following table to determine the main home exclusion criteria to use for property sold before 1 July 2024. Date property acquiredMain home exclusion criteria On or after 27 March 2021You must have: • used more than 50% of the property’s area as your main home (including the yard, gardens, and garage) • used the property for 100% of the time as your main home. This may include any continuous period of up to 12 months in the bright-line period where the property was not used as your main home (for example, a period between moving out and when the property is finally sold). Before 27 March 2021You must have: • u sed more than 50% of the property’s area as your main home (including the yard, gardens, and garage) • u sed the property for more than 50% of the bright-line period as your main home. Go to ird.govt.nz/bright-line to find out: • w hen you cannot use the main home exclusion and when it may still apply • how to work out which is your main home when you have more than 1.