Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) declaration IR1101 July 2024 1 This declaration is required when the following apply: • you're an offshore RLWT person selling a residential property located in New Zealand • you’re selling the property on or after 1 July 2024 and it is being sold within 2 years of buying it • you’re selling the property before 1 July 2024 and it is being sold within 5 years of buying it. See page 6 to work out the bright-line start and end dates. These dates are important as they determine whether RLWT should be deducted. Terms used in this declaration • Offshore RLWT person - is any person (both individual and non-individual) liable to have residential land withholding tax deducted from their sale/disposal of residential property. Use the flowcharts on pages 4 and 5 to help work out if you are liable. • Withholder - the person required to deduct and pay an amount of residential land withholding tax in relation to the property sale proceeds on behalf of the seller. • Conveyancer - for a seller or purchaser, the lawyer, incorporated law firm, conveyancing practitioner, or incorporated firm that provides conveyancing services (as that term is used in the Lawyers and Conveyancers Act 2006) to the seller or purchaser using a New Zealand- based trust account. • Purchase/acquisition - means any form of acquisition of property including transfers or gifts. • Sale/disposal - means any form of disposal of property including transfers or gifts. Completing this declaration • If more than 1 person owns the property then each person selling or disposing of the property must complete their own IR1101. • If the seller is a trust, estate, or company, then a single trustee, executor of the estate, or director of the company who is not an offshore RLWT person may complete this declaration on its behalf. Use the flowcharts on pages 4 and 5 to work out if this person is an offshore RLWT person or not. • If the seller is a limited partnership, apply under its IRD number. A separate declaration is not needed from each partner that is an offshore RLWT person. One of the general partners who is not an offshore RLWT person must sign the form. • This declaration must be completed in English. It must be completed even if the withholder will not need to deduct RLWT. There are further notes on pages 6 and 7 to help you complete this declaration. • You'll need to show your withholder the original or provide certified copies of all supporting documents you need to provide. In most cases your withholder will be your conveyancer. After you've completed this declaration: Give your completed IR1101 and show originals or provide certified copies of the supporting documents to your withholder. Your withholder is: • your conveyancer if you have one (unless you're associated to the buyer) • the buyer's conveyancer if you do not have one • the buyer if you're associated to the buyer, or • the buyer if neither you nor the buyer have a conveyancer. Information for withholders When you've received the completed IR1101 and have taken copies of any original supporting information or certified copies, what you need to do depends on who you are. If you're a: lawyer or conveyancer - keep the completed IR1101, and copies of all supporting information, with your records of the property transaction for at least 7 years - do not send them to us. buyer acting as withholder - send the completed IR1101 and copies of all supporting information within 1 month of receiving it, to: Inland Revenue PO Box 39010 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045 New Zealand 2 Section A - seller's details Note: If the seller is a partnership (except for a limited partnership) or unincorporated club or society, then each member must complete their own individual IR1101 and give their own IRD number, not that of the partnership, club, or society. Full name MrMrsMissMsNon-individual (Tick one) IRD number Contact address (not that of the property being sold) Street address Town or cityPostcode/zip codeCountry Description of the property being sold/ disposed of, for example Certificate of Title number. See note on page 6. Section B - associated persons There are different rules if the seller is associated to the buyer. Generally you're associated if you're related privately or professionally to the buyer. For more information about associated persons, refer to the notes on page 7. I'm associated to the buyer. I'm not associated to the buyer. Use the flowcharts on pages 4 and 5 to help you work out if you're an offshore RLWT person. Section C - not an offshore RLWT person I confirm that I'm not, and the organisation I'm authorised to represent is not (if applicable), an offshore RLWT person Individuals Show your withholder your original, or provide certified copies, of 1 of the following: • A current or recently expired (last 12 months) New Zealand passport • A current form of photo ID\*, for example your driver’s licence, and - your full New Zealand birth certificate issued on or after 1 January 1998 - your New Zealand citizenship certificate, or - your most recent overseas passport together with your New Zealand residence class visa. If you're outside of New Zealand when completing this form, you'll need to provide the above as well as attach a statement confirming you've been in New Zealand within the last: • 3 years (if you're a New Zealand citizen) or • 12 months (if you hold a permanent resident visa or a resident visa defined under the Immigration Act 2009, or you are entitled to reside in New Zealand permanently). Non-individuals If you're completing this form on behalf of a non-individual, for example a company or trust, attach a statement confirming the entity does not meet any of the RLWT offshore person criteria listed in the shaded boxes on pages 4 and 5. Complete Section E - declaration on page 3. 3 Section D - an offshore RLWT person Tick one of the following: I confirm I'm an offshore RLWT person subject to RLWT My share of the property being disposed of is % See note on page 7. I confirm I'm an offshore RLWT person not subject to RLWT because (tick reason): I hold a valid certificate of exemption from residential land withholding tax - show the original or a certified copy to your withholder. The property transfer is from a deceased person to the executor or administrator of the estate - show the original or certified copies of the Letters of Administration or Probate to your withholder. The property transfer is due to the settlement of relationship property. The property sale/disposal is by an estate on the death of a person - show the original or certified copies of the Letters of Administration or Probate to your withholder. I'm a beneficiary of an estate selling/disposing of an inherited property - show the original or certified copies of the Letters of Administration, Probate, or application of transmission to your withholder. Complete Section E - declaration Section E - declaration Name Designation or title (if applicable) For example, director, partner, trustee, executive office holder, manager, duly authorised person SignatureDate I declare that the information given on this form is true and correct. Day Month Year Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities or your entitlements under the Acts we administer. For full details of our privacy policy go to ird.govt.nz/privacy Criminal penalties A person commits an offence under section 143A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 if they knowingly provide altered, false, incomplete, or misleading information to the Commissioner or any other person in respect of a tax law, or a matter or thing related to a tax law. A person convicted of an offence is liable to a fine. 4 Use the following flowcharts to determine if you're an offshore RLWT person Individuals This also includes: • partners in a partnership, and • members of an unincorporated club or society. Do you hold a permanent resident visa or resident visa defined under the Immigration Act 2009, or are entitled to reside in New Zealand permanently? NO Are you a New Zealand citizen? You're not an offshore RLWT person and are not liable for RLWT. Complete section C on page 2 Yo u are an offshore RLWT person and are liable for RLWT. Complete section B and D on page 2 and 3 You: • are currently in New Zealand, or • have been in New Zealand at any time in the last 3 years? You: • are currently in New Zealand, or • have been in New Zealand at any time in the last 12 months? YES YESYES YES NO NO NO Non-individuals (except trusts and estates) Refer to "Individuals" above to determine if an individual is an offshore RLWT person NO The entity is not an offshore RLWT person and is not liable for R LW T. Complete section C on page 2 YES YES NO Is there a director or general partner who: • is not an offshore RLWT person themself (refer to "Individuals" above) • can provide the proof of identity information required under Section C for themselves (see page 2) • can also provide the statement required under Section C that none of the conditions in the shaded box above apply to the organisation? Is the entity incorporated, registered, or constituted under foreign law? The entity is an offshore RLWT person and is liable for RLWT. Complete section B and D on page 2 and 3 Do any of the following apply: (tick if yes) For companies and incorporated societies • More than 25% of the directors are offshore RLWT person(s). • More than 25% of the shareholder decision-making rights are held or controlled by offshore RLWT person(s). For look-through companies • More than 25% of the effective interest(s) in the LTC are held or controlled by offshore RLWT person(s). For limited partnerships • More than 25% of the general partners are offshore RLWT person(s). • More than 25% of the partnership shares are held or controlled by offshore RLWT person(s NO YES 5 Trusts and estates Refer to the individuals flowchart on page 4 to determine if an individual person is an offshore RLWT person. For a non-individual entity (such as a corporate trustee) refer to the questions in the shaded boxes in the flowchart for the relevant entity type either below or the non-individuals flowchart on page 4. Do any of the following apply: (tick if yes) • All individual beneficiaries, including individual discretionary beneficiaries, are offshore RLWT person(s). • All beneficiaries, including discretionary beneficiaries, are offshore RLWT person(s). • Any individual beneficiary, including an individual discretionary beneficiary, who is an offshore RLWT person has received a distribution totalling more than $5,000 from the trust in 1 of the last 4 years before the current disposal of residential land. • Any non-individual beneficiary, for example a company, including a non-individual discretionary beneficiary, who is an offshore RLWT person has received a distribution from the trust in 1 of the last 4 years before the current disposal of residential land. • Any beneficiary, including a discretionary beneficiary, is an offshore RLWT person and the trust has disposed of residential land within the 4 years before the current disposal of residential land. NO The trust or estate is not an offshore RLWT person and is not liable for RLWT. Complete section C on page 2 YES Is there a trustee or executor who: • is not an offshore RLWT person themself (refer to note above) • can provide the proof of identity information required under Section C for themselves (see page 2) • can also provide the statement required under Section C that none of the conditions in the shaded box above apply to the organisation? The trust or estate is an offshore RLWT person and is liable f o r R LW T. Complete section B and D on page 2 and 3 Do either of the following apply: (tick if yes) • More than 25% of the trustees are offshore RLWT person(s). • More than 25% of the people (generally the settlors or trustees) who have the power to appoint/remove trustees or amend the trust deed are offshore RLWT person(s). NO YES NO YES 6 Notes to help you complete this form Purchase amount Use the following table to determine when the liability for RLWT occurs. Type of paymentRLWT liability occurs when: Monetary50% or more of the sale price has been paid to the seller or the seller's conveyancer Giftingthe gift becomes effective For other situations you'll need to talk to a tax professional. Bright-line start date Use the following table to determine what date to use as the bright-line start date. Type of purchase/acquisitionDate to use Standard purchase of a propertyDate the transfer of the property is registered to you with Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) (usually the settlement date) Subdivided land – property you have subdividedThe original date of registration for the undivided property Off the plans – property acquired relying on the completion of a land development or subdivision Date you entered into a sale and purchase agreement Change of trustee – land transferred from a trustee of a trust to another trustee of the trust Bright-line start date for the original trustee Joint tenancy converted to a tenancy in common or tenancy in common converted to a joint tenancy To the extent the person’s share in the land is unchanged, the bright-line start date for the land before the tenancy was converted Purchase where no registration happens before the sale dateDate you acquired an interest in the property Freehold estate converted from a lease with a perpetual right of renewal Date you were first granted the leasehold estate Land outside New ZealandDate the transfer of the property is registered to you under foreign laws Bright-line end date Use the following table to determine what date to use as the bright-line end date. Type of sale/disposalDate to use Standard sale of a propertyDate you entered into a sale and purchase agreement Gifting of propertyDate the gift was made Compulsory acquisition by the Crown, a local authority, or a public authority Date of compulsory acquisition Mortgagee saleDate the property is disposed of by or for the mortgagee because the mortgagor defaulted (usually the settlement date) Disposals not covered aboveDate you disposed of the property If more than 1 type of disposal applies, use the earliest date. Description of property If the land being sold/disposed of has a Certificate of Title number show this. If there is no Certificate of Title number, show 1 of the descriptions in the following table. Description of propertyInclude with your application a copy of: Leasehold titlethe lease Allocated number/letterthe plan or similar, for example subdivision or survey plan, showing the property and the part being disposed of with the allocated number/letter Other description, for example, a survey plan (not the address) similar documentation to the above that shows the property and the part being disposed of with the description 7 Notes to help you complete this form Share of property This is your share (as a percentage) of the property you are selling/disposing of. • In most cases this will be an equal share (100% / number of owners) of the property, for example 2 persons jointly owning the property will have a 50% share each. • If ownership is not equally divided then you will need to provide evidence to your withholder. • If you're selling/disposing of part of your share, state the amount of the total, for example, disposing of half of a half-share is 25% of the total. Associated persons There are a number of tests used to work out if 2 persons are associated for RLWT transactions. For example, you’re associated where you’re buying or selling: • to an individual and they are: - your spouse, civil union or de facto partner - within two degrees of blood relationship to you, your spouse, or civil union or de facto partner. • a company where: - you hold 25% or more of the voting rights or market value interest (the company and individual or entity other than a company test) - your spouse or children hold 25% of the voting rights or market value interest (the aggregation test) - where the combined holdings under all these rules total 25% or more market value interest. For example if you hold 10% of the shares in a company, your children hold 10%, and your family trust also holds 10%, then you are associated to the company. • a look-through company where: - you have a look-through interest in the company, and you are either a director or employee of the company - you have not or are not any of the above, but have a look-through interest of 25% or more. • a partnership that you are a partner of. • a limited partner in a limited partnership and have a 25% or more share in a right, obligation, property, status, or thing of the limited partnership. If you’re a trustee of a trust you’re associated when you’re selling to or buying from: • any settlor of the trust • a trustee of another trust where the trusts have a common settlor (spouses are treated as a separate person) • a person with power to appoint or remove trustees of the trust • a beneficiary of the trust • a beneficiary of the trust who is also related to you. Two companies are associated when conducting a property transaction between them where: • a group of persons total voting rights or market interest in each company are 50% or more • a group of persons control both companies by any other means. Aggregation rule There are additional rules that combine your interests with the interests held by people you're associated to making you associated to another person. The Tripartite test If you are associated to a person under 1 of the above rules, and that person is then associated to a third person you are selling to under a different rule, then you are associated to that third-person. The only exception is if the association is by the 2 companies test, and the association to the third-party comes from a test that does not involve an individual. For example you have control over 2 companies, Company A and Company B. These companies are associated to each other under the 2 companies test. Company A is the settlor of a trust where Peter is the beneficiary, so Peter is associated to Company A under the settlor and beneficiary test. As Peter is associated to Company A, and Company A is also associated to Company B, then Peter and Company B will also be associated. For more information about the association rules refer to our Tax and your property transactions - IR361 and A guide to associated persons definitions for income tax purposes - IR620 guides, or talk to a tax professional.