Child Support Page 1 ird.govt.nz/childsupport Change of circumstances IR116 Your details 1 Your New Zealand IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 2 Your name (Tick one)MrMrsMissMs First name(s) Surname 3 Address Street address or PO Box number Suburb and town or cityPostcode Country 4 Your contact details ( )( )( ) DayEveningMobile Email If you need to tell us about more children, include their details on a separate piece of paper and attach it to this form. Please include your name and IRD number at the top of the page. Children leaving your care or no longer qualifying for child support These can be the children you pay or receive child support for (qualifying children) or your other children that live with you (dependent children). The following child/children have left my care or no longer qualify for child support: 5 Child 1 Name of childIRD number Child's date of birthDate of change Day Month Year Day Month Year Tick the reason for change Child left care Child lives in a marriage, civil union or de facto relationship Child is financially independent - working on average 30 hours or more a week or getting a benefit or student allowance. Child is 18 years of age and has left school before the end of the school year Child no longer lives in New Zealand and is not a New Zealand citizen (applies to qualifying children only) Child has died Child Support November 2021 When to use this form • Use this form to tell us about changes of circumstances for your children. Read the notes at the end before completing this form. If you have a myIR account you can update your information online. Go to ird.govt.nz/myIR to login or register. Child Support Page 2 ird.govt.nz/childsupport 6 Child 2 Name of childIRD number Child's date of birthDate of change Day Month Year Day Month Year Tick the reason for change Child left care Child lives in a marriage, civil union or de facto relationship Child is financially independent - working on average 30 hours or more a week or getting a benefit or student allowance. Child is 18 years of age and has left school before the end of the school year Child no longer lives in New Zealand and is not a New Zealand citizen (applies to qualifying children only) Child has died 7 Child 3 Name of childIRD number Child's date of birthDate of change Day Month Year Day Month Year Tick the reason for change Child left care Child lives in a marriage, civil union or de facto relationship Child is financially independent - working on average 30 hours or more a week or getting a benefit or student allowance. Child is 18 years of age and has left school before the end of the school year Child no longer lives in New Zealand and is not a New Zealand citizen (applies to qualifying children only) Child has died Dependent children Dependent children are children in your care that you are the parent of, but you do not pay or receive child support for. We will take your dependent children into account when we work out your child support. The children must have an IRD number before we can add them to your child support. Read the notes pages if you need to know how to get one. The following dependent child/children are living with me: 8 Child 1 Name of childIRD number Child's date of birthDate of change Day Month Year Day Month Year Is this child 18 or turning 18 in the next 2 months and still attending a registered school? Ye sNo Does this child live with you full-time? Ye sNo If no, tell us about your care details: Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Name of other carer First name(s)Surname Child Support Page 3 ird.govt.nz/childsupport 9 Child 2 Name of childIRD number Child's date of birthDate of change Day Month Year Day Month Year Is this child 18 or turning 18 in the next 2 months and still attending a registered school? Ye sNo Does this child live with you full-time? Ye sNo If no, tell us about your care details: Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Name of other carer First name(s)Surname 10 Child 3 Name of childIRD number Child's date of birthDate of change Day Month Year Day Month Year Is this child 18 or turning 18 in the next 2 months and still attending a registered school? Ye sNo Does this child live with you full-time? Ye sNo If no, tell us about your care details: Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Name of other carer First name(s)Surname Changing care details If the care details for a child have changed, for example, you now share care with another person, or your level of care has changed, please provide the details below. Please read the recognised care notes for more information. If you need help to work out your care levels, use our online calculator at ird.govt.nz/childsupport 11 Child 1 Name of childIRD number Child's date of birthDate of change Day Month Year Day Month Year Your amount of care Number of nights in your care How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Name of other carer First name(s)Surname Other carer’s amount of care Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Child Support Page 4 ird.govt.nz/childsupport 12 Child 2 Name of childIRD number Child's date of birthDate of change Day Month Year Day Month Year Your amount of care Number of nights in your care How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Name of other carer First name(s)Surname Other carer’s amount of care Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly 13 Child 3 Name of childIRD number Child's date of birthDate of change Day Month Year Day Month Year Your amount of care Number of nights in your care How often? WeeklyFortnightly MonthlyYearly Name of other carer First name(s)Surname Other carer’s amount of care Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Note: If your or the other carer's pattern of care for any child is not covered by the options provided, please write the care details in panel 14 below. If there are additional carers for any child, please provide their details below. 14 Please list any additional information that may help us work out your care levels - for example, if the arrangements are different for school holidays. Declaration To the best of my knowledge, the information given on this form is true and correct. Signature Date Please send this completed form to: Child Support, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045 Child Support Page 5 ird.govt.nz/childsupport Privacy Meeting your child support obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities and entitlements under the Child Support Act 1991. We may also exchange information about you with: • some government agencies • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask for the personal information we hold about you, we'll give it to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Call us on 0800 221 221 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to ird.govt.nz/privacy Notes to help you complete this form For the purposes of child support a child will either be a qualifying child or a dependent child – they cannot be both. Qualifying children These are the children that you are either paying or receiving child support for. To qualify for child support, a child must be: • under 18 years of age or 18 years of age and enrolled at and attending a registered school in New Zealand or an overseas school • a New Zealand citizen or ordinarily resident in New Zealand. The child cannot be: • receiving a benefit or student allowance, or working 30 hours or more a week (on average) • living with another person in a marriage, civil union or de facto relationship. Dependent children A dependent child is: • a child that you are the parent of (see the note below - “who is a parent?”) • under 18 years of age or 18 years of age and enrolled at and attending a registered school in New Zealand or an overseas school • in your care, for example, living with you, or maintained as a member of your family but living somewhere else. For example, boarding school. A dependent child cannot be: • financially independent. That is, receiving a benefit or student allowance, or working 30 hours or more a week (on average) • living with another person in a marriage, civil union or de facto relationship • a child in relation to whom any person is a liable parent or receiving carer, or for whom, under the law of another country, a person is required to make payments that are of the same nature as child support. Who is a parent? A parent is a person who: • is the birth or legally adoptive parent of a child • was married to the other parent when the child was conceived or born • has acknowledged before a court, or in writing, that they are a parent of the child and a court has not overturned this • has been declared a legal step-parent by the Family Court • a court has made a paternity order against in respect of the child. Proof of date of birth You will need to supply one of the following for proof of date of birth if you are telling us about a new dependent child: • full New Zealand birth certificate • overseas birth certificate • passport • certificate of New Zealand citizenship • certificate of identity • photo driver's licence • 18+ card issued by the Hospitality Association. Child Support Page 6 ird.govt.nz/childsupport Proof of parentage You will need to supply one of the following as proof you are the parent if you are telling us about a new dependent child: • the child's full New Zealand birth certificate • the child's full overseas birth certificate (with a certified English translation if necessary) • an adoption order for the child • a paternity order for the child made by a New Zealand or overseas court • a copy of the Family Court's declaration of step-parentage. IRD numbers for children If your child does not have an IRD number, you will need to apply for one. You can do this by completing an Application for an IRD number - individual - IR595 form. If your child does not have an IRD number, your request to have them added as dependent children cannot be accepted. Recognised care The child support formula takes the costs of raising a child and shares these costs between the parents based on their income and the amount of care each parent has for the child. Care of a child is recognised for child support: • for a parent when they care for the child at least 103 nights per year, or 2 nights per week (28% of the time) • for a non-parent carer, for example, a grandparent, when they care for a child for at least 128 nights per year, or 5 nights per fortnight (35% of the time). If a person provides more than 263 nights per year, or 5 nights a week on average (more than 72% of the time) of a child’s care, this is the only care we take into account in the child support formula calculation. Use our online calculator at ird.govt.nz/childsupport to work out your care levels. You can then print and attach it to this form. Agreement or court order If you have an agreement or court order detailing the care arrangements for your child/children, please send a copy with this form. We can use this to help work out your recognised care level. For more information about any of the above, please go to ird.govt.nz/childsupport