ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Tax Agents Kaikaute Taake 1 IR1123 | October 2021 A guide on using the EOT dashboard in myIR. Tax agents see a different view in Manage agency to other intermediaries. This guide covers the tax agent's 'Manage agency' view. Agency EOT and overall agency results. The first tab is the Agency EOT showing your agency's overall performance. It includes data from all client lists, and any representative lists that you may have under a different IRD number, for example, individual partners. In the example image below your agency's overall performance as a percentage is 91.78%. We use this percentage to check your agency's performance against the performance measure in the Tax agents' extension of time (EOT) agreement - IR9XA. In the example your agency's list details shows two client lists. Three partners are also registered as tax agents under their own IRD numbers as agency representatives. (You view the list details by selecting the Breakdown button in the top right hand corner.) The Overall agency results panel shows the income tax period the results are for, and the extended return due date for that period. The results panel also shows you the total number of clients you're linked to for income tax. This figure includes clients who: • do not have a return expectation (ceased companies, 'auto issued - more info' requests) • have L EOT or D EOT that have been removed from the calculation below. Overall breakdown table The overall breakdown table shows standard, early and late balance dates with a total for them. The left hand column of the table has three parts showing tax returns required, those lodged, and a percentage of those lodged. Tax returns required This is the number of returns required, including 'auto issued - more info' requests. It excludes customers with L EOT and D EOT, unless their return has been lodged. We also break the figures down to show customers that have, and do not have, an EOT. Tax returns lodged This is the number of returns lodged and received by us, including 'auto issued - more info' requests. We also break these figures down to show those that have, and do not have, an EOT. Extension of time (EOT) dashboard ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. 2 Percentage of lodged tax returns This is a calculation that compares the above information. That's total returns with EOT we've received in comparison to the total returns with EOT that are required. Client list tables The Client lists table will show the results for each of your client lists. You can see the performance percentage of each list and select each client to see the breakdown. Any representative IRD numbers in the overall results show a combined performance percentage. For security reasons you cannot access representative client lists breakdowns from here. If you're authorised, log in under the web logon associated to the agency representative. You can then view the same dashboard and access the breakdown. Client list ID When you select the Client list ID link you can view the results breakdown for that client. This is a filtered view of the results for that list. It only shows the results that represent a component of the overall agency performance percentage. When you select the Client list ID link you can view the results breakdown. This provides a filtered view of the results for that list. The header will show that the results only represent a component of the overall agency performance percentage. ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. 3 The List breakdown table is calculated in the same way as the Overall breakdown table. But only shows the data for the client list ID you've selected. ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online from the myIR login screen and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you. FREE ADVISORY SERVICE Our community compliance officers run free tax seminars and workshops for new businesses and organisations. For more information or to register to attend one of these sessions go to ird.govt.nz/seminars or phone 0800 377 774.