1 Digital platform information Guide to filing disclosures in myIR IR1170 October 2024 3 Introduction This guide is for platform operators resident in New Zealand who must collect and report information about sellers on their platforms. Platform operators are also known as online marketplace operators. Register for a digital platform information (DPI) account in myIR – go to ird.govt.nz/myIR Reporting to us Disclosures must be filed in myIR: yannually for each year ending 31 December, regardless of whether you have sellers to report or not yon or before 7 February following the end of the filing period yusing the OECD model rules XML Schema – Model reporting rules for digital platforms (oecd.org) File size maximums yExcel file – maximum 1,000 sellers per file yXML – maximum file size 200MB Reporting on behalf of other platform operators A platform operator can report information on behalf of another platform. If you are not the reporting platform, you still need to register and file information identifying the platform reporting on your behalf. Due diligence We expect all platform operators to fulfil their due diligence obligations and retain these records for the statutory 7-year period so that you can demonstrate your compliance, if required. For more help Email DPI@ird.govt.nz if you require any further assistance. Go to ird.govt.nz/income-reporting-rules 4 Contents 1 Choose your filing method 5 2 Report nil DPI disclosures 5 2.1 Nil disclosure information 6 2.2 Platform operator disclosing on your behalf 6 2.3 Reporting disclosures for your business or another platform operator 8 2.4 Confirm and submit your nil disclosure 10 2.5 Deleting or changing nil disclosure information 10 3 Report by DPI excel file upload 11 3.1 Disclosing on behalf of another platform operator 12 3.2 Disclosing on behalf of another platform operator 12 3.3 Import your excel disclosure file 13 3.4 Review excel disclosure details 14 3.5 Confirm and submit excel disclosure 14 3.6 Another platform filing disclosure on your behalf 15 4 Correct or delete by DPI excel file upload 15 4.1 Make corrections to DPI excel file upload 16 4.2 Correcting seller information 17 4.3 Correct platform operators you are reporting on behalf of 17 4.4 Make deletions to DPI excel file upload 19 4.5 Delete a platform operator 19 4.6 Delete sellers 20 5 Report by XML file upload 21 5.1 Upload XML disclosure file 21 5.2 Correcting and deleting XML file details 22 6 Filing early disclosures for nil, excel and XML 22 7 Glossary 22 8 Services you may need 23 5 Report DPI disclosures In myIR, choose the disclosure link in the DPI account panel. 1 Choose your filing method yOnline form for nil disclosures yExcel file upload – limited to 1,000 sellers per upload yXML file upload – limited to 200MB per upload. 2 Report nil DPI disclosures Follow the instructions to file nil DPI disclosures: yfor your own platform(s) when you have no sellers to report yfor other platform operators you are filing on behalf of when there are no sellers to report ywhen another platform is filing disclosures on your behalf. 6 2.1 Nil disclosure information Complete the following: ycontact information yselect the reporting period from the list yadd platform business name – add each business name you are reporting for yother platform operator – choose yes if another operator is reporting on your behalf or no if you are reporting for your platform(s). Note A red \* indicates required information you must complete. 2.2 Platform operator disclosing on your behalf yAdd the platform operator disclosing on your behalf. 7 Note Please complete all required fields \* and as much other information as possible of the platform operator disclosing on your behalf. When you have completed all the information for a nil disclosure go 2.4 to confirm and submit 8 2.3 Reporting disclosures for your business or another platform operator No – you are reporting disclosures for your own business(es) – go to 2.4 to confirm and submit Ye s – complete the following information if you are disclosing on behalf of another platform: yAdd another platform operator Note Please complete all required fields \* and as much other information as possible for each platform operator you are filing for. You must complete this information for each platform operator you are filing on behalf of. 9 10 2.4 Confirm and submit your nil disclosure Note Submission confirmation – keep a copy for your records. 2.5 Deleting or changing nil disclosure information Note You cannot edit a nil disclosure. You must delete the disclosure and submit a new one with corrected information. To delete a nil disclosure filed in error, go to the review panel: ySelect review DPI reported sellers link ySelect the disclosure reporting period from the list ySelect the link in the seller list to delete the disclosure. 11 yConfirm you are deleting the disclosure and submit to delete. Note Please file a corrected disclosure if one is still required. 3 Report by DPI excel file upload Reporting sellers by excel file upload. If another platform operator is filing on your behalf, use the report a nil disclosure link. Follow the instructions to file a DPI disclosure using excel file upload: ySelect report by DPI excel file upload ySelect the reporting period from the list yAdd platform business name. Note Add each platform business you are filing disclosures for. 12 3.1 Disclosing on behalf of another platform operator yChoose yes if you are disclosing on behalf of another platform. yChoose no if you are reporting for your business(es). 3.2 Disclosing on behalf of another platform operator yAdd the platform operator(s) you are disclosing on behalf of. 13 Note Please complete all required fields \* and as much other information as possible for each platform operator you are filing for. 3.3 Import your excel disclosure file Please make sure you are using the latest excel template for your disclosures. You can download the latest version using the export button. Add your disclosure information to the template and save your file ready for import. yImport to upload your excel file. yWhen your imported file has been successfully uploaded select next. 14 3.4 Review excel disclosure details yReview the disclosure information. 3.5 Confirm and submit excel disclosure 15 Note Submission confirmation – keep a copy for your records. 3.6 Another platform filing disclosure on your behalf yYe s – cancel this submission and report a nil disclosure instead yNo – Next yGo to import your excel disclosure file and follow the instructions from 3.3 to 3.5 to complete your submission. 4 Correct or delete by DPI excel file upload Use the correct or delete by DPI excel file link to change or remove submitted disclosures. Note To add additional new sellers or platform operators you are filing on behalf of, upload the information in a new excel file. These will be added to your other disclosure(s) for the reporting period. 16 Go to 4.4 Deletions Note If you need to make corrections to platform operator details for disclosures you file on their behalf, and seller deletions from the same disclosure: yDelete the platform operator yDelete all sellers ySubmit yUpload a replacement DPI excel file with the right information (you can do this the same day). 4.1 Make corrections to DPI excel file upload ySelect corrections ySelect the reporting period from the list ySelect the disclosure to correct. Note If you have filed more than 1 disclosure for the same reporting period, you can find the confirmation number here: 17 You can correct information for: ySellers yPlatform operators and their sellers you are disclosing on behalf of. Note Correcting seller information only when you disclose on behalf of another platform You will be asked to confirm if you are changing platform operator information before you can select sellers for correction. 4.2 Correcting seller information ySelect all – to make corrections for all sellers, or ySelect individual or organisation sellers to correct. yExport to download file of selected sellers yOpen the exported excel file and make corrections to the sellers you have selected ySave the file yImport the saved file to myIR. yReview, confirm and submit your changes. 4.3 Correct platform operators you are reporting on behalf of ySelect yes to change platform operator information ySelect the platform operator 18 yMake your corrections to the platform operator’s details and select ok to return to the previous screen. yIf you are making changes to sellers, select next yFollow the correcting seller information instructions at 4.2 to complete your changes. 19 4.4 Make deletions to DPI excel file upload ySelect deletions ySelect the reporting period from the list ySelect the disclosure. You can delete information for: yPlatform operators you have filed disclosures on behalf of ySellers included in the disclosure. 4.5 Delete a platform operator ySelect platform operator from the list 20 yDelete the platform operator. 4.6 Delete sellers ySelect all to delete all sellers, or ySelect specific sellers to delete yReview and submit. 21 5 Report by XML file upload 5.1 Upload XML disclosure file yChoose the XML file to upload yReview XML file and summary information and submit. Note Submission confirmation – keep a copy for your records. 22 5.2 Correcting and deleting XML file details yTo correct or delete a XML file, upload an updated XML file as per the schema requirements. 6 Filing early disclosures for nil, excel and XML You can only file an early disclosure before the end of the reporting period when you are closing your DPI account. You must confirm you intend to close your DPI account within 7 calendar days. Submit your return and keep a copy of the confirmation for your records. Note If you do not close your account within 7 calendar days of submitting your early disclosure, we will contact you for further information. 7 Glossary AcronymsDefinition DPIDigital platform operator OECDOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development TINTaxpayer identification number XMLExtensible markup language 23 8 Services you may need 0800 self-service number Our 0800 self-service number, 0800 257 777, is open 7 days a week. Make sure you have your IRD number ready when you call. To get information about your own account, you’ll need to be enrolled with voice ID or have a PIN. When you call, confirm what you want from the options given. If you need to talk with us, we’ll re-direct your call to someone who can help you. Need to speak with us? Have your IRD number ready and call us on one of these numbers. General tax, tax credits and refunds 0800 775 247 Employer enquiries 0800 377 772 General business tax 0800 377 774 Overdue disclosures and payments 0800 227 771 Find out more at ird.govt.nz/contact-us Privacy It’s important that you give us accurate information so we can assess your tax and entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you do not. We may also exchange information about you with: ysome government agencies yanother country, if we have an information supply agreement with them, and yStatistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). You can ask for the personal information we hold about you. We’ll give the information to you and correct any mistakes, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Find our full privacy policy at ird.govt.nz/privacy If you have a complaint about our service We’re committed to providing you with a quality service. If there’s a problem, we’d like to know about it and have the chance to fix it. If you disagree with how we’ve assessed your tax, you may need to follow a formal disputes process. Find out more about making a complaint, and the disputes process, at ird.govt.nz/disputes 24