Complaints guide ird.govt.nz/complaints The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. IR1169 | November 2023 • what is a complaint • how to make a complaint • how you can get help making a complaint • what happens when you make a complaint • what you can expect from us • what we ask of you to progress your complaint • how to have your complaint reviewed if you are not satisfied with the outcome. This document explains: What is a complaint? A complaint is an expression of dissatisfaction with an Inland Revenue decision, service or system action, where you are seeking a review or resolution and/or response to your issue. • If you have ideas on how we can do things better but do not necessarily need us to respond or resolve anything, you can submit these through the orange feedback tab on the right-hand side of our website ird.govt.nz • If you disagree with an assessment or decision, contact us to discuss either by sending a message in myIR or calling our contact centre. If we cannot resolve the issue and you still disagree with our decision or assessment, you may consider a formal dispute process. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/disputes How to make a complaint We aim to resolve your complaint at your first point of contact however if this has not worked for you, you can contact our Complaints Management Service directly. Complete our online complaints form This is the best way to file a complaint as it gives us the information we need to properly address your issue. Go to ird.govt.nz/complaints-form Call us Leave a detailed voice message and we will get back to you within 1 business day. • New Zealand callers - 0800 274 138 • Overseas callers - +64 4 978 0650 Write to us Send your complaint to: Complaints Management Service Inland Revenue PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 If you need help making a complaint You can either make a complaint yourself or ask someone to help you. This could be a friend, family member, support worker or carer. Keep in mind that we may need to contact you if the other person is not authorised to discuss your tax affairs. If you want someone to act on your behalf, you must set them up as a nominated person. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/act-on- your-behalf Other assistance available: • Language Assistance is a phone-based interpretation service, available in over 180 languages, for our customers whose first or preferred language is not English. If you want to speak in your own language, you can ask for an interpreter when you call us. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/contactus/ other-languages • NZ Relay is a telecommunications service for people who are deaf, hard of hearing, deaf-blind or speech impaired. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/ contactus/hearing-loss-services • for personal enquiries (within NZ) call 0800 775 247 • for business enquiries (within NZ) call 0800 377 774 • for overseas enquiries call +64 9 952 5914 • Let us know in your complaint if you are vision impaired and we will ensure we respond to you in the appropriate manner. • You may like to contact a Kaitakawaenga Māori Officer who can support you to navigate the complaints service. Go to ird.govt.nz/contactus/business- advisory-social-policy, select the Inland Revenue office that is closest to you, fill in the email request and someone will be in touch. ird.govt.nz/complaints The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online from the myIR login screen and we will send them to the email address we hold for you. What happens when you make a complaint • We will acknowledge your complaint by providing you a complaint case number within one business day of your complaint being received. • If we do not have all the information we need to review your complaint, we may contact you. • We aim to resolve your complaint within 10 business days. This might include gathering information from other departments. • If we need more time to resolve your complaint, we will explain why and will keep you informed of progress. • We will send you a complaint outcome to your preferred channel, usually email, letter or by phone. What you can expect from us We will: • be prompt, courteous and professional • acknowledge your complaint and follow through on what we say we will do • inform you of options available if you disagree with us • value your feedback and use complaints as an opportunity to learn and improve our services • work within the Inland Revenue Acts and other relevant laws, and our actions will be consistent with the spirit of the Treaty of Waitangi. What we expect of you For us to help you as effectively as possible, we ask that you act in an appropriate manner. We may be unable to progress your complaint if we deem your behaviour during the process to be unreasonable. We ask that you: • be polite and cooperative with the person helping you • provide all supporting information and documentation requested • do not threaten, abuse, harass or intimidate our people, their families or colleagues • provide all relevant information at the time your complaint is raised to enable us to fully understand and address your complaint in a timely manner • allow us time to review and address your complaint without contacting us in an excessive way • take the appropriate escalation channel advised in the complaint outcome (refer below for more information). If you are not satisfied with the outcome of your complaint review We may advise you to contact the Office of the Ombudsman. • An Ombudsman is an independent body who investigates complaints about the administrative acts and decisions of central and local government agencies. • The Ombudsman’s office usually requires customers to attempt to resolve their complaint directly with Inland Revenue before they will consider taking on the complaint. • The Ombudsman’s office will contact Inland Revenue if they decide to formally take the complaint on, outlining the details and asking for a response. Inland Revenue has 20 working days to respond. For more information go to www.ombudsman. parliament.nz/what-ombudsman-can-help/ complaints-about-government-agencies/how- make-complaint Helpful links Formal complaints (ird.govt.nz) Kaitakawaenga Māori (ird.govt.nz) Language Assistance NZ Relay Disputes