Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) return Read the notes on pages 3 and 4 before completing this return. IR1100 August 2022 Complete required details on page 2 1 Withholder's IRD number 1 Withholder's name Period ended 2 Vendor's name and IRD number Surname or name of the entityFirst name(s)IRD number 345 Amount paid to Inland Revenue (in NZ$) Amount required to be deducted (in NZ$) (if different to the amount being paid)Certificate of Title number(s) 678 9 RLWT calculation method used Sale price × 10%Sale price less purchase price × RLWT rateSale price less NZ-registered securities and/or outstanding rates (vendor's conveyancer only) Sale price less outstanding rates (buyer or buyer's conveyancer only) Surname or name of the entityFirst name(s)IRD number 345 Amount paid to Inland Revenue (in NZ$) Amount required to be deducted (in NZ$) (if different to the amount being paid)Certificate of Title number(s) 678 9 RLWT calculation method used Sale price × 10%Sale price less purchase price × RLWT rateSale price less NZ-registered securities and/or outstanding rates (vendor's conveyancer only) Sale price less outstanding rates (buyer or buyer's conveyancer only) Surname or name of the entityFirst name(s)IRD number 345 Amount paid to Inland Revenue (in NZ$) Amount required to be deducted (in NZ$) (if different to the amount being paid)Certificate of Title number(s) 678 9 RLWT calculation method used Sale price × 10%Sale price less purchase price × RLWT rateSale price less NZ-registered securities and/or outstanding rates (vendor's conveyancer only) Sale price less outstanding rates (buyer or buyer's conveyancer only) 2 Surname or name of the entityFirst name(s)IRD number 345 Amount paid to Inland Revenue (in NZ$) Amount required to be deducted (in NZ$) (if different to the amount being paid)Certificate of Title number(s) 678 9 RLWT calculation method used Sale price × 10%Sale price less purchase price × RLWT rateSale price less NZ-registered securities and/or outstanding rates (vendor's conveyancer only) Sale price less outstanding rates (buyer or buyer's conveyancer only) Surname or name of the entityFirst name(s)IRD number 345 Amount paid to Inland Revenue (in NZ$) Amount required to be deducted (in NZ$) (if different to the amount being paid)Certificate of Title number(s) 678 9 RLWT calculation method used Sale price × 10%Sale price less purchase price × RLWT rateSale price less NZ-registered securities and/or outstanding rates (vendor's conveyancer only) Sale price less outstanding rates (buyer or buyer's conveyancer only) Total amount paid to Inland Revenue (in NZ$) For information on how to file your return and make payment see page 4 Declaration I declare that the information given in this return is true and correct, based on the information provided to me by the vendor. I understand Inland Revenue can disclose any information I provide on this form with a vendor, including whether I have paid the RLWT which I have deducted to Inland Revenue. SignatureDate Day Month Year If completing this form online an elecronic signature is acceptable If you're sending more than one RLWT return at the same time print the number of pages being sent here Withholder's contact details Contact person Phone number ( ) Daytime Email address 3 Notes to help you complete this form • You only need to file this return for the month you've made a deduction of residential land withholding tax (RLWT). You'll need to include details of any vendors where the required amount to be deducted is calculated as zero. • The return and payment are due by the 20th of the month after deductions have been made, eg, for deductions made in July, the return and payment are due by 20th August. • Please show each RLWT deduction in a separate box. • If there are more than five vendors and/or transactions for the month, you'll need to complete extra RLWT returns with their details. • If you've already filed a return(s) for this month but have since deducted RLWT from another transaction in the same month for either a new vendor, or deducted more RLWT from a vendor listed on a previous return, only include the details of the new transaction on this return. • If you need to amend a previous return you've provided, send us an email or letter outlining what the details on the previous return were, what the amended details are, and the reason(s) for the amendment(s). Also include both the vendor’s and the withholder's name and IRD number. Do not show the amended details on this return. • If you're deducting RLWT from instalment payments (explained further below) show the amount of RLWT deducted from each instalment in the return that relates to the month that you deducted the RLWT. Completing the return Withholder's details • Wi thholder's name - show the full name of the individual or entity which made the RLWT deduction, eg, the law practice or conveyancing firm. • Wi thholder's IRD number - show the IRD number of the individual or entity shown in the "Withholder's name". • Pe riod ended - this is the last day of the month the deduction was made in, eg, for a deduction made on 5 November the period ended would be 30/11/20XX. Vendor's details • Name - show the full name of the vendor. If the vendor is: - an individual - show their surname first and then their first name(s). - a company, incorporated club or society, trust, a limited partnership, or an entity constituted under foreign law - show the full name. • IR D number - show the IRD number the vendor has given you on their Residential land withholding tax declaration - IR1101 form. • Certificate of Title number(s) - show the certificate of title number of the property being sold/disposed of. If there is no certificate of title show the reference number for the property, eg, leasehold title. If more than one title is being sold/disposed of as one transaction, eg, an apartment and carpark on separate titles, show all titles together under one lot of vendors details. Otherwise, show each property sale as a separate vendor detail. • Amount paid to Inland Revenue (in NZ$) - this is the amount of RLWT you have paid to Inland Revenue on behalf of the vendor at the time you're completing the return. Note: see the "insufficient funds" section. • Amount required to be deducted (in NZ$) - this is the amount of RLWT calculated that is required to be deducted for the vendor. • RL WT calculation method used - tick the method used to determine the amount of RLWT required to be deducted. For the third calculation method, if you're the vendor's conveyancer you are able to deduct the amount of any New Zealand registered securities and/or outstanding council local authority rates. If you're the buyer or the buyer's conveyancer you can only deduct any outstanding local authority rates. Total amount paid to Inland Revenue (in NZ$) This is the total amount of RLWT you're paying to Inland Revenue. Check the total entered is correct. If there's more than one RLWT return being completed, you can either total up each return separately, or show the total amount of RLWT being paid for all returns on one return. Instalment payments or 50% deposit not yet paid If you're not sure when RLWT should be deducted if the buyer is paying in instalments, or the deposit paid is not yet 50%, go to ird.govt.nz/rlwt Insufficient funds If there are insufficient funds, or there are no funds to pay the RLWT that should've been deducted, you must still complete this return. Show the amount calculated as required to be deducted in the "Amount required to be deducted (in NZ$)" field, and the amount actually being paid to Inland Revenue in the "Amount paid to Inland Revenue (in NZ$)" field, even if this amount is zero. Attach a letter advising why the amount being paid is less than the amount calculated to be deducted. If we do not receive a letter, we'll calculate the amount of RLWT owing based on the amount required to be deducted. Note: you may be liable for a shortfall penalty if this situation occurs. We'll contact you to discuss if we are considering this. 4 Late filing penalty If this return is required and is filed late, a late filing penalty of $250 may be charged. This is payable on the 20th of the month after when the return was due, eg, a penalty for the return due 20th August is payable on 20th September. Late payment If you do not pay a bill on time, you may have to pay penalties and interest. Contact us if you are not able to pay on time. We’ll look at your payment options, which may include an instalment arrangement. Find out more at ird.govt.nz/penalties Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your tax and entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you do not. We may also exchange information about you with: • some government agencies • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them, and • St atistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). You can ask for the personal information we hold about you. We’ll give the information to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Find our full privacy policy at ird.govt.nz/privacy How to make payments Go to ird.govt.nz/pay to find out about paying by: • direct debit • credit or debit card • internet banking. How to file your return Email: RLWTforms@ird.govt.nzPost - return only: Inland Revenue PO Box 39090 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045 New Zealand