IR1225 November 2018 Transfer pricing questionnaire: New Zealand branches Answer the following questions based on the latest completed tax year. You may provide separate written comments if you wish to give clarification on any issue or identify assumptions made. Legal entity information (Questions 12-19 below) can be in the currency of the legal entity. All other values must be in NZ dollars. 1Name of the company 2IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 3Address Street address Town or cityCountryPostcode 4Contact name 5Telephone number 6Email 7Tax representative 8Ultimate parent company 9Tax residence of the legal entity 10Describe the principal activities of the branch 11Describe the principal activities of the legal entity The following information is required for calculating various accounting ratios for comparison purposes. If the branch is performing below legal entity levels you may wish to provide an explanatory note. This branch NZ $000 Legal entity Currency 12Current account/equity (net assets) 13Total assets 14Total revenue (excluding interest) 15Gross profit 16Total expenses (excluding interest and expenses taken into account in calculating gross profit) 17Earnings before interest, tax and exceptional items 18Gross interest expense 19Gross interest income The following questions relate to supplies by or to the branch either by the legal entity or by an associate. In all cases only cross-border dealings/transactions are to be included. Property Supplied to the branch NZ$000 Supplied by the branch NZ$000 20Raw materials 21Processed goods 22Other (specify) 23Rents, royalties, licence or franchise fees 24Intangible property (acquired or disposed of) Services Supplied to the branch NZ$000 Supplied by the branch NZ$000 25Management and administration 26Te c h n i c a l 27Research and development 28Commissions Financial Supplied to the branch NZ$000 Supplied by the branch NZ$000 29Interest 30Dividends 31Insurance 32Guarantees 33Other (specify) Other dealings Supplied to the branch NZ$000 Supplied by the branch NZ$000 34Reimbursement of expenses 35Cost sharing/contribution arrangements 36Revenue sharing arrangements 37Other (specify) 38Total dealings/associated party transactions New Zealand tax legislation sets out five methods (fields 39 to 43 below) to calculate an arm’s length consideration for setting transfer prices between legal entities. The determination of income for branches is governed by section YD5 of the Income Tax Act 2007. However, the provisions of this legislation are subject to the business profits article of the many double tax agreements New Zealand has entered into. In general, best practice for core dealings is to look at the New Zealand business activity and use the five methods applicable to transactions between legal entities. In the “Supplied” columns below, record the value of dealings/transactions where prices have been confirmed by a method (the “tested dealings/transactions”). Where more than one method was used, allocate the value to the predominant method. Field 44 is for the value of untested dealings/transactions. The totals at field 45 must equal the totals at field 38. Dealings/transactions Supplied to the branch NZ$000 Supplied by the branch NZ$000 39Comparable uncontrolled price method 40Resale price method 41Cost plus method 42Transactional profit split method 43Transactional net margin method 44Untested dealings/transactions 45Total dealings/transactions 46Has the branch provided any goods or services or anything else of value to any part of the legal entity operating outside New Zealand or to a non-resident associated person for no consideration? Ye sNo If the answer is “Yes” provide details. 47In computing the profit or loss of the New Zealand branch, has any part of the income or expenditure recognised involved parts of the legal entity operating in jurisdictions or territories, or associated persons tax resident in jurisdictions or territories, where the income of the legal entity or associated person would be taxed at a rate of 15% or less for a company having the usual tax status of a company? Total value for all such dealings/transactionsNZ $000 48If there are a number of companies in New Zealand which, together with this branch, form a group for tax purposes, please provide a list of the names of the other group companies below or on a separate schedule. 49How many full time equivalent staff does this branch employ? 50How many staff earn more than NZ$150,000 pa (including benefits)? 51What is the debt percentage of the New Zealand group as calculated under subpart FE of the Income Tax Act 2007? % 52Has documentation been produced in support of your transfer prices/apportionment of income and expenditure? Ye sNo 53Have any dealings with any part of the legal entity operating outside New Zealand or transactions with non-resident associated persons been the subject of a tax ruling or advance pricing agreement in another jurisdiction? Ye sNo 54Are any dealings/associated party transactions subject to advance pricing agreement in New Zealand? Ye sNo 55Name of officer providing this information 56Position