IR1223 January 2023 Transfer pricing questionnaire: Foreign-owned multinationals Answer the following questions based on the latest completed tax year. You may provide separate written comments if you wish to give clarification on any issue or identify assumptions made. Consolidated group information (Questions 12 -19 below) can be in the currency of the ultimate parent company. All other values must be in NZ dollars. 1Name of the company 2IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 3Address Street address Town or cityCountryPostcode 4Contact name 5Telephone number 6Email 7Tax representative 8Ultimate parent company 9Tax residence of ultimate parent company 10Describe the principal activities of the company. 11Describe the principal activities of the ultimate parent company and its consolidated group. The following information is required for calculating various accounting ratios for comparison purposes. If your company is performing below consolidated group levels, you may wish to provide an explanatory note. This companyConsolidated group NZ $000Currency 12Shareholder funds (net assets) 13Total assets 14Total revenue (excluding interest) 15Gross profit 16Total expenses (excluding interest and expenses taken into account in calculating gross profit) 17Earnings before interest, tax and exceptional items 18Gross interest expense 19Gross interest income The following questions relate to supplies by or to the company by non-resident associated persons. In all cases include only cross-border transactions. Property Supplied by associated persons NZ$000 Supplied to associated persons NZ$000 20Raw materials 21Processed goods 22Other (specify) 23Rents, royalties, licence or franchise fees 24Intangible property (acquired or disposed of) Services Supplied by associated persons NZ$000 Supplied to associated persons NZ$000 25Management and administration 26Te c h n i c a l 27Research and development 28Commissions Financial Supplied by associated persons NZ$000 Supplied to associated persons NZ$000 29Interest 30Dividends 31Insurance 32Guarantees 33Other (specify) Other transactions Supplied by associated persons NZ$000 Supplied to associated persons NZ$000 34Reimbursement of expenses 35Cost sharing/contribution arrangements 36Revenue sharing arrangements 37Other (specify) 38Total associated party transactions New Zealand tax legislation sets out five methods (fields 39 to 43 below) to calculate an arm’s length consideration for setting transfer pricing. In the “Supplied” columns below, record the value of transactions where prices have been confirmed by a method (the “tested transactions”). Where more than one method was used, allocate the value to the predominant method. Field 44 is for the value of untested transactions. The totals at field 45 must equal the totals at field 38. Transactions Supplied by associated persons NZ$000 Supplied to associated persons NZ$000 39Comparable uncontrolled price method 40Resale price method 41Cost plus method 42Transactional profit split method 43Transactional net margin method 44Untested transactions 45Total transactions 46Has the company provided any goods or services or anything else of value to a non-resident associated person for no consideration? Ye sNo If the answer is “Yes” provide details. 47What is the value of transactions with associated persons tax resident in jurisdictions or territories where the income of the associated person would be taxed at a rate of 15% or less for a company having the usual tax status of a company? NZ$000 48Have there been any material structural changes in the last five years which have resulted in a reduction of business functions, assets held and risks borne by the New Zealand operations? If so, provide details. 49If the company has entered into a partnership, joint venture or profit or revenue sharing arrangement with a non-resident associated person, provide details. 50If there are a number of companies in New Zealand which, together with this company, form a group for tax purposes, provide a list of the names of the other group companies below or on a separate schedule and state whether they have any material cross-border associated party transactions or dealings. 51How many full-time equivalent staff does this company employ? 52How many staff earn more than NZ$150,000 pa (including benefits)? 53What is the debt percentage of the New Zealand group as calculated under subpart FE of the Income Tax Act 2007? % 54Do you have documentation to support your transfer prices in accordance with the OECD Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administration 2022? Ye sNo The guidelines are at www.oecd.org/tax/transfer-pricing 55Have any associated party transactions been the subject of a tax ruling or an advance pricing agreement in another jurisdiction? Ye sNo 56Are any associated party transactions the subject of an advance pricing agreement in New Zealand? Ye sNo 57Name of officer providing this information 58Position