Working and raising a family? See if you qualify for extra money ... IR201 July 2024 2 Working for Families helps make it easier for you to work and raise a family. To find out more, go to ird.govt.nz/ working-for-families 3 Help with family costs Working for Families is paid to families with dependent children aged 18 years or under to help with the day-to-day cost of raising a family. Family tax credit This payment depends on how much you earn, how many dependent children you have, and any shared care arrangements. You may not qualify for this payment if you receive a Foster Care Allowance, Orphans' Benefit, Unsupported Child's Benefit, parent's allowance or board payments from Oranga Tamariki– Ministry for Children. This is the most you can get each week from 1 April 2024: Number of childrenWeekly rate Eldest child$144.00 Subsequent child$117.00 Work and Income can pay the family tax credit to families receiving a benefit. In-work tax credit The in-work tax credit pays up to $97 a week for families with up to 3 children, and up to an extra $15 weekly for each additional child. This is a payment for families who are normally in paid work. You’ll keep receiving the in-work tax credit payments for up to 2 weeks during an unpaid break from work. For example, changing jobs, leaving employment, or unpaid time such as school holidays. If you or your partner start receiving a main benefit or student allowance, your payments will stop. Go to ird.govt.nz/working-for-families to find out more. 4 Minimum family tax credit If your family income is $35,316 or less a year after tax, you may be able to get the minimum family tax credit. This payment tops up your family’s income to at least $679 a week after tax. To get this payment, at least 1 parent must be working the required hours for salary or wages. A single parent must be working at least 20 hours a week and in a 2-parent family, 1 or both parents must be working at least 30 hours a week between them. Best Start tax credit Best Start is a payment to help with costs in a child’s first 3 years. Payment starts at $73 a week, per child, for the first year (up to $3,838 per year) regardless of the family income. For the second and third year of the child’s life the $73 per week is reduced when the family income exceeds $79,000 in each of these years. You can not receive the Best Start and paid parental leave payments at the same time. If you register for both, your Best Start will start after your paid parental leave payments stop. Working for Families and the independent earner tax credit (IETC) You can not receive Working for Famlies and IETC at the same time. If you’re using a ME or ME SL tax code you’ll need to change this with your employer when you apply for Working for Families For more information go to ird.govt.nz/ietc 5 myIR Manage your Working for Families account in myIR. Get fast, secure access to update your details, bank account and see your payments at ird.govt.nz/myir. Help with childcare costs If your household income is less than $180,000 per year, you may be eligible to receive FamilyBoost. This is a childcare payment to help eligible households pay for the cost of early childhood education. Go to ird.govt.nz/FamilyBoost to find out more. You may also qualify for help with your childcare costs from Work and Income. Childcare assistance can include: • Childcare Subsidy - helps families with pre-school children with the cost of pre-school childcare. • Guaranteed Childcare Assistance Payment - provides childcare assistance for pre-school children while their young parents (16 to 18 years) are taking part in approved activities (such as school or employment-related education or training). • OSCAR Subsidy - can help pay for your children’s care before or after school and in the school holidays, if you have school- age children and you’re working or in employment-related education or training. • Early Learning Payment - helps pay the costs of early childhood education for children aged 18 months to 3 years in families enrolled in selected Family Start or Early Start programmes. If you’re enrolled in Family Start or Early Start you’ll be assigned a family/whānau worker who will contact Work and Income for you. • Flexible Childcare Assistance – helps with the cost of informal childcare if you’re working or in employment-related education or training during times when you can’t access childcare programmes. To find out more about Childcare assistance and how to apply, go to workandincome.govt.nz or phone 0800 559 009. Have your client number handy if you have one. 6 Help with housing costs An Accommodation Supplement from Work and Income can help with your rent, board or the cost of owning a home. To qualify your income and assets must be below certain amounts. You do not qualify if you’re living in a social housing property. To find out about Accommodation Supplement and how to apply, go to workandincome.govt.nz or phone 0800 559 009. Have your client number handy if you have one. Other help when you’re working Here’s some of the other government assistance you may qualify for. Health costs The Community Services Card can help with the costs of visiting your doctor and getting prescriptions. It is a family card so you can use it for dependent children aged under 18 years. If you already have a card you can keep using it – and when it runs out you can apply for another one. Your yearly income must be under a certain amount and depends on your personal situation. To find out if you qualify refer to https://www.workandincome.govt.nz/products/a-z-benefits/ community-services-card.html You may also qualify for the Pharmaceutical Subsidy Card if you or your children need a lot of prescriptions each year. To find out more about this card, talk to your pharmacist. Help for people with health conditions The Disability Allowance helps with the extra costs you, your partner or child have because of a health condition or disability that is likely to last at least 6 months. The amount you get depends upon the cost of things like ongoing visits to the doctor, medicines, extra clothing and travel. Your weekly income before tax must be under certain amounts to qualif y. 7 The Child Disability Allowance may be available if you’re caring for a child under 18 years old who has a serious disability and needs constant care and attention. Your income or costs are not considered. You may be able to get both Child Disability Allowance and Disability Allowance for the same child. Refer workandincome.govt.nz One-off payments If you’re struggling to meet your living costs, or get an unexpected bill, Work and Income may be able to give you a one-off payment. What payment you may be able to get depends on if you are getting a benefit or not, what costs you have, your income and any money or assets you and your partner have. Some of these grants need to be paid back. For more information call Work and Income on 0800 559 009 or check workandincome.govt.nz To see if you are eligible for further assistance through Working for Families go to: Inland Revenue if you receive salary/wages • Working for Families 0800 227 773 Monday to Friday 8am - 6pm. • ird.govt.nz/working-for-families • Check or update your details in your myIR account, go to ird.govt.nz/myir Or Work and Income if you receive a benefit • 0800 559 009 Monday to Friday 7am - 6pm, Saturday 8am - 1pm • workandincome.govt.nz/childcare Language Assistance If you want to speak in your own language, you can ask for an interpreter when you call. Other options If you're deaf or find it hard communicating by phone, you can: • email MSD\_Deaf\_Services@msd.govt.nz • call through New Zealand Relay on TTY 0800 4 711 711.