Do you need a tailored tax code or tailored tax rate? 0800 self-service numbers (New Zealand callers) Our 0800 self-service numbers are open 7 days a week - except between 5am and 6am each day. Make sure you have your IRD number ready when you call. For access to your account-specific information, you’ll need to be enrolled with voice ID or have a PIN. Order forms, guides and returns 0800 257 773 All other services 0800 257 777 When you call, confirm what you want from the options given. If you need to talk with us, we’ll re-direct your call to someone who can help you. Self-service numbers (Overseas callers) Our self-service numbers are open to overseas callers 7 days a week - except between 5am and 6am each day, New Zealand local time. Make sure you have your IRD number ready when you call. For access to your account- specific information, you’ll need to be enrolled with voice ID or have a PIN. Order forms, guides and returns + 64 4 832 5254 All other services +64 4 832 5205 When you call, confirm what you want from the options given. If you need to talk with us, we’ll re-direct your call to someone who can help you. Additional countries can now call us for free from Australia, Canada, United States of America, China, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, South Korea and United Kingdom. Visit .ird.govt.nz to view the Overseas customers – toll free numbers. myIR You can manage your tax and entitlements online with a myIR account. In myIR you can: • check if you’re due a refund • keep up-to-date with your student loan • check and update your Working for Families details • review your KiwiSaver contributions • manage your child support payments • file returns • update your contact and bank account details. myIR is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Find out more, and register, at ird.govt.nz/myIR Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online from the myIR login screen and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you. IR23G July 2024 Why a tailored tax code might suit you The standard tax codes (M, ME, SB, S, SH ST and SA) may not always deduct the right amount of tax. For example, you: • have a second job or other income apart from your main job • receive an overseas pension is taxable in New Zealand • are a beneficiary or receive accident compensation and you also work. A tailored tax code could help you in these situations. You may be heading for a tax refund or bill without even knowing it. Tailored tax rates for WT tax code users The minimum rate of tax you can choose may be too high. For example, you: • have losses to carry forward • receive payments under a labour hire arrangement and want a 0% tailored tax rate (because you cannot apply for a certificate of exemption for these payments). Tailored tax codes do not apply to student loan repayments You can no longer use a tailored tax code to change the amount of your student loan repayment deductions. For more information about working in New Zealand with a student loan go to ird.govt.nz/studentloans Applying for a tailored tax code or tailored tax rate Apply for a Tailored tax code online in myIR by using the Tailored tax application or download the Tailored tax code or tailored tax rate application - IR23BS from ird.govt.nz Apply at the beginning of the tax year, or if your situation changes. Tailored tax codes When we receive your application, we'll calculate the correct tax rate for your situation, to help avoid a large tax refund or bill at the end of the year. The rate may be higher or lower than the current rates. We'll send you a tailored tax code certificate for you to give to your employer. It tells them what tax rate to use. Tailored tax rates When we receive your application, we'll calculate the tax rate for your situation. You'll only need to apply for a tailored tax rate if the rate calculated is going to be lower than the minimum you can choose on the Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C form. If you're applying for a 0% tailored tax rate because you receive payments under a labour hire arrangement, we will look at your payment and filing history before accepting your application. We'll send you a tailored tax rate certificate for you to give to the person paying you (payer). It tells them what tax rate to use. Tell us if your circumstances change Any changes in your circumstances might affect the amount of tax you should be paying. It’s important to let us know so we can give you a new tailored tax code with the correct tax rate for your current situation. Independent earner tax credit (IETC) If you’re entitled to IETC, your tailored tax code will include this, based on the details on your application form. IETC is a tax credit for individuals who earn between $24,000 and $70,000 and who do not receive: • Working for Families (you or your partner), • an main benefit from Work and Income, • NZ Super, • a Veteran’s Pension, • or an overseas equivalent of any of these. How a tailored tax code or rate works • Your tailored tax code or rate is based on the information you give us. Because your income will be an estimate, we can only work out the exact amount of tax you must pay for the year when you complete your income tax return. • Tailored tax codes are valid for one tax year. We'll automatically send a renewal form for you to re-apply before 20 February each year. • Some tailored tax rates may be issued for up to 5 years. We'll determine the length based on your compliance history. • A tailored tax code or rate takes effect either from 1 April, or from the day we approve it. It cannot be backdated. • A tailored tax code cannot be applied to a main benefit (except for New Zealand Superannuation and Veteran’s Pension). • If we ask you to send back your tailored tax code or rate certificate, you must do this within 7 days. • You must tell us if your circumstances change during the year (for example, your income goes down) or you may end up with a large tax bill at the end of the year.