Trusts and estates income tax rules IR288 March 2021 TRUSTS AND ESTATES 2 The information in this guide is based on current tax laws at the time of printing. ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online from the myIR login screen and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you. ird.govt.nz 3 Contents Introduction 5 Trust returns 5 Glossary 6 Part 1 - Explaining the important concepts 8 How a trust starts 8 Information a settlor must give us 9 How the trust earns income 9 Estates 10 The trust's income 10 Foreign trusts disclosure and record keeping rules 11 Part 2 - Different types of trusts 12 Complying trusts 12 Foreign trusts 13 Non-complying trusts 13 New arrivals in New Zealand 13 Part 3 - How the trust's income is taxed 15 Tax on trustee income 15 Tax on beneficiary income 17 Part 4 - Other distributions to beneficiaries 21 Distributions from complying trusts 21 Distributions from foreign trusts 22 Distributions from non-complying trusts 23 Foreign tax credits 24 Electing to become a complying trust 24 Part 5 - Tax returns for trusts and beneficiaries 26 The trust's tax return 26 The beneficiaries' tax returns 28 Tax returns for a deceased person's estate 29 Charitable trusts or estates 30 Final trust or estate return 30 TRUSTS AND ESTATES 4 Part 6 - Provisional tax 31 The principle of provisional tax 31 Circumstances when a trust must pay provisional tax 31 Provisional tax calculation methods 32 Use-of-money interest (UOMI) 33 Late payment penalties 35 Summary - tax rates and time limits 36 For more help 37 0800 self-service numbers 37 Need to talk to us? 37 Privacy 38 If you have a complaint about our service 38 Publications 39 How to get our forms and guides 39 ird.govt.nz 5 Introduction This guide explains: • the basic concepts of a trust or estate • how a trust's income is divided up for tax purposes • how each part is taxed. In this guide, the term "trust" also applies to estates unless specifically stated otherwise. This information doesn't apply to unit trusts (as these are treated as companies for income tax purposes) or trusts that are superannuation funds (as different rules apply). A glossary of terms is on page 6. Trust returns If your trust won't have any taxable income in any tax year, please call us on 0800 377 774 with the name and IRD number of the trust so we can record that a return isn't required for that year. However, if the trust receives any assessable income, eg, interest, the trustee must file a return, regardless of the amount derived. If the trust subsequently derives assessable income in a future year, the trust must send in a return. This only applies to trust returns. Estates are still required to file a return of income, regardless of whether or not they have derived assessable income. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 6 Glossary Associated persons Associated persons are defined as: • two companies • a company and a person other than a company • two relatives • a person and a trustee for a relative • a trustee and a beneficiary • trustees with a common settlor • a trustee and a settlor • a settlor and a beneficiary • a trustee and a person with the power of appointment or removal of the trustee • a partnership and a partner • two persons who are each associated with the same third person (tripartite test). For full details on associated persons read A guide to associated persons definitions for income tax purposes (IR620). You can download this from www.ird.govt.nz "Forms and guides". Charitable trust A charitable trust is one in which the income can be used only for charitable purposes. For more information on charitable trusts, read our guide Charitable organisations (IR255). Corpus This is the market value of any property settled on a trust, at the date of settlement. Disposition of property Any form of transfer, conveyance, assignment, settlement, delivery, payment or other allocation of property to a trust (or for its benefit) is a disposition of property. This includes dispositions made under a person's will and through intestacy (dying without a will). Inter vivos trust This is a trust settled during the lifetime of the settlor. This term is used when working out whether trustee income from overseas is subject to New Zealand income tax. ird.govt.nz 7 Resident You are a New Zealand tax resident in any of these situations: • you're in New Zealand for more than 183 days in any twelve-month period, or • you have an enduring relationship with New Zealand, or • you have a permanent place of abode in New Zealand, or • you're away from New Zealand in the service of the New Zealand Government. Testamentary trust A trust created by a person's will, codicil or intestacy (dying without a will), or by a court order at the time of the person's death. Transitional resident A transitional resident is an individual who has arrived in New Zealand after 1 April 2006 and qualifies for a temporary tax exemption on their foreign income. To qualify as a transitional resident, the individual must not have been resident in New Zealand for the last 10 years, or have been a transitional resident before. For more information see, "Temporary tax exemption on foreign income for new migrants and returning New Zealanders" at www.ird.govt.nz TRUSTS AND ESTATES 8 Part 1 - Explaining the important concepts How a trust starts To create a trust, a person (the settlor) gives money or property to another person (the trustee), to be held in trust for the benefit of either the trust's beneficiaries, or a purpose recognised by law. There should be a signed trust deed (agreement) that acknowledges the settlement, but it's possible to establish a trust verbally. Trustees The trustee holds the trust's property in trust for the beneficiary, and administers or manages the trust. A trustee includes an executor or administrator of an estate, which may be the Public Trustee or the Mäori Trustee. Companies may also act as trustees. Settlors Note When a trustee of a trust owes an amount to a beneficiary of the trust, the beneficiary does not become a settlor when either: • the trust pays the beneficiary a market interest rate equal to or greater than the prescribed rate of interest, or • the amount retained in the beneficiary’s current account at the end of the income year is not more than $25,000. A settlor of the trust can include any person who at any time: • transfers value –to a trust, or –for the benefit of the trust, or –on terms of the trust • provides financial assistance to the trust for its value. These are called settlements. Trusts may also be settled by companies. ird.govt.nz 9 Determining who is a settlor of a trust and whether they're a resident is important for establishing whether the trust's overseas income is taxable in New Zealand. These factors also affect the category of a trust (complying, foreign, or non-complying - explained in Part 2 of this guide) and which distributions to beneficiaries are non- taxable. Settlement A settlement is any action that makes a person a settlor of a trust and includes any of the following: • disposal of any property to the trust for less than market value • property or funds made available to the trust for less than market value • services provided to the trust for less than market value • any property acquired from the trust or any service from the trustee for greater than market value. Settlement also includes any failure to act or enter into any or part of any of the above actions. Note The courts will only recognise that a valid trust has been created if it’s covered in a trust deed. You should seek professional advice about drawing up a trust deed. Information a settlor must give us A New Zealand resident settlor must tell us the details within three months of making a settlement on a trust that doesn't have New Zealand resident trustees. The settlor must also give us the names and addresses of the trust's trustees and beneficiaries. For disclosure purposes, a settlement also includes a settlement made as a nominee of another person, or of a nominal amount made at the request of another person. A settlor of a trust who is resident in New Zealand for any part of the income year, may be taxed as an agent of the trustee on trustee income which is derived in that income year, if the trust ceases to have a New Zealand trustee. If all the trustees of the trust cease to be New Zealand residents, the settlor must tell us within three months of the date on which the trust ceased to have a resident trustee. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 10 In each of these situations, the settlor must complete a Settlors of trusts disclosure (IR462) form within three months and send it to us. How the trust earns income Usually, the money or property settled on the trust is used as an investment to earn further revenue, or as capital to fund a trading operation. This revenue becomes the trust's income as it's earned. The initial settlement on the trust isn't income for tax purposes, but the settlor may have to pay gift duty on it if it's received before 1 October 2011, depending on the value of the settlement. Estates The trust tax rules also apply to estates of people who have died, if such an estate continues to earn income after the person's death. When we refer to "trusts" in this guide we also include estates, unless specifically excluded by the context. The trust's income The trust's income is deemed to include certain settlements of property on a trust. • Property settled by a trustee of another trust so long as it would have counted as income if that trust had distributed the property to one of its beneficiaries instead (see page 21). • A settlement of property on a trust, which would, if not for the settlement, have constituted: –gross income of the settlor, or –a dividend for which the settlor would have, if not for settlement, been liable to deduct FDP (foreign dividend payment) if the settlor is a resident or if the settlor had been a resident in New Zealand and subject to our income tax laws at that time. • A settlement of property on a trust for which the settlor claims a deduction from gross income for New Zealand tax purposes. These property settlements are excluded from the definition of corpus. ird.govt.nz 11 The trust's income is separated into two parts for tax purposes: beneficiary income and trustee income. The tax on these two parts is then calculated separately, to arrive at the total tax payable on the trust's income. Here's how the income is allocated: • Beneficiary income is an amount of income derived by a trustee of the trust and allocated to a beneficiary during any income year that either: –vests absolutely in the beneficiary during that income year, or –is paid or applied for the benefit of the beneficiary within six months after the end of that income year. • Trustee income is all income the trust earns in its income year that: –does not vest absolutely in the beneficiary during that income year, or –is not paid or applied for the benefit of the beneficiary within six months after the end of that income year. Trusts can make other types of distributions, some of which will also be taxable. These other distributions are explained in Part 4 of this guide. How the trust's tax is calculated depends on the type of trust, and whether the settlor and/or trustees are New Zealand residents. The different types of trust are explained in Part 2 of this guide. Foreign trusts disclosure and record keeping rules Resident foreign trustees (including complying resident foreign trustees) are required, for each foreign trust they administer, to: • complete and submit to us a Foreign trust disclosure (IR607) form, and • keep financial and other records for New Zealand tax purposes. You can get the IR607 from our website www.ird.govt.nz "Forms and guides", or by emailing competent.authority@ird.govt.nz Disclosures must be completed by resident foreign trustees appointed: • if on or after 1 October 2006, within 30 days after the later of the date of appointment as a trustee, or the date of the trustee's arrival in New Zealand • if before 1 October 2006, within 60 days after the later of 1 October 2006, or the date of the trustee's arrival in New Zealand. More information Full details of the rules are in the Tax Information Bulletin Vol 18, No 5 (June 2006). TRUSTS AND ESTATES 12 Part 2 - Different types of trusts For income tax purposes, there are three types of trust: • complying trusts • foreign trusts • non-complying trusts. The type of trust is important, because it determines whether some distributions from a trust are taxable. Complying trusts A complying trust is one that has been taxed in New Zealand on all its trustee income since the date it began. Complying trusts include: • trusts settled by New Zealand residents with New Zealand trustees • estates of people who were New Zealand residents when they died • other trusts which have elected to become a complying trust. A trust remains a complying trust if, since settlement of the trust, the trustees have satisfied all their obligations for its income tax liabilities. A trust isn't a complying trust if: • the only trustee income is non-resident passive income, or • the trustees earn foreign-sourced income excluded from the meaning of gross income. If a trust ceases to meet the conditions for a complying trust in an income year, it will no longer be a complying trust - it will generally become a non-complying trust (see definition on page 13). A complying trust won't lose its complying status simply because one or more of the following apply: • the trust has no trustee income and there is no tax liability • the only trustee income is tax-exempt • the trust's deductible expenses or losses exceed the trustee income, so there is no tax payable on the net trustee income. ird.govt.nz 13 Foreign trusts A trust will be a foreign trust if none of its settlors have been resident in New Zealand since the later of these dates: • 17 December 1987 • the date the trust was first settled. A trust will cease to be a foreign trust if it makes any distribution after a settlor becomes a New Zealand resident, or if a New Zealand resident makes a settlement on the trust. Non-complying trusts A non-complying trust is any trust that is neither a complying trust nor a foreign trust at the time it makes a distribution. See page 23 for more information on distributions from a non-complying trust. It's generally a trust that has a resident settlor, has been established overseas with non-resident trustees, and hasn't been liable for New Zealand income tax since it was first settled. It also includes a trust where its trustee income has been liable for full New Zealand tax but the trustees haven't paid the tax. New arrivals in New Zealand New residents who arrive in New Zealand may have settled a trust before they arrived in this country. Such a trust would normally be a foreign trust, but it can elect to become a complying trust. The benefits of such an election will become clearer in Part 4 of this guide, because the type of trust affects how some distributions to beneficiaries are taxed. To change types, the trust must elect to pay New Zealand income tax on its trustee income within 12 months of when the settlor first arrives in New Zealand, unless the settlor is a transitional resident\*. If the settlor isn't a transitional resident the trustee income will become taxable in New Zealand, from the date the trust makes the election. If the settlor is a transitional resident, the 12 months to elect to change trust types starts on the date the settlor ceases to be a transitional resident. The trust should use an Election to pay income tax on trustee income (IR463) form to make this election. \* See glossary TRUSTS AND ESTATES 14 If the trust doesn't make an election, it'll be treated as one of the following: • a foreign trust, for any distribution that consists of income, capital profits or capital gains derived before the election expiry date • a non-complying trust, for any distribution that consists of income, capital profits or capital gains derived after the election expiry date. ird.govt.nz 15 Part 3 - How the trust's income is taxed Tax on trustee income The tax on a trust's trustee income (explained on page 11) is calculated at a flat rate of 33 cents in the dollar for all three different types of trust. General rule The trustee is liable for New Zealand income tax on income derived from New Zealand, irrespective of where the trustee lives. The trustee is also liable for New Zealand income tax on income derived from outside New Zealand where: • any settlor is resident in New Zealand at any time during the income year, or • any settlor of an inter vivos or a testamentary trust died while they were resident in New Zealand and a trustee is resident in New Zealand at any time during the income year. Exceptions to the general rule There are two situations in which a trustee isn't liable for income tax on trustee income derived from outside New Zealand. These apply where the trustee is resident outside New Zealand at all times during the income year and either: • no settlement has been made on the trust since 17 December 1987, or • the only settlements made on the trust were by settlors who weren't resident in New Zealand at the time of settlement and who haven't been resident in New Zealand since 17 December 1987. Neither exception applies where an election to pay tax on trustee income has been made by the trustee. These exceptions don't affect the liability to income tax for any settlor of the trust, for example, where the settlor elects to pay tax on trustee income. The trustee income remains liable for income tax for the purpose of determining whether the trust is a complying trust. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 16 Settlor liability If a trust was settled before 17 December 1987, and no settlement has been made on the trust since then, the settlor isn't liable for tax on trustee income unless they elect to pay tax on it. Any settlor of a trust who is a resident in New Zealand at any time during the income year is liable for income tax on trustee income as an agent of the trustee, with certain exceptions. If there's more than one New Zealand resident settlor, these settlors are jointly liable for the tax on trustee income. This means that any or all of the New Zealand resident settlors are liable for this tax. The New Zealand resident settlor won't be liable for the income tax on trustee income if any of these conditions are met. • A trustee is resident in New Zealand at all times during the income year. • The settlor, being a natural person (not a company), wasn't a New Zealand resident at the time they made any settlement on the trust, unless the settlor elects to pay tax on trustee income. • The settlor can show to our satisfaction that their share of the trust's tax liability is excessive, taking into account the settlements on the trust made by all settlors. • The trustee income is derived by the application of the accruals rules of the Income Tax Act to any amounts remitted by the settlor under any financial arrangement. Provisional tax If a trust's residual income tax (RIT) at the end of an income year is more than $2,500, it will generally have to pay provisional tax on the following year's income. RIT is the amount of tax due at the end of the year, after deducting all tax credits the trust can claim (except provisional tax payments). Provisional tax for trusts is explained fully in Part 6 of this guide. Tax on beneficiary income New Zealand resident beneficiaries Beneficiaries who are New Zealand residents are liable for New Zealand income tax on all their income, from any source in the world. Beneficiary income they receive from any trust will be taxable in New Zealand, at their normal income tax rates. To calculate normal income tax rates the trustee must first calculate the tax payable on the total taxable income of the beneficiary and then determine the portion referable to just the beneficiary’s income and taxable distributions. ird.govt.nz 17 Example During the income year beneficiary derives beneficiary income of $5,000 and salary $45,000, (not beneficiary income) total taxable income $50,000. Tax payable by the trustee on the beneficiary income is calculated as follows: Tax payable on taxable income at current marginal rates $48,000 × (10.5% to $14,000 then 17.5%) = $7,420 $2,000 × 30% = $600 Total = $8,020 Tax payable on beneficiary income $8,020 × ($5,000 ÷ $50,000) = $802 Beneficiaries under 16 may be subject to special rules. For more information, please see page 18. From the 2004-2005 income year, any amount derived by the trustee of a community trust is exempt from income tax. The distributions from community trusts aren't taxed on beneficiary income, instead they're included in the gross income of the beneficiaries. The trustee must pay tax on behalf of the beneficiary for income allocated to that beneficiary. The beneficiary can then claim a tax credit for the tax paid on their behalf. Beneficiaries are required to return all income received in their own personal tax return. However, the trustee and beneficiary can agree between themselves not to have tax deducted from trust income before the beneficiary receives it. This is called having the income "transferred direct", and it may be useful in cases such as when the beneficiary has other tax losses to offset against the trust income in their tax return. If the income is transferred direct and the beneficiary doesn't pay any tax on it, the trustees can still be held liable for the unpaid tax. Any distributions made from a non-complying trust to the beneficiary is taxed at 45%. If the trust subsequently gains its complying status, that distribution will be reversed. There are also some other trust distributions beneficiaries must declare for income tax purposes. These are explained in Part 4 of this guide. The nature of the trust's income continues when allocated to the beneficiaries. So interest earned by the trust and allocated to a beneficiary is interest income of the beneficiary. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 18 Timing of allocation of beneficiary income From the 2009-2010 income year onwards, the date by which income allocation to beneficiaries must be allocated, is the later of: • six months after balance date, or • the earlier of: –the date on which the trustee files the return of income for the income year, or –the date by which the trustee must file a return for the income year. Example Olive Family Trust is allocating income to beneficiaries for the year ended 31 March 2012. The trust return is due on 7 July 2012. The income should be allocated by: • 30 September 2012, or • the earlier of: –the date the return is filed, or –7 July 2012. If the trust has a tax agent, the extension of time for filing an income tax return still applies. Special rules for beneficiaries who are children (the "minor beneficiary rule") The minor beneficiary rule applies to income derived from 1 April 2001 or the equivalent income year. Certain distributions of beneficiary income to children under 16 (minors) on the balance date of the trust must be taxed at a final tax rate of 33%. The rule doesn't apply to income derived in that income year if the minor turned 16 during that year. Minor beneficiary income is taxed as trustees' income and isn't the minor's gross income. For the purposes of entries in a beneficiary's account with a trust, the tax on beneficiary income, although taxed as trustees' income, is still treated as being paid on behalf of the beneficiary. ird.govt.nz 19 The minor beneficiary rule applies to beneficiary income derived by a minor from property settled on a trust by: • a relative or legal guardian of the minor, or • a person associated with a relative or legal guardian. The rule applies to all beneficiary income distributed to a minor from a trust unless all the settlements on that trust were made: • by a settlor who received the property as an agent for the beneficiary from someone other than a relative, guardian or their associate • by a settlor who's been ordered by a court to pay damages or compensation to the minor • by a settlor against whom a protection order has been made under section 14 of the Domestic Violence Act 1995.\* • under the terms of a will, codicil, intestacy or any variations of these by a court, if the minor or their brother or sister, or half-brother or half-sister, was alive within 12 months after the date of the settlor's death. If a trust includes some settlements that fit within one of these criteria, and some settlements that don't, special rules apply. For more information see your tax agent or call us on 0800 377 774. The rule doesn't apply if: • the minor is a non-resident • the minor receives a child disability allowance under the Social Security Act 2018 • the minor receives beneficiary income from a group investment fund or Ma ̄ori authority • the beneficiary income derived is $1,000 or less in an income year. However, if the beneficiary's income is over $1,000, all the beneficiary income is subject to the rule. \* This exception only applies if the minor is a protected person in relation to the protection order and the settlement on the trust is made before the protection order is made, or during the time the protection order is in force. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 20 Beneficiaries and provisional tax If a beneficiary's residual income tax (RIT) is more than $2,500, they will generally have to pay provisional tax for the following year. RIT is the amount of tax due at the end of the year, after deducting all tax credits the beneficiary can claim, including tax paid by the trustee on the beneficiary's behalf, but excluding provisional tax payments. Our guide Provisional tax (IR289) explains these rules. Non-resident beneficiaries The trust must deduct NRWT (non-resident withholding tax) from any interest, dividends or royalties before the non-resident beneficiary receives them. This withholding tax is the final tax payable on the income. They should be able to claim a credit for their tax paid in their overseas tax return. Other income, such as income from a rental property, will be subject to New Zealand income tax at the normal rates. Note Beneficiary income retains its nature in the beneficiary’s hands - for example, if the trust earned the income from dividends, the beneficiary should return it as dividends in their overseas tax return. If a trust has non-resident beneficiaries, our NRWT - payer's guide (IR291) contains information the trust administrators will need to know. If a beneficiary isn't a New Zealand resident, and they receive beneficiary income that didn't come from New Zealand sources, the beneficiary won't have to pay New Zealand income tax on this income. Beneficiaries temporarily ceasing to be resident If a beneficiary ceases to be a New Zealand resident and then becomes a New Zealand resident again within five years, they must pay New Zealand income tax on any beneficiary income or taxable distributions (explained in Part 4) received from a foreign or non-complying trust. In this situation, any beneficiary income or taxable distributions the beneficiary received while they were a non-resident, will be taxable as such in the year in which the beneficiary again becomes a New Zealand resident. ird.govt.nz 21 Part 4 - Other distributions to beneficiaries As well as distributing beneficiary income, as explained in Part 3, a trust can distribute money or assets to its beneficiaries by: • distributing trustee income accumulated in previous years • distributing capital profits or gains made from disposing of some of its assets or property • supplying trust property or services to the beneficiary for less than full value • acquiring property or services from the beneficiary for more than full value • making a distribution from the trust's corpus • settling sums or property for the benefit of another trust to the extent that if distributed to a beneficiary resident in New Zealand, the sum or property would have constituted beneficiary income or a taxable distribution to that beneficiary. A beneficiary who receives such a distribution may have to pay income tax on it. This will depend on the type of trust making the distribution. This is why the difference between complying trusts, foreign trusts and non-complying trusts is significant. Distributions of accumulated trustee income and capital profits or gains that were derived by the trust in the 1988 or earlier income years aren't treated as taxable distributions. Distributions from complying trusts If a complying trust makes a distribution of any of the types listed above, the beneficiary receiving the distribution won't have to pay income tax on it. This is the principal advantage of being a complying trust. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 22 Distributions from foreign trusts When a foreign trust makes a distribution of any of the types listed on page 21, it will be a taxable distribution unless it's from the trust's corpus, or from capital profits or gains from transactions with non-associated persons (an adjustment is made for any capital loss incurred in the year the profit was realised). This means the beneficiary must pay tax on the distribution at their normal tax rate. Order of sources of distributions to beneficiaries When a foreign trust makes a distribution to a beneficiary, for tax purposes the distribution will be considered to have come from different sources in the following order: 1. Income the trust derived that is beneficiary income in the previous income year – see page 18 2. Income the trust derived in the current income year. 3. Income (other than beneficiary income) the trust derived in a previous income year (accumulated trustee income). 4. Any capital profit or gain realised in the current income year. 5. Any accumulated capital profit or gain realised in previous income years. 6. The corpus of the trust. However, there are certain distributions not subject to the order listed above. These are: • any distribution from a non-discretionary trust: –created by will, codicil or court order modifying the will or codicil –created on an intestacy, or –on which no settlement has been made since 17 December 1987 • any distribution from a foreign trust that has elected to become a complying trust • any distribution under which a beneficiary acquired trust property for less than market value • any distribution under which a beneficiary acquired services from the trust for less than market value. Except for the last two items in this list, the distributions are deemed to consist of amounts that reflect the terms of the trust deed, or that the trustee(s) determine(s). If a foreign trust doesn't keep enough records to accurately show the source of a distribution, it will be a taxable distribution. ird.govt.nz 23 Distributions that are taxable to the beneficiary If a New Zealand resident beneficiary receives a taxable distribution from a foreign trust, this distribution must be included in the beneficiary's tax return as part of their assessable income. This is on top of any beneficiary income the beneficiary receives from the trust. The beneficiary will then pay tax on the distribution at their normal income tax rates. If the beneficiary receiving the distribution from a foreign trust isn't a New Zealand resident, then they only have to pay New Zealand income tax on any part of the distribution that came from a source in New Zealand. Distributions from non-complying trusts When a non-complying trust makes a distribution of any of the types listed on page 21, it will be taxable unless it's from the trust's corpus. If the beneficiary receiving the distribution from a non-complying trust is a New Zealand resident, it's included in the person's tax return with their other income for the year. It will be taxed at a flat rate of 45 cents in the dollar. Distributions of beneficiary income are taxed at the beneficiary's normal tax rates. A complying trust which has become a non-complying trust because of the trustee's income tax obligations not being met, will become a complying trust retrospectively if the trustee satisfies their obligations, including penalties and interest. When a non-complying trust makes a distribution to a beneficiary, the same rules of order listed on page 22 apply. If a beneficiary has a tax loss from some other source If a beneficiary receives a taxable distribution from a non-complying trust, and that beneficiary has a loss or a loss to carry forward from some other source, they can claim a deduction against the distribution. Use this formula to calculate the amount of this deduction: a× b c In this formula: a is the amount of loss or loss carried forward b is the rate of tax on trustee income - 33 cents in the dollar (0.33) c is 45 cents in the dollar (0.45). TRUSTS AND ESTATES 24 Foreign tax credits Credits for foreign tax paid on a taxable distribution can only be claimed if the tax deducted by the foreign country is similar to New Zealand NRWT. Electing to become a complying trust There are some situations in which a foreign trust or a non-complying trust can elect to become a complying trust. If they want to do this, either the trustee, the settlor or the beneficiary must elect to pay tax on the trustees' worldwide income. The trustee income will then be taxed in New Zealand (when it otherwise may not have been taxable here), in the same way as a complying trust. This then allows it to make non-taxable distributions to its beneficiaries. The person making this election should fill in an Election to pay income tax on trustee income (IR463) form and send it to us. Once an election has been made the person will need to indicate that the trust continues to qualify as a complying trust in their tax return each year or, if they are a non-active trust, through their myIR account each year. The following three types of trust can elect to become complying trusts if they make the election within the relevant time limits - see the following pages. New residents A trust settled by a non-resident settlor who became a New Zealand resident after 17 December 1987 may elect to become a complying trust. This election must be made within 12 months of the settlor becoming a New Zealand resident. Unless the settlor is a transitional resident\*, the 12 months to change trust type starts on the date the settlor ceases to be a transitional resident. If the trust makes an election it will be treated either as: • a foreign trust, for any distribution of income, capital profits or capital gains the trust derived before it made the election, or • a complying trust, for any distribution of income, capital profits or capital gains the trust derived after it made the election. \* See glossary ird.govt.nz 25 This treatment doesn't apply if the trust fails to pay the tax on the trustees' income. The trust will be treated as a non-complying trust for any distributions made in the income year in which the tax isn't paid and in subsequent income years. Only distributions from amounts derived after the trust made the election will be treated as having been made from a non-complying trust. If the election is made part-way through an income year, the income, profits or capital gains for the year must be allocated to the appropriate period that the trust was a foreign or complying trust, according to the date they were derived on. Settled in 1989 or later income years A non-complying or foreign trust settled during the 1989 or later income years, and not otherwise liable to New Zealand income tax on its trustee income, may elect to become a complying trust. The election must be made within the time for filing the trust’s tax return for the income year of settlement. If New Zealand income tax is paid on all trustee income derived since the date of settlement, the trust will meet the complying trust definition at the date of the distribution. Complying trusts no longer liable for New Zealand tax A trust that was formerly a complying trust, but ceased to be liable for New Zealand income tax on its trustee income (for example, if the settlor becomes a non-resident), ceases to be a complying trust. However, such a trust can elect or re-elect to be a complying trust. The election must be made within the time for filing the tax return for the income year in which the trust ceased to be a complying trust. The income tax liability relating to trustee income for each income years since the trust began must also be satisfied. The trust will again be treated as a complying trust from the date it would otherwise have ceased to be liable for New Zealand tax. If no election is made, the trust will become a non-complying trust. Note To become a complying trust, it must make its election before the relevant time limit expires. Late elections cannot be accepted. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 26 Part 5 - Tax returns for trusts and beneficiaries The trust's tax return The trustee must file an IR6 tax return for the trust each year. This return is separate from the trustee's own personal tax return. In the IR6 return the trustee shows: • all income derived by the trust, including any income from a Mäori authority • the tax credits relating to that income • the allocation of income between beneficiary income and trustee income, and • any taxable distributions made. The trustee then calculates the tax payable on the beneficiary income, trustee income and taxable distributions. Allocation of RWT credits Any associated tax credits are generally also allocated in the same proportion as the income. However, if a trustee is paying income tax on beneficiary income on behalf of the beneficiaries, the trustee has the option of detaching some or all of the RWT credits associated with the resident passive income distributed to beneficiaries and reallocating the credits between beneficiaries and trustee to satisfy the income tax on beneficiary income and trustee income. Note The option of detaching RWT credits is only available to a trustee who pays income tax on beneficiary income on behalf of the beneficiaries. If the trustee detaches RWT credits from resident passive income distributed to a beneficiary (Beneficiary A), the trustee must pay Beneficiary A an RWT substitution payment equal to the amount of the detached RWT credits. The trustee can then either: • Reallocate the detached RWT credits to Beneficiary B by meeting Beneficiary B’s income tax on beneficiary income; • Retain the detached RWT credits to satisfy income tax on trustee income; or • A combination of both. The reallocated or retained RWT credit is not income of either Beneficiary B or the trustee – it is the transfer of RWT credits. ird.govt.nz 27 The RWT credits available to Beneficiary A are then reduced by the amount of the RWT substitution payment. The RWT substitution payment is treated as resident passive income that is beneficiary income of Beneficiary A. However, there is no liability or obligation on the trustee to withhold RWT in relation to the RWT substitution payment. The practical effect of the reallocation exercise is that the RWT credit is transferred from one taxpayer (Beneficiary A) to another (Beneficiary B or trustee) and the transferred RWT credit is used to satisfy the trustee’s obligations for satisfying the income tax liability on trustee income and/or Beneficiary B’s beneficiary income. Reallocating the RWT credits also means that Beneficiary A will not need to seek a refund from the Commissioner for the excess RWT credits and, instead, receives a cash payment from the trustee in substitution for the RWT credits. Example The trustee of the Olive Family trust derives $100 in interest, from which 33% tax has been deducted, leaving $67 in cash, and the trustee receives an entitlement to $33 in RWT credits. The Olive Family trust distributes all of the interest to Brook as beneficiary income, with Brook receiving $67 in cash and $33 in RWT credits. Brook has a marginal tax rate of 17.5%, which means her tax liability on her beneficiary income is $17.50. Since the trustee is paying income tax on beneficiary income for Brook, the trustee can detach $15.50 from the RWT credits allocated to Brook and pay her cash of $15.50 in substitution for the detached RWT credit. This leaves Brook with $17.50 of RWT tax credit – enough to satisfy her income tax on beneficiary income. Brook is in the same position as if she had obtained a refund of the excess RWT credit from the Commissioner. The trustee can retain the detached RWT credit of $15.50 to satisfy income tax on trustee income. Allocation of imputation credits The imputation credits must be allocated in proportion to the total distributions received from the trust. This also applies to Mäori authority credits and FDP (foreign dividend payment) credits attached to dividends distributed as beneficiary income. This means a trust can't choose to allocate credits to beneficiaries who may be better able to use them than other beneficiaries. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 28 Use this formula to allocate the imputation and FDP credits: a× b c In this formula: a is the total imputation and FDP credits attached to all dividends distributed to beneficiaries during the income year b is the total distribution, including capital distributions, to the particular beneficiary during the income year c is the total distributions made to all beneficiaries during the income year. The beneficiaries can then claim a credit for tax paid on their beneficiary income and taxable distributions (and their share of tax credits) in their personal income tax returns. Note Where a trust has no prospect or intention of deriving any assessable income in a given financial year, please call us on 0800 377 774 with the name and IRD number of the trust so we can record that a return isn’t required for that year. However, if the trust receives any assessable income, for example, interest, the trustee must file a return, regardless of the amount derived. If the trust subsequently derives assessable income in a future year, the trust must send in a return. This only applies to trust returns. Estates are still required to file a return of income regardless of whether or not they have derived assessable income. The beneficiaries' tax returns A person who receives beneficiary income from any type of trust, or a taxable distribution from a foreign trust, must include this income in their tax return for that year and pay tax on it at their normal rates. If the trust has deducted tax before paying the income to the beneficiary, the beneficiary can claim a credit for this tax deducted. However, if the tax was deducted overseas, the maximum credit a New Zealand beneficiary can claim is the amount of New Zealand income tax payable on their share of the overseas trust income. If the trust's balance date isn't 31 March, the beneficiary must include any income from the trust in their tax return for the year that corresponds with the trust's accounting year. There's no need to make any separate calculations to allow for a difference in balance dates. ird.govt.nz 29 If a person receives beneficiary income or taxable distributions from a foreign or non-complying trust, they should fill in the details of the trust income on a Schedule of beneficiary's estate or trust income (IR307) form, and include this with their tax return. If the trust has a New Zealand tax agent, they will usually fill in an IR307 form for each beneficiary to include with their individual tax return. These forms will then show the beneficiaries how much income to declare, and the amount of any tax credits to claim. Note Any taxable distributions a beneficiary receives from a non-complying trust are to be included separately in the beneficiary’s tax return. These distributions will be taxed separately at a flat rate of 45 cents in the dollar. Tax returns for a deceased person's estate The personal representative, executor or administrator of a deceased person's estate must file all tax returns the deceased person would otherwise have had to file and make sure any tax due is paid. The tax return to be used for the period to the date of death is an Individual tax return (IR3). The return must show their IRD number and include all gross income the deceased person derived up until that date. After the date of death, the person's estate will get a new IRD number and any income must be returned in an Income tax return: Estate or Trust (IR6). The first estate return will include all income derived and expenditure incurred from the date of death until the end of the return period. Even after an estate has been wound up, we can audit the deceased person's tax returns for previous years. If more tax becomes payable as a result of such an audit, the estate is still liable to pay this tax. If there are no estate funds available because the final distribution has been made, the executor or administrator is liable for the extra tax assessed. Charitable trusts or estates A trust will be a charitable trust if all income the trustee derives is held solely for charitable purposes, and no person associated with the trust can gain any personal profit from it. There are special tax exemptions available to charitable trusts and estates. You'll find more information about charitable trusts and estates in our Charitable organisations (IR255) guide. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 30 Final trust or estate return The trustees of a trust or estate are personally responsible for any tax payable on the trust income. This means that before an estate or trust is wound up and its assets distributed, all income must be returned and enough funds retained to pay any tax due. The trustee must file a tax return to the date of winding up, which must show the final distribution of the income. ird.govt.nz 31 Part 6 - Provisional tax The principle of provisional tax The principle of provisional tax is that a trust pays tax as it earns income, instead of having a large tax bill at the end of the year. Provisional tax is charged in instalments during an income year. When the trust files its tax return, it can claim a credit for the provisional tax it's paid during the year. Circumstances when a trust must pay provisional tax One of the important concepts in provisional tax is residual income tax (RIT). This is the amount of tax payable on the trust's income for the year, after deducting any allowable tax credits (but not provisional tax payments). This includes tax payable by the trustee on both beneficiary income and trustee income. • If a trust's RIT is $2,500 or less, the trust doesn't have to pay provisional tax for the following year, but it can choose to make voluntary payments. • If a trust's RIT is more than $2,500, the trust will generally have to pay provisional tax for the following income year. There are three different methods for calculating the amount of provisional tax payable: the standard option, the estimation option or the ratio option. These methods are explained on pages 32 and 33. • If a trust's RIT is more than $2,500, but the trust expects its RIT at the end of the following year to be $2,500 or less, it can estimate its provisional tax at nil. However, before making such an estimate please read the section on use-of-money interest - see page 33. Provisional tax calculation methods Standard option Provisional tax calculations may change from year to year. For current and past rates go to www.ird.govt.nz (keywords: standard options). If a trust uses the standard option, it can change to the estimation option at any time up until the due date of the final instalment of provisional tax. If a trust using the standard option wishes to change to the ratio option it must elect to use the ratio before the tax year in which it wants to use the ratio. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 32 Estimation option A trust can choose to estimate its provisional tax by estimating its income for the year and then calculating the tax on it. This is usually beneficial for trusts that expect the following year's income to be less than the current year's income. If the trust used the standard option in this situation, it would end up paying more tax than it had to during the year, and then receive a refund at the end of the year. However, if a trust chooses the estimation option and the RIT is greater than the provisional tax paid, it can be charged interest from the first instalment date and may be liable for a shortfall penalty of 20% of the underpaid provisional tax for lack of reasonable care. Once a trust chooses the estimation option, it can't switch to the standard or ratio option during that income year. However, it can change the amount of the estimation at any time up until the due date for the final instalment of provisional tax. Note An estimate must be fair and reasonable at each instalment date. Ratio option From the 2008-2009 tax year, trusts are able to pay their provisional tax in line with when income is received. This option is only available to GST-registered trusts. Using the ratio option, six provisional tax instalments are made based on a trust's GST turnover. We'll calculate a percentage based on the prior year's RIT divided by the total GST supplies for the corresponding year. To calculate each provisional tax instalment, a trust multiplies the percentage which is preprinted on their GST103 return, by the total taxable supplies for the two-month period (monthly payers will add the taxable supplies for two return periods). If a trust makes the correct ratio payments by the due dates, it won't be charged interest if the provisional tax falls short of the RIT for the year. To use the ratio option, a trust must apply by phone or in writing before the start of the tax year they want to use this option in. ird.govt.nz 33 Use-of-money interest (UOMI) Only tax on trustee income is subject to UOMI. We won't charge or pay interest on tax on the trust's beneficiary income. If the trust's RIT on trustee income is more than $2,500, and the trust has paid too much provisional tax for this income, we may pay interest. However, if the provisional tax paid is less than the RIT, we may charge interest. There are changes to when UOMI is charged for the 2018 income year onwards There are changes in debit and credit use-of-money interest (UOMI) on provisional tax for the 2018 income year onwards when using the standard option, and when changing from the standard option to the estimation option for the final instalment, provided all required payments are made in full and on time. There is no change to debit or credit use-of-money interest when using the estimation option instalment(s) other than at the final instalment. When determining the interest start date, the $50,000 RIT threshold for individuals using the standard option has been increased to $60,000. This threshold will also apply to non-individuals, including trusts. Provisional tax amount End of year residual income tax (RIT) Credit or debit UOMICalculated from More than RIT amount Less than $60,000 Credit UOMI calculated on the difference between the provisional tax amount paid and the RIT Terminal tax due date More than RIT $60,000 or more Credit UOMI calculated on the difference between the provisional tax amount paid and the RIT Final instalment date Less than RIT $60,000 or more Debit UOMI calculated on the difference between the provisional tax amount paid and the RIT Final instalment date Less than RIT Less than $60,000 Debit UOMI calculated on the difference between the provisional tax amount paid and the RIT Terminal tax due date If the trust has paid all but the last instalment in full and on time using the standard option then UOMI will apply from the final instalment due date. This will also apply if the trust has changed to the estimation option at or before the final instalment date due date. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 34 If the trust has paid an instalment late or doesn't pay it at all UOMI will be charged from the due date of the instalment on the lesser of: • the amount of the instalment that was paid less the amount that should have paid, or • your RIT divided by the number of instalments for the tax year less the amount paid. The above changes may not apply if the trust: • is associated to a company and they aren't covered by the above standard option rules or they don't use the GST ratio option, or • has entered a provisional tax interest avoidance arrangement. Interest applies from the day after each provisional tax instalment date, if the RIT on trustee income is more than $2,500 when using the estimation option for the instalments other than the final instalment date. If they have elected to use the ratio option, interest applies from the day after the terminal tax due date. If the trust's RIT on trustee income is $2,500 or less, and it's paid too much provisional tax for trustee income, it can elect to be a provisional tax payer for that year. The trust may then still be paid interest on the overpaid provisional tax. A trust may elect to be a provisional tax payer if: • it expects to have RIT on trustee income of more than $2,500, and • it pays provisional tax on trustee income of more than $2,500 by the last provisional tax instalment date. If you experience problems with the way UOMI for the trust is calculated, call us on 0800 377 774. Any UOMI charged will generally be tax-deductible, while UOMI received is treated as gross income. If a trust is charged UOMI, it should be paid by the due date for paying its end-of-year tax bill (usually 7 February, or 7 April if the trust has a tax agent). However, interest will continue to be charged on a daily basis until the tax is paid. The only way to stop interest from accruing is to pay the unpaid tax on trustee income. Further information For more information on provisional tax and UOMI, read our Provisional tax (IR289) guide. ird.govt.nz 35 Late payment penalties If tax isn't paid by the due date, a late payment penalty will be charged. An initial 1% late payment penalty will be charged on the day after the due date. A further 4% penalty will be charged if there's still an amount of unpaid tax (including penalties) at the end of the 7th day from the due date. For income years before 2018 Every month after the due date, a further 1% will be added to any unpaid amount (including penalties). Note Penalties aren’t charged on unpaid amounts less than $100. TRUSTS AND ESTATES 36 Summary - tax rates and time limits The chart below summarises the tax rates for trustee income, the time limits that apply to other elections a trust can make and information it must give us. The information in this chart is fully explained in the earlier parts of this guide. Type of trust Situation Complying trustForeign trustNon-complying trust Tax rate for trustee income 33 cents in the dollar33 cents in the dollar (on NZ sourced income) 33 cents in the dollar Taxable distributions Not applicableAccumulated trustee income included, corpus and most capital profits excluded Tax at beneficiary's normal rates Accumulated trustee income and capital profits included, corpus excluded Beneficiary taxed at 45 cents in the dollar Election to be a complying trust Not applicableOn becoming a new resident: within 12 months of settlor becoming a New Zealand resident Formerly a complying trust: within time for filing tax return for year in which it ceased to be a complying trust Other trust settled in 1989 or later income years: within time for filing tax return for year of first settlement Disclosure to be made to Inland Revenue Within three months if no trustee is resident at the time of settlement, or all trustees become non-residents Not requiredWithin three months if no trustee is resident at the time of settlement, or all trustees become non-residents ird.govt.nz 37 For more help 0800 self-service numbers Our 0800 self-service numbers are open 7 days a week - except between 5am and 6am each day. Make sure you have your IRD number ready when you call. For access to your account-specific information, you’ll need to be enrolled with voice ID or have a PIN. Order forms, guides and returns 0800 257 773 All other services 0800 257 777 When you call, confirm what you want from the options given. If you need to talk with us, we’ll re-direct your call to someone who can help you. Need to speak with us? Have your IRD number ready and call us on one of these numbers. General tax, tax credits and refunds 0800 775 247 Employer enquiries 0800 377 772 General business tax 0800 377 774 Overdue returns and payments 0800 377 771 We’re open 8am to 8pm Monday to Friday, and 9am to 1pm Saturday. We record all calls. Our self-service lines are open 7 days a week - except between 5am and 6am each day. They offer a range of automated options, especially if you’re enrolled with voice ID. Find out more at ird.govt.nz/contact-us TRUSTS AND ESTATES 38 Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your tax and entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you do not. We may also exchange information about you with: • some government agencies • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them, and • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). You can ask for the personal information we hold about you. We’ll give the information to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Find our full privacy policy at ird.govt.nz/privacy If you have a complaint about our service We’re committed to providing you with a quality service. If there’s a problem, we’d like to know about it and have the chance to fix it. If you disagree with how we’ve assessed your tax, you may need to follow a formal disputes process. Find out more about making a complaint, and the disputes process, at ird.govt.nz/disputes Publications The following publications contain more information: • Taxes and duties (IR295) • Charitable organisations (IR255) • Provisional tax (IR289) • Penalties and interest (IR240) • Grants and subsidies (IR249) • RWT on interest - payer's guide (IR283) • Imputation (IR274) How to get our forms and guides You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides