ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Business Ngā Ūmanga IR296 | April 2023 This factsheet explains your tax responsibilities and entitlements if you're a self-employed private operator in the sex industry. A private operator is anyone in the sex industry who receives payment for their services without tax being deducted from it. The definition includes people who work in massage parlours, escort agencies, on the street and privately. Work out if you're self-employed (a private operator) or an employee (you work for someone else) by reading our guide Self-employed or an employee? - IR336 or by contacting us - see overleaf. If you're a private operator, you file an Individual tax return - IR3 at the end of the income year. You show your total income and work out how much tax you have to pay. You'll also have to work out your ACC levies and student loan repayments if you're a borrower. Everyone who earns money in New Zealand must pay their share of tax. Your taxes pay for services we all need, such as healthcare, education, social welfare, and transport. Taxes and how to pay them Income tax For most self-employed people, the income year starts on 1 April and ends on 31 March the following year. Your income tax returns are due on 7 July (although it can be later if you have a tax agent). In most cases, you must pay any tax by 7 February the following year. If you expect your income tax bill to be $5,000 or more at the end of the year, you may need to pay your tax in instalments throughout the year. This system is called provisional tax. Our guide Smart business - IR320 explains how you can plan for these payments. Find out more about provisional tax at ird.govt.nz/provisional-tax GST (goods and services tax) GST is a 15% tax on the supply (sale) of most goods and services in New Zealand, most goods imported into New Zealand and some specified imported services. Supplying or making a supply is your taxable activity. You must register for GST if your turnover from your taxable activities: • was over $60,000 for the last 12 months, or • is expected to go over $60,000 for the next 12 months. Private operators If you have not already registered for GST and need help deciding, use our guided help – Do I need to register for GST? You can voluntarily register for GST if your turnover is less than $60,000. If you decide you need to register, you claim GST for purchases and expenses related to your business and pay GST on your income. You can register for GST in myIR. You can reduce your end-of-year tax payment Deduct your business expenses Business expenses are products or services that you pay for and use in your work. You can claim most business-related expenses in your tax return, for example condoms, lubricants, work clothes and advertising fees. You cannot claim personal or domestic expenses such as casual clothing, groceries, gym fees and childcare. You can claim industry-specific medical expenses, for example HIV and STD tests. You may also be able to claim for pregnancy tests and cosmetic surgery. But you cannot claim private medical expenses. Find out more about expenses at ird.govt.nz/business-expenses Claim the costs of working from home If you work from home, you can claim a percentage of your household expenses, eg, rent, electricity, house insurance and rates. You'll need to set aside a specific area, for example a bedroom, hold on to all your receipts and keep a record of all the expenses you want to claim. We tell you how to do this at ird.govt.nz/business-expenses Work out depreciation for wear and tear When business items wear out or become outdated, they lose value. This is called depreciation. You can claim for single items over $500 or for a group of similar items with a combined value. Use our depreciation rates to work out the loss in value and deduct this amount in your tax return. ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Find out more about the depreciation rules and rates at ird.govt.nz/depreciation or by reading our guide Depreciation - a guide for businesses - IR260. Get extra help Working for Families If you have children aged 18 or under you may be entitled to Working for Families. There are different payment types you could qualify for, depending on your family's circumstances. For details, go to ird.govt.nz/working-for-families or read our guide Working and raising a family - IR201. Accommodation and childcare assistance If you receive Working for Families you may also be entitled to extra help with housing and childcare costs from Work and Income. Find out more at www.workandincome.govt.nz/ products/a-z-benefits/working-for-families.html or by calling Work and Income on 0800 774 004. Child support Child support is money paid by a parent who does not live with their children. Inland Revenue assesses and collects child support and passes it on to the person who cares for the children. For more details, go to ird.govt.nz/childsupport or read our guide Helping you to understand child support - IR100. Independent earner tax credit (IETC) If you earn between $24,000 and $48,000 you could be entitled to IETC. Find out more at ird.govt.nz/ietc Be a smart operator Make sure your paperwork is in good order. You'll need to: • keep original documents, for example invoices, receipts or other documents or taxable supply information if you are GST registered • keep a record of the money you earn and spend • register for the taxes you're required to, for example GST • enter all your income on the returns you file, and only claim the deductions you're entitled to • file your returns and pay your taxes on time. Contact us as soon as possible if you’re not able to meet your obligations. We'll discuss your circumstances and work out a filing and payment plan with you. myIR You can manage your tax and entitlements online with a myIR account. In myIR you can: • check if you’re due a refund • keep up to date with your student loan • check and update your Working for Families details • review your KiwiSaver contributions • manage your child support payments • file returns • update your contact and bank account details. myIR is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Find out more, and register, at ird.govt.nz/myir Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you. How to get our forms and guides You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides FREE ADVISORY SERVICE Our community compliance officers run free tax seminars and workshops for new businesses and organisations. For more information or to register to attend one of these sessions go to ird.govt.nz/seminars or phone 0800 377 774. ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online from the myIR login screen and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you.