1 IR3 2018 Individual tax return Accident Compensation Act 2001 • Income Tax Act 2007 • Tax Administration Act 1994 1 April 2017 to 31 March 2018 •You can file your return online at www.ird.govt.nz (search keyword: IR3 2018). •To see if you need to complete this return use the "Work out my income tax filing options" tool online. •The 2018 IR3 guide is available on our website. To view a copy go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: IR3G 2018). 1If your IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 1 2If your correct name is not shown above, print it in full in Box 2. 2 MrMrsMissMs Please put first names above and surname below 3If your correct postal address is not shown above, print the full address in Box 3. Don't print your tax agent's address here. See page 8 in the guide. 3 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town or city below 4If your correct street address is not shown below, print it in full in Box 4. 4 Please put street address above and suburb, city, RD or region below 5If your correct date of birth is not shown below, print it in Box 5. 5 Day Month Year 6If your business industry classification (BIC) code is not shown below or has changed, print it in Box 6. For more information about BIC codes, go to www.businessdescription.co.nz 6 7If your correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in Box 7. 7 Prefix Phone number 8If your correct bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 8. See page 9 in the guide. 8 Bank Branch Account number Suffix 9Adjustments to your income - student loan and Working for Families Tax Credits customers Please check the income list on our website www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: adjust your income) to see if you need to make any adjustments. If you have already told us your end of year adjustments, you don't need to do anything further. If you do have adjustments to make, tick Box 9A, complete an Adjust your income (IR215) form and send it in with your return. See page 9 in the guide. 9A 10You may be a non-resident of New Zealand for tax purposes and may need to complete an IR3NR return instead. See page 9 in the guide. 2 11Did you receive family tax credit from Work and Income? Don't include any payments from Inland Revenue. See page 11 in the guide. No Go to Question 11AYe sEnter the amount from your summary of earnings below. Total family tax credit from Work and Income 11 $ , , • 11ADid you receive income with tax deducted, as shown on your summary of earnings? See page 11 in the guide. No Go to Question 12Ye sCopy the amounts from your summary of earnings to the boxes below. Total PAYE deductedTotal gross income 11A $ , , • 11B $ , , • ACC earners' levyTo t a l income not liable for ACC earners' levy 11D $ , , • 11C $ , , • Total tax deducted See page 13 in the guide for a list of income not liable for ACC earners' levy (eg, NZ Super, income-tested benefits, student allowances). 11E $ , , • 12Did you receive income from schedular payments, as shown on your summary of earnings? See page 14 in the guide. No Go to Question 13Ye sCopy the schedular payment totals from your summary of earnings to Boxes 12A and 12B below. Enter any expenses related to schedular payments in Box 12C (don't include at Box 26) Total tax deducted 12A $ , , • Total gross payments 12B $ , , • Expenses related to schedular payments (don't include expenses claimed here at Box 26) 12C $ , , • Net schedular payments (Subtract Box 12C from Box 12B) 12D $ , , • 13Did you have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to you? Include any interest from partnerships, look-through companies and/or trusts. Keep your interest statements or certificates. No Go to Question 14Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 15 in the guide. To t a l RW TTotal gross interest 13A $ , , • 13B $ , , • If any of your interest was received from a partnership, look-through company, trust and/or estate, please tick 13C. 13C 14Did you have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to you or did you receive shares instead of dividends? Include any dividends from partnerships, look-through companies and/or trusts. Keep your dividend statements. No Go to Question 15Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 17 in the guide. Total dividend imputation credits 14 $ , , • Total dividend RWT creditsTotal gross dividends 14A $ , , • 14B $ , , • If any of your dividends were received from a partnership, look-through company, trust and/or estate, please tick 14C. 14C 15Did you receive any taxable Māori authority distributions? Keep your distribution statements. No Go to Question 16Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 18 in the guide. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distributions 15A $ , , • 15B $ , , • 16Did you receive any New Zealand estate or trust income? Exclude interest, dividends and distributions shown at Questions 13, 14 or 15, as appropriate. No Go to Question 17Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 18 in the guide. Total tax paid by trusteesTotal estate or trust income (excluding amount in Box 16C) 16A $ , , • 16B $ , , • Total taxable distributions from non-complying trusts 16C $ , , • Income Note: If any total is a loss, put a minus sign in the last box provided. 3 Attach your summary of earnings showing any amendments, your Working for Families Tax Credits form and any other information required, to the top of this page. 17Did you receive any overseas income? Staple proof of overseas tax paid and a letter detailing any overseas losses to the top of page 3. No Go to Question 18Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 19 in the guide. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income 17A $ , , • 17B $ , , • If your total overseas income includes a withdrawal and/or transfer from a foreign superannuation scheme, please read page 20 in the guide and tick Box 17C if applicable. 17C 18Did you receive any partnership income? Exclude any income/losses shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22 or 24 as appropriate. No Go to Question 19Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 25 in the guide. Total partnership tax creditsTotal active partnership income 18A $ , , • 18B $ , , • 19Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? Exclude any income/loss shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22 and 24. No Go to Question 20Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 25 in the guide. Total LTC tax credits 19A $ , , • Total active LTC income - if this amount is a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. 19B $ , , • Non-allowable deductions this year 19C $ , , • Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 19D $ , , • Adjusted LTC income Either add Boxes 19B and 19C or subtract Box 19D from 19B. Print your answer in Box 19E. 19E $ , , • 20Tax credit and income subtotal Add the blue Boxes 11E, 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A, 18A and 19A. Print the total in Box 20A. Add the dark red Boxes 11B, 12D, 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, 16C, 17B, 18B and 19E. Print the total in Box 20B. Tax credit subtotalIncome subtotal 20A $ , , • 20B $ , , • 21Did you receive a shareholder-employee salary with no tax deducted? No Go to Question 22Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 26 in the guide. Total shareholder-employee salary 21 $ , , • If you did not receive a shareholder-employee salary but may in the future, please tick Box 21A. 21A If you qualify for WfFTC, and you are a major shareholder working full-time without pay for your close company which earns gross income, please read page 26 in the guide and tick this box if it applies to you. 21B 22Did you receive any rents? No Go to Question 23Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 27 in the guide. Net rents 22 $ , , • 23Did you receive income from self-employment? Don't include any income from your summary of earnings here. No Go to Question 24Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 27 in the guide. Self-employed net income 23 $ , , • 4 24Did you receive any other income? This includes income from any taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in your return. No Go to Question 25Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 29 in the guide. Total other net income Please put name of payer above, and type of income below 24 $ , , • Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) credit 24A $ , , • Refer to the RLWT update on the notes page (IR3N). 25Total income Total income Add Boxes 20B, 21, 22, 23 and 24. Print your answer in Box 25. 25 $ , , • 26Are you claiming other expenses against your income? Note: If you've claimed expenses somewhere else in this return, do not show them here. No Go to Question 27Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 31 in the guide. If you paid someone to complete your return, print that person's name in the panel below. Please put first names above, and surname below Total other expenses claimed 26 27Income after expenses Income after expenses Subtract Box 26 from Box 25. Print your answer in Box 27. Use this amount to work out your tax credits. 27 28Are you claiming net losses brought forward? No Go to Question 29Ye sPrint the net loss amounts in Boxes 28A and 28B. See page 32 in the guide. Amount brought forwardAmount claimed this year 28A - 28B - 29Your taxable income Taxable income Subtract Box 28B from Box 27. Print your answer in Box 29. 29 Tax credits Claim a tax credit for donations on the Tax credit claim form (IR526). Don't send in donation receipts with this IR3 return. See page 33 in the guide. 30If your income at Question 27 is between $24,000 and $48,000, you may be able to claim the independent earner tax credit (IETC). See our website at www.ird.govt.nz (search keyword: IETC) and the IR3N or pages 33 to 35 in the guide to see if you're eligible and calculate your IETC. 30AAre you eligible for this tax credit? To have the IETC included in your assessment you must tick "Yes" below. 30A Ye s No Go to Question 31 30BIf you received excluded overseas income, complete the dates you received this below. StartEnd 30B Day Month Year Day Month Year Print the number of qualifying months here. 30C Print your tax credit here. 30 31Do you have excess imputation credits brought forward? No Go to Question 32Ye sSee page 35 of the guide. Print the total here. 31 - 5 32Please use the tax calculation worksheet on the IR3N or page 38 in the guide to work out the amount of tax to pay or amount to be refunded. Tax on taxable income Transfer the tax on taxable income from Box 2 of the worksheet to Box 32. 32 Residual income tax Transfer the residual income tax from Box 12 of the worksheet to Box 32A. 32A (Tick one) Credit Debit Tax calculation result Transfer the tax calculation result from Box 14 of the worksheet to Box 32B. 32B (Tick one) Credit Debit 33 Are you entitled to claim an early payment discount? See page 42 in the guide. 33 Ye s No Refunds and/or transfers Note: If you or your spouse or partner (or ex-spouse or ex-partner) received any Working for Families Tax Credits during the year, this isn't your final refund or tax to pay. You'll need to confirm the details on the Working for Families Tax Credits form and, if there are any changes, staple it to the top of page 3 of this return. 34Getting a refund - how do you want it paid? Copy your refund from Box 32B to Box 34. 34 Print any overpayment of 2019 provisional tax you would like refunded in Box 34A. 34A Add Box 34 and Box 34A and print your answer in Box 34B. 34B Do you want your refund transferred: to 2019 provisional tax? Print the amount in Box 34C. 34C to this year's student loan? Print the amount in Box 34D. 34D to someone else's income tax account? Are you "associated"? See page 45 in the guide. 34E Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving your refundTheir IRD number 34F Year ended 31 MarchAmount 34G to someone else's 2018 student loan? Are you "associated"? See page 45 in the guide. 34H Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving your refundTheir IRD number 34I Amount 34J Other - If you want your: • refund transferred to another tax type, or • overpaid 2019 provisional tax transferred to pay your 2018 residual income tax debt staple a note to the top of the front page of this return. Subtract Boxes 34C, 34D, 34G and 34J from Box 34B. Print your answer in Box 34K. 34K The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your bank account. Please check the correct bank account number is preprinted at Question 8. If you bank account isn't preprinted, please include it at Question 8. Tax calculation 6 March 2018 40 OFFICE Operator Corresp Payment Return AI Yes No Scanner U S E O N LY code indicator attached cat 2019 provisional tax 35Is the amount in Box 32A a debit of more than $2,500? No Go to Question 36Ye sYou may have to pay 2019 provisional tax. See page 46 in the guide, then print the details below. • Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 35A. 35A • Print your 2019 provisional tax payment in Box 35B. 35B 00 36Did you at any time during the income year hold rights in a foreign company, unit trust, superannuation scheme or life insurance policy for which disclosure is required? 36 NoGo to Question 37Ye sSee page 48 in the guide. 37Is this return for a part-year? 37 NoGo to Question 38Ye sSee page 48 in the guide. If "Yes", tick the situation below that applies to you. 37A You arrived in (or returned to) New Zealand and you're now a tax resident You left New Zealand permanently (for more than 325 days) You're a student loan borrower and you've left New Zealand for 184 days or more You were declared bankrupt This return is for a deceased person to the date of their death Your balance date changed during the year. Print the start and end dates the return is for in the spaces provided. 37B Fromto 37C Day Month Year Day Month Year Notice of assessment and declaration 38Please see page 48 in the guide, then read and sign the following: The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2018 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. It is also a correct statement of my earnings for the purposes of the Accident Compensation Act 2001. Signature Date / / Please make a copy of this return for your own records. There are penalties for not filing a tax return or for filing a false return. See page 7 in the guide. 39What to do next • Attach your summary of earnings and/or Working for Families Tax Credits form to your return if you've made any changes on them. • Print your name and IRD number on all other papers attached to your return. • Send us your return by 7 July 2018, unless you have an extension of time or a non-standard balance date. • Send your completed return in the envelope supplied, or to the address shown below. Keep a copy for your records. • If you have tax to pay, you need to pay it by 7 February 2019 to avoid any penalties (if you have a tax agent, see page 49 in the guide). You can pay earlier if you want to. If you want to pay now, staple your cheque to the front page of this return. Privacy To find out what may happen to the information you provide on this form, see page 58 in the guide. Accident Compensation Act 2001 See page 55 in the guide to understand how the information you provide on this form will be used for ACC purposes. Send this form to: Inland Revenue PO Box 39090 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045