IR3 2020 Individual tax return Accident Compensation Act 2001 • Income Tax Act 2007 • Tax Administration Act 1994 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020 •You can file your return in myIR. •To see if you need to complete this return go to ird.govt.nz/end-of-year-tax •The 2020 IR3 guide is available on our website. To view a copy go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides 1If your IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 1 2If your correct name is not shown above, print it in full in Box 2. 2 MrMrsMissMs Please put first names above and surname below 3If your correct postal address is not shown above, print the full address in Box 3. Don't print your tax agent's address here. See page 8 in the guide. 3 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town or city below 4If your correct street address is not shown below, print it in full in Box 4. 4 Please put street address above and suburb, city, RD or region below 5If your correct date of birth is not shown below, print it in Box 5. 5 Day Month Year 6If your business industry classification (BIC) code is not shown below or has changed, print it in Box 6. For more information about BIC codes, go to businessdescription.co.nz 6 7If your correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in Box 7. 7 Prefix Phone number 8If your correct bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 8. See page 9 in the guide. 8 Bank Branch Account number Suffix 9Adjustments to your income - student loan and Working for Families Tax Credits customers Please check the income list on our website ird.govt.nz/adjust-income to see if you need to make any adjustments. If you have already told us your end of year adjustments, you don't need to do anything further. If you do have adjustments to make, tick Box 9A, complete an Adjust your income - IR215 form and send it in with your return. See page 9 in the guide. 9A 10You may be a non-resident of New Zealand for tax purposes and may need to complete an IR3NR return instead. See page 9 in the guide. Income Note: If any total is a loss, put a minus sign in the last box provided. 11Did you receive family tax credit from Work and Income? Don't include any payments from Inland Revenue. See page 11 in the guide. No Go to Question 11AYe sEnter the amount from your Summary of Income below. Total family tax credit from Work and Income 11 11ADid you receive income with tax deducted, as shown on your Summary of Income? See page 11 in the guide. No Go to Question 12Ye sCopy the amounts from your Summary of Income to the boxes below. Total PAYE deductedTotal gross income 11A11B ACC earners' levyTo t a l income not liable for ACC earners' levy 11D11C Total tax deducted See page 13 in the guide for a list of income not liable for ACC earners' levy (eg, NZ Super, income-tested benefits, student allowances). 11E 12Did you receive income from schedular payments, as shown on your Summary of Income? See page 14 in the guide. No Go to Question 13Ye sCopy the schedular payment totals from your Summary of Income to Boxes 12A and 12B below. Enter any expenses related to schedular payments in Box 12C (don't include at Box 28) Total tax deducted 12A Total gross payments 12B Expenses related to schedular payments (don't include expenses claimed here at Box 28) 12C Net schedular payments (Subtract Box 12C from Box 12B) 12D 13Did you have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to you? Include any interest from partnerships, look-through companies and/or trusts. Keep your interest statements or certificates. No Go to Question 14Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 15 in the guide. To t a l RW TTotal gross interest 13A13B If any of your interest was received from a partnership, look-through company, trust and/or estate, please tick 13C. 13C 14Did you have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to you or did you receive shares instead of dividends? Include any dividends from partnerships, look-through companies and/or trusts. Keep your dividend statements. No Go to Question 15Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 17 in the guide. Total dividend imputation credits 14 Total dividend RWT creditsTotal gross dividends 14A14B If any of your dividends were received from a partnership, look-through company, trust and/or estate, please tick 14C. 14C 15Did you receive any taxable Māori authority distributions? Keep your distribution statements. No Go to Question 16Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 18 in the guide. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distributions 15A15B 16Did you receive any New Zealand estate or trust income? Exclude interest, dividends and distributions shown at Questions 13, 14, or 15, as appropriate. No Go to Question 17Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 18 in the guide. Total tax paid by trusteesTotal estate or trust income (excluding amount in Box 16C) 16A16B Total taxable distributions from non-complying trusts 16C 17Did you receive any overseas income? Attach proof of overseas tax paid and a letter detailing any overseas losses to the return. No Go to Question 18Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 19 in the guide. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income 17A17B If your total overseas income includes a withdrawal and/or transfer from a foreign superannuation scheme, please read page 20 in the guide and tick Box 17C if applicable. 17C 18Did you receive any partnership income? Exclude any income/losses shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25, or 26 as appropriate. No Go to Question 19Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 25 in the guide. Total partnership tax creditsTotal active partnership income 18A18B 19Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? Exclude any income/loss shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25 and 26. No Go to Question 20Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 25 in the guide. Total LTC tax credits 19A Total active LTC income - if this amount is a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. 19B Non-allowable deductions this year 19C Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 19D Adjusted LTC income Either add Boxes 19B and 19C or subtract Box 19D from 19B. Print your answer in Box 19E. 19E 20Did you receive a shareholder-employee salary with no tax deducted? No Go to Question 21Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 27 in the guide. Total shareholder-employee salary 20 If you did not receive a shareholder-employee salary but may in the future, please tick Box 20A. 20A Shareholder AIM tax credit 20B If you qualify for WfFTC, and you are a major shareholder working full-time without pay for your close company which earns gross income, please read page 27 in the guide and tick Box 20C if it applies to you. 20C 21Tax credit and income subtotal Add the blue Boxes 11E, 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A, 18A, 19A and 20B. Print the total in Box 21A. Add the dark red Boxes 11B, 12D, 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, 16C, 17B, 18B, 19E and 20. Print the total in Box 21B. Tax credit subtotalIncome subtotal 21A21B 22Did you receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? No Go to Question 23.Ye sPrint the totals below. See page 27 of the guide. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 22A22B Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 22C Not applicable 22D Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxExcess residential rental deductions carried forward 22E22F 23Did you receive any other rents? Don't include any income already shown at Question 22. No Go to Question 24Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 32 in the guide. Net rents 23 24Did you receive income from self-employment? Don't include any income from your summary of income here. No Go to Question 25Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 33 in the guide. Self-employed net income 24 25Did you receive any income from taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in the return? (Do not include any bright-line loss) No Go to Question 26Ye sPrint details here. See page 34 in the guide. Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) creditProfit/loss from sale of property - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 25A 25B 26Did you receive any other income? No Go to Question 27Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 35 in the guide. Total other net income 26 Please put name of payer above, and type of income below 27Total income Total income Add Boxes 21B, 22E, 23, 24, 25B and 26. Print your answer in Box 27. 27 28Are you claiming other expenses against your income? Note: If you've claimed expenses somewhere else in this return, do not show them here. No Go to Question 29Ye sPrint the totals here. See page 37 in the guide. If you paid someone to complete your return, print that person's name in the panel below. Please put first names above, and surname below Total other expenses claimed 28 29Income after expenses Income after expenses Subtract Box 28 from Box 27. Print your answer in Box 29. Use this amount to work out your tax credits. 29 30Are you claiming net losses brought forward? No Go to Question 31Ye sPrint the net loss amounts in Boxes 30A and 30B. See page 38 in the guide. Amount brought forwardAmount claimed this year 30A – 30B – 31Your taxable income Taxable income Subtract Box 30B from Box 29. Print your answer in Box 31. 31 Tax credits Claim a tax credit for donations on the Tax credit claim form - IR526. Don't send in donation receipts with this IR3 return. See page 39 in the guide. 32If your income at Question 29 is between $24,000 and $48,000, you may be able to claim the independent earner tax credit (IETC). See our website at ird.govt.nz/IETC or pages 39 to 41 in the guide to see if you're eligible and calculate your IETC. 32AAre you eligible for this tax credit? To have the IETC included in your assessment you must tick "Yes" below. 32A Ye s No Go to Question 33 32BIf you received excluded overseas income, complete the dates you received this below. StartEnd 32B Day Month Year Day Month Year Print the number of qualifying months here. 32C Print your tax credit here. 32 33Do you have excess imputation credits brought forward? No Go to Question 34Ye sSee page 41 of the guide. Print the total here. 33 – Tax calculation 34Please use the tax calculation worksheet on page 44 in the guide to work out the amount of tax to pay or amount to be refunded. Tax on taxable income Transfer the tax on taxable income from Box 2 of the worksheet to Box 34. 34 Residual income tax Transfer the residual income tax from Box 12 of the worksheet to Box 34A. 34A (Tick one) Credit Debit Tax calculation result Transfer the tax calculation result from Box 14 of the worksheet to Box 34B. 34B (Tick one) Credit Debit 35 Are you entitled to claim an early payment discount? See page 48 in the guide. 35 Ye s No Refunds and/or transfers Note: If you or your spouse or partner (or ex-spouse or ex-partner) received any Working for Families Tax Credits during the year, this isn't your final refund or tax to pay. You'll need to confirm the details on the Working for Families Tax Credits form and, if there are any changes, attach it to your return. 36Getting a refund - how do you want it paid? Copy your refund from Box 34B to Box 36. 36 Print any overpayment of 2021 provisional tax you would like refunded in Box 36A. 36A Add Box 36 and Box 36A and print your answer in Box 36B. 36B Do you want your refund transferred: to 2021 provisional tax? Print the amount in Box 36C. 36C to this year's student loan? Print the amount in Box 36D. 36D to someone else's income tax account? Are you "associated"? See page 51 in the guide. 36E Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving your refundTheir IRD number 36F Year ended 31 MarchAmount 36G to someone else's 2020 student loan? Are you "associated"? See page 51 in the guide. 36H Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving your refundTheir IRD number 36I Amount 36J Other - If you want your: •• refund transferred to another tax type, or •• overpaid 2021 provisional tax transferred to pay your 2020 residual income tax debt staple a note to the top of the front page of this return. Subtract Boxes 36C, 36D, 36G and 36J from Box 36B. Print your answer in Box 36K. 36K The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your bank account. Please check the correct bank account number is preprinted at Question 8. If your bank account isn't preprinted, please include it at Question 8. 2021 provisional tax 37Is the amount in Box 34A a debit of more than $5,000? No Go to Question 38Ye sYou may have to pay 2021 provisional tax. See page 52 in the guide, then print the details below. •• Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 37A. 37A •• Print your 2021 provisional tax payment in Box 37B. 37B 00 38Did you at any time during the income year hold rights in a foreign company, unit trust, superannuation scheme or life insurance policy for which disclosure is required? 38 NoGo to Question 39Ye sSee page 54 in the guide. 39Is this return for a part-year? 39 NoGo to Question 40Ye sSee page 54 in the guide. If "Yes", tick the situation below that applies to you. 39A You arrived in (or returned to) New Zealand and you're now a tax resident You left New Zealand permanently (for more than 325 days) You're a student loan borrower and you've left New Zealand for 184 days or more You were declared bankrupt This return is for a deceased person to the date of their death Your balance date changed during the year. Print the start and end dates the return is for in the spaces provided. 39B Fromto 39C Day Month Year Day Month Year Notice of assessment and declaration 40Please see page 55 in the guide, then read and sign the following: The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2020 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. It is also a correct statement of my earnings for the purposes of the Accident Compensation Act 2001. Signature Date / / Please make a copy of this return for your own records. There are penalties for not filing a tax return or for filing a false return. See page 7 in the guide. 41What to do next •• Attach your summary of income and/or Working for Families Tax Credits form to your return if you've made any changes on them. •• Print your name and IRD number on all other papers attached to your return. •• Send us your return by 7 July 2020, unless you have an extension of time or a non-standard balance date. •• Send your completed return in the envelope supplied, or to the address shown below. Keep a copy for your records. •• If you have tax to pay, you need to pay it by 7 February 2021 to avoid any penalties (if you have a tax agent, see page 55 in the guide). You can pay earlier if you want to. If you want to pay now, you can make payments: – electronically, through your bank - we recommend you pay electronically using the "pay tax" function provided by most New Zealand banks – by credit card online through our website. Privacy To find out what may happen to the information you provide on this form, see page 64 in the guide. Accident Compensation Act 2001 See page 61 in the guide to understand how the information you provide on this form will be used for ACC purposes. Send this form to: Inland Revenue, PO BOX 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt, 5045 Please keep a copy for your records. OFFICE USE ONLY 42 Correspondence indicatorAccounts Included?Ye sNo March 2020