IR3 2023 Individual tax return Accident Compensation Act 2001 • Income Tax Act 2007 • Tax Administration Act 1994 1 April 2022 to 31 March 2023 •You can complete your return in myIR. •To see if you need to complete this return go to ird.govt.nz/end-of-year-tax •The 2023 IR3 guide is available on our website. To view a copy go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides 1If your IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. (8 digit numbers start in the second Box ) 1 2If your correct name is not shown above, print it in full in Box 2. 2 MrMrsMissMs Put first names above and surname below 3If your correct postal address is not shown above, print the full address in Box 3. Do not print your tax preparers address here. See the guide for further details. 3 Put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, Box lobby or RD and town or city below 4If your correct street address is not shown below, print it in full in Box 4. 4 Put street address above and suburb, city, RD or region below 5If your correct date of birth is not shown below, print it in Box 5. 5 Day Month Year 6If your business industry classification (BIC) code is not shown below or has changed, print it in Box 6. For more information about BIC codes, go to businessdescription.co.nz 6 7If your correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in Box 7. 7 Prefix Phone number 8If your correct bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 8. See the guide for further details. 8 Bank Branch Account number Suffix 9Adjustments to your income - student loan and Working for Families customers Check the income list on our website ird.govt.nz/adjust-income to see if you need to make any adjustments. If you have already told us your end of year adjustments, you do not need to do anything further. If you do have adjustments to make, tick Box 9A, complete an Adjust your income - IR215 form and send it in with your return. See the guide for further details. 9A 10You may be a non-resident of New Zealand for tax purposes and may need to complete an IR3NR return instead. See the guide for further details. Name Address Income Note: If any total is a loss, put a minus sign in the last Box provided. 11Did you receive family tax credit from Work and Income? Do not include any payments from Inland Revenue. See the guide for further details. No Go to Question 11AYe sEnter the amount from your Summary of Income below. Total family tax credit from Work and Income 11 11ADid you receive income with tax deducted, as shown on your Summary of Income? See the guide for further details. No Go to Question 12Ye sCopy the amounts from your Summary of Income to the Boxes below. Total PAYE deductedTotal gross income 11A11B ACC earners' levyTo t a l income not liable for ACC earners' levy 11D11C Total tax deducted See the guide for a list of income not liable for ACC earners' levy (for example NZ Super, income-tested benefits and student allowances). 11E 12Did you receive income from schedular payments, as shown on your Summary of Income? See the guide for further details. No Go to Question 13Ye sCopy the schedular payment totals from your Summary of Income to Boxes 12A and 12B below. Enter any expenses related to schedular payments in Box 12C (do not include at Box 29) Total tax deducted 12A Total gross payments 12B Expenses related to schedular payments (do not include expenses claimed here at Box 29) 12C Net schedular payments (Subtract Box 12C from Box 12B) 12D 13Did you have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to you? Include any interest from partnerships, look-through companies and/or trusts. Keep your interest statements or certificates. No Go to Question 14Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. To t a l RW TTotal gross interest 13A13B If any of your interest was received from a partnership, look-through company, trust and/or estate, tick 13C. 13C 14Did you have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to you or did you receive shares instead of dividends? Include any dividends from partnerships, look-through companies and/or trusts. Keep your dividend statements. No Go to Question 15Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total dividend imputation credits 14 Total dividend RWT creditsTotal gross dividends 14A14B If any of your dividends were received from a partnership, look-through company, trust and/or estate, tick 14C. 14C 15Did you receive any taxable Māori authority distributions? Keep your distribution statements. No Go to Question 16Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distributions 15A15B 16Did you receive any New Zealand estate or trust income? Exclude interest, dividends and distributions shown at Questions 13, 14, or 15, as appropriate. No Go to Question 17Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total tax paid by trusteesTotal estate or trust income (excluding amount in Box 16C) 16A16B Total taxable distributions from non-complying trusts 16C 17Did you receive any overseas income? Complete an Overseas income summary - IR1261 form and attach it to this return. No Go to Question 18Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income 17A17B If your total overseas income includes a withdrawal and/or transfer from a foreign superannuation scheme, see the guide and tick Box 17C if applicable. 17C 18Did you receive any partnership income? Exclude any income/losses shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25, or 27 as appropriate. No Go to Question 19Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total partnership tax creditsTotal active partnership income 18A18B 19Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? Exclude any income/loss shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25 and 27. No Go to Question 20Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total LTC tax credits 19A Total active LTC income - if this amount is a loss, put a minus sign in the last Box. 19B Non-allowable deductions this year 19C Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 19D Adjusted LTC income Either add Boxes 19B and 19C or subtract Box 19D from 19B. Print your answer in Box 19E. 19E 20Did you receive a shareholder-employee salary with no tax deducted? No Go to Question 21Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total shareholder-employee salary 20 If you did not receive a shareholder-employee salary but may in the future, tick Box 20A. 20A Shareholder AIM tax credit 20B If you qualify for Wf F, and you are a major shareholder working full-time without pay for your close company which earns gross income, see the guide and tick Box 20C if it applies to you. 20C 21Tax credit and income subtotal Add the blue Boxes 11E, 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A, 18A, 19A and 20B. Print the total in Box 21A. Add the dark red Boxes 11B, 12D, 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, 16C, 17B, 18B, 19E and 20. Print the total in Box 21B. Tax credit subtotalIncome subtotal 21A21B 22Did you receive any income or incur any expenses from residential property? No Go to Question 23.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Gross residential rental incomeNet bright-line profit (excluding losses) 22B Total combined residential income. Add Boxes 22A, 22B, and 22C. Print the total in Box 22D. 22D Excess residential rental deductions brought forward 22F Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 22H 22A Other residential income 22C Residential rental deductions 22E Residential rental deductions claimed this year 22G Excess residential rental deductions carried forward 22I 23.Did you incur any interest from residential property? No Go to Question 24.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Total interest on residential propertyInterest expense claimed 23A $ 23B $ Reason for interest expense claimed 23C A Māori exempt company or not a residential land company New build exemption Certain schedule 15 exclusions or property not in NZ Development or land business exemption Loans drawn down prior to 27 March 2021 Emergency, transitional, social or council housing Approved build-to-rent exclusion 24Did you receive any other rents? Do not include any income already shown at Question 22. No Go to Question 25Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Net rents 24 25Did you receive income from self-employment? Do not include any income from your Summary of Income here. No Go to Question 26Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Self-employed net income 25 26Did you receive any income from taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in the return? (Do not include any bright-line loss) No Go to Question 27Ye sPrint details here. See the guide for further details. Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) creditProfit/loss from sale of property - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last Box 26A 26B 27Did you receive any government subsidy? Do not include subsidy amounts here which have been included in the gross earnings or schedular payments section of your IR3 return. No Go to Question 28Ye sPrint the details here. See the guide for further details. Total Government subsidies 27 28Did you receive any other income? No Go to Question 29Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total other net income 28 Put name of payer above, and type of income below 29Total income Total income Add Boxes 21B, 22H, 24, 25, 26B, 27 and 28. Print your answer in Box 29. 29 30Are you claiming other expenses against your income? Note: If you've claimed expenses somewhere else in this return, do not show them here. No Go to Question 31Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. If you paid someone to complete your return, print that person's name in the panel below. Total other expenses claimed 30 Put first names above, and surname below 31Income after expenses Income after expenses Subtract Box 30 from Box 29. Print your answer in Box 31. Use this amount to work out your tax credits. 31 32Are you claiming net losses brought forward? No Go to Question 33Ye sPrint the net loss amounts in Boxes 32A and 32B. See the guide for further details. Amount brought forwardAmount claimed this year 32A – 32B – 33Your taxable income Taxable income Subtract Box 32B from Box 31. Print your answer in Box 33. 33 Tax credits Claim a tax credit for donations on the Tax credit claim form - IR526. Do not send in donation receipts with this IR3 return. See the guide for further details. 34If your income at Question 31 is between $24,000 and $48,000, you may be able to claim the independent earner tax credit (IETC). See our website at ird.govt.nz/IETC or refer to the guide to see if you're eligible and calculate your IETC. 34A Are you eligible for this tax credit? To have the IETC included in your assessment you must tick "Yes" below. 34A Ye s No Go to Question 35 34BIf you received excluded overseas income, complete the dates you received this below. StartEnd 34B Day Month Year Day Month Year Print the number of qualifying months here. 34C Print your tax credit here. 34 35Do you have excess imputation credits brought forward? No Go to Question 36Ye sPrint the total here. See the guide for further details. 35 – Portfolio Investment Entity calculation 36Did you receive any Portfolio Investment Entity (PIE) income? No Go to Question 37Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total PIE deductionsTotal PIE Income/Loss 36A 36B PIE calculation outcome Use the PIE worksheet in the guide to work out your PIE calculation outcome. Transfer Box 5 of the worksheet to Box 36C. 36C Tax calculation 37Use the tax calculation worksheet in the guide to work out the amount of tax to pay or amount to be refunded. Tax on taxable income Transfer the tax on taxable income from Box 2 of the worksheet to Box 37. 37 Residual income tax Transfer the residual income tax from Box 14 of the worksheet to Box 37A. 37A (Tick one) Credit Debit Tax calculation result Transfer the tax calculation result from Box 16 of the worksheet to Box 37B. 37B (Tick one) Credit Debit 38Are you entitled to claim an early payment discount? See the guide for further details. 38 Ye s No Refunds and/or transfers Note: If you, your partner, or ex-partner, received any Working for Families during the year, this is not your final refund or tax to pay. You can check and update your Working for Families details in myIR. 39Getting a refund - how do you want it paid? Copy your refund from Box 37B to Box 39. 39 Do you want your refund transferred: to 2024 provisional tax? Print the amount in Box 39A. 39A to this year's student loan? Print the amount in Box 39B. 39B to someone else's income tax account? Are you "associated"? See the guide for further details. 39C Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving your refundTheir IRD number 39D Year ended 31 MarchAmount 39E to someone else's 2023 student loan? Are you "associated"? See the guide for further details. 39F Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving your refundTheir IRD number 39G Amount 39H Other - If you want your: •• refund transferred to another tax type, or •• overpaid 2024 provisional tax transferred to pay your 2023 residual income tax debt staple a note to the top of the front page of this return. Subtract Boxes 39A, 39B, 39E and 39H from Box 39. Print your answer in Box 39I. 39I The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your bank account. Check the correct bank account is preprinted at Question 8. If your bank account is not preprinted, include it at Question 8. 2024 provisional tax 40Is the amount in Box 37A a debit of more than $5,000? No Go to Question 41Ye sYou may have to pay 2024 provisional tax. See the guide, then print the details below. •• Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 40A. 40A •• Print your 2024 provisional tax payment in Box 40B. 40B 00 41Did you at any time during the income year hold rights in a foreign company, unit trust, superannuation scheme or life insurance policy for which disclosure is required? 41 NoGo to Question 42Ye sSee the guide for further details. 42Is this return for a part-year? 42 NoGo to Question 43Ye sRefer to the guide. If "Yes", tick the situation below that applies to you. 42A You arrived in (or returned to) New Zealand and you're now a tax resident You left New Zealand permanently (for more than 325 days) You're a student loan borrower and you've left New Zealand for 184 days or more You were declared bankrupt This return is for a deceased person to the date of their death Your balance date changed during the year. Print the start and end dates the return is for in the spaces provided. 42B Fromto 42C Day Month Year Day Month Year Notice of assessment and declaration 43Refer to the guide, then read and sign the following: The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2023 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. It is also a correct statement of my earnings for the purposes of the Accident Compensation Act 2001. Signature Date / / Make a copy of this return for your own records. There are penalties for not completing a tax return or for filing a false return. See the guide for further details. 44What to do next •• Attach your summary of income and/or Working for Families form to your return if you've made any changes on them. •• Print your name and IRD number on all other papers attached to your return. •• Send us your return by 7 July 2023, unless you have an extension of time or a non-standard balance date. •• Send your completed return to the address shown below. Keep a copy for your records. •• If you have tax to pay, you need to pay it by 7 February 2024 to avoid any penalties (if you have a tax agent, see the guide for further details). You can pay earlier if you want to. If you want to pay now, you can make payments: – ele ctronically, through your bank - we recommend you pay electronically using the "pay tax" function provided by most New Zealand banks, or – by cr edit card online through our website. Privacy To find out what may happen to the information you provide on this form, see the guide for further details. Accident Compensation Act 2001 Refer to the guide to understand how the information you provide on this form will be used for ACC purposes. Send this form to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt, 5045 Keep a copy for your records. OFFICE USE ONLY 45 Correspondence indicatorAccounts Included?Ye sNo March 2023