1 IR330C October 2023 Tax rate notification for contractors Use this form if you’re a contractor receiving schedular payments. If you’re receiving salary or wages as an employee, you’ll need to use the Tax code declaration - IR330 form. If you receive schedular payments you will receive an invoice for your ACC levies directly from ACC. Once completed: Contractor Give this form to the person paying you. Payer Do not send this form to Inland Revenue. You must keep this completed IR330C with your business records for seven years following the last schedular payment you make to the person or entity. 1. Your details Full Name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) If you don’t have: • your IRD number you can find it in myIR or on letters or statements from us. • an IRD number go to ird.govt.nz/irdnumber to find out how to apply for one. 2. Your tax rate You must complete a separate Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C for each source of contracting income Refer to the flowchart on page 2 and enter your tax rate to one decimal point here. % Refer to the table on page 3 and enter your schedular payment activity number here. Your tax code will always be: WT 3. Declaration Name Designation or title (if applicable) For example, director, partner, executive office holder, manager, duly authorised person Signature 2 0 Day Month Year Give this completed form to your payer. If you don’t complete sections 1 and 3 your payer must deduct tax from your pay at the no-notification rate of 45%, except for non-resident contractor companies where it’s 20%. Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities or your entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you don’t. We may also exchange information about you with: • s ome government agencies • a nother country, if we have an information supply agreement with them • S tatistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask to see the personal information we hold about you, we’ll show you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Contact us on 0800 377 774 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to ird.govt.nz/privacy 2 Schedular payments are payments made to people who are not employees but are contractors. This includes independent contractors, labour- only contractors and self-employed contractors. You’re receiving schedular payments if you’re not an employee and the type of work you’re receiving a payment for is an activity listed on page 3. If you aren’t ordinarily required to have tax deducted from payments you receive you can choose to have tax deducted. This will be treated as schedular payments, if the person paying you agrees. You will need to get their agreement in writing. Use the flow chart below to work out what tax rate to use Are you a non- resident entertainer or professional sportsperson visiting New Zealand? Do you have a tailored tax rate certificate? (see A) Your tax rate will be 20% Use the rate on the certificate Are you a non- resident for tax purposes or do you hold a temporary entry class visa? Do you want to choose your tax rate? Use the standard tax rate for the activity type you do (page 3) Do you want to choose your tax rate? You can choose a specific rate for your situation but it cannot be lower than 10%. Use our estimation tool for contractors at ird.govt.nz/tools-calculators. Use the standard tax rate for the activity type you do (page 3) You can choose a specific rate for your situation but it cannot be lower than 15%. Use our estimation tool for contractors at ird.govt.nz/tools-calculators NoNoNoNo Ye sYe sYe sYe s NoYe s If you have a tailored tax rate (TTR) enter this on page 1 and show your original TTR certificate to your payer. A TTR is a tax rate worked out to suit your individual circumstances. You may want a TTR if the minimum tax rate that applies to you will result in you paying too much tax. For example, if you have business expenses that will lower the amount of tax you need to pay on your income. You can apply for a tailored tax rate in myIR or by completing a Tailored tax code application - IR23BS form which you can download at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides If you’re a non-resident contractor the application process is different. For more information see ird.govt.nz/apply-for-exemption-nr-contractor BIf you don’t want tax deducted from your schedular payments, you may be able to apply for a certificate of exemption (COE) in myIR or by completing the Request for PAYE exemption on schedular payments - IR332 form on our website. If you’re a resident contractor paid by a labour hire business under a labour hire arrangement you cannot use a COE for these payments. You may be able to apply for a 0% tailored tax rate instead. You can complete an IR23BS in myIR. For more information see ird.govt.nz/coe-schedular-payments Non-residents You can apply for an Exemption from non-resident contractors’ tax by sending a completed Non-resident contractors’ tax (NRCT) exemption application form - IR197 and a copy of your contract to nr.contractors@ird.govt.nz or as a secure mail in myIR. For more information see ird.govt.nz/non-resident-contractors or call us on +64 4 890 3056 Non-resident entertainers The following may be entitled to an exemption from tax: • non-resident entertainers taking part in a cultural programme sponsored by a government or promoted by an overseas non-profit cultural organisation • n on-resident sports people officially representing an overseas national sports body. For more information see ird.govt.nz/nr-entertainers You can contact us by email at nr.entertainers@ird.govt.nz or phone +64 9 984 4329 3 Schedular payment tax rates If you are receiving payment for any of the types of work listed below, enter the activity number in the box at section 2 on page 1. The description below may not include all activities. For a more detailed description see schedule 4 of the Income Tax Act 2007. You’ll generally be required to complete an income tax return at the end of the tax year. Activity number Activity description Standard tax rate – % No-notification rate – % 1ACC personal service rehabilitation payments (attendant care, home help, childcare, attendant care services related to training for independence and attendant care services related to transport for independence) paid under the Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation Compensation Act 2001 10.545 2Agricultural contracts for maintenance, development, or other work on farming or agricultural land (not to be used where CAE code applies) 1545 3Agricultural, horticultural or viticultural contracts by any type of contractor (individual, partnership, trust or company) for work or services rendered under contract or arrangement for the supply of labour, or substantially for the supply of labour on land in connection with fruit crops, orchards, vegetables or vineyards 1545 4Apprentice jockeys or drivers1545 5Cleaning office, business, institution, or other premises (except residential) or cleaning or laundering plant, vehicle, furniture etc 2045 6Commissions to insurance agents and sub-agents and salespeople 2045 7Company directors' (fees)3345 8Contracts wholly or substantially for labour only in the building industry2045 9Demonstrating goods or appliances2545 10Entertainers (New Zealand resident only) such as lecturers, presenters, participants in sporting events, and radio, television, stage and film performers 2045 11Examiners (fees payable) 3345 12Fishing boat work for profit-share (supply of labour only)2045 13Forestry or bush work of all kinds, or flax planting or cutting1545 14Freelance contributions to newspapers, journals (eg, articles, photographs, cartoons) or for radio, television or stage productions 2545 15Gardening, grass or hedge cutting, or weed or vermin destruction (for an office, business or institution) 2045 16Honoraria3345 17Modelling2045 18Non-resident entertainers and professional sportspeople visiting New Zealand20N/A 19Payment by a labour hire business to any person (eg individual, partnership, trust or company) performing work or services directly for a client of the labour hire business or a client of another person, under a labour hire arrangement 2045 20Payments for: 1545 – caretaking or acting as a guard – mail contracting – milk delivery – refuse removal, street or road cleaning – transport of school children 21Proceeds from sales of: 2545 – eels (not retail sales) – greenstone (not retail sales) – sphagnum moss (not retail sales) – whitebait (not retail sales) – wild deer, pigs or goats or parts of these animals 22Public office holders (fees)3345 23Shearing or droving (not to be used where CAE code applies)1545 24Television, video or film: on-set and off-set production processes (New Zealand residents only)2045 25Voluntary schedular payments2045 If you are a non-resident contractor receiving a contract payment for a contract activity or service and none of the above activities are applicable, then: 26Non-resident contractor (and not a company)1545 27Non-resident contractor (and a company)1520 Note: If you need help choosing your tax rate use the estimation tool at ird.govt.nz/tax-rate-schedular-payments 4