Employer's guide Information to help you with your responsibilities as an employer IR335 November 2024 BLANK 1ird.govt.nz The information in this guide is based on current tax laws at the time of printing. If you have anyone working for you, it's your responsibility to deduct tax and other amounts from payments you make to them, as well as giving information to us. We explain what you're required to do and what happens if you do not comply. If you have not yet registered as an employer, read our First-time employer's guide - IR333. It tells you what you need to know before you register as an employer. If you need help with any of your employer responsibilities, or you have questions about anything in this guide, please call us on 0800 377 772. Work permits If you're thinking of hiring someone from overseas, they may need a work permit. Only citizens and permanent residents of New Zealand and Australia may work in New Zealand without one. Note: In some cases a visitor or student permit or other entitlement may allow employment in New Zealand. For more information about this and work permits please go to www.immigration.govt.nz or call the New Zealand Immigration Service on 0508 558 855. Changes to note From 31 July 2024 • • Income thresholds have been changed affecting the amount of PAYE and independent earner tax credit (IETC). From 1 April 2024, the following changes came into effect: • • The Student Loan repayment threshold has increased to $24,128. • • The ACC earners’ levy has increased to $1.60 per $100 (1.60%). Levies are only deducted on earnings up to a maximum of $142,283 and the total maximum levy payable is $2,276.52. ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online from the myIR login screen and we'll send them to the email address we hold for you. How to get our forms and guides You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Introduction 2 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Part 1 - Your responsibilities as an employer An explanation of your day-to-day responsibilities, what is an employee, and what you may have to deduct from your employees' wages. Part 2 - Record keeping and making payments Learn what records you need to keep, how often to make payments to us, the forms you need to complete, and what to do if you stop employing staff. Part 3 - Other payments Employers may make payments to their workers other than normal wages. Find out about the tax treatment of these other types of payments. Part 4 - Penalties Learn what the penalties and charges are if you fail to meet your tax responsibilities. Part 5 - Special types of workers Find out how to deduct tax from the payments you make to special types of workers. Part 6 - Services you may need Our services, contact details and other useful information. How to use this guide 3ird.govt.nz Contents Part 1 - Your responsibilities as an employer 5 Who is an employee? 5 Amounts you'll need to deduct 6 Deducting PAYE 6 Tax codes 6 Non-notified rate - ND tax code 7 Tailored tax codes, rates and student loan special deduction rate certificates 8 Schedular payments 10 If a worker has a Certificate of exemption - IR331 11 ACC earners' levy 11 KiwiSaver 12 Student loan deductions 12 Child support deductions 13 Deducting arrears 15 Payroll giving 15 Employer's superannuation cash contribution (employer contribution) and ESCT 16 Records you need to keep 20 PAYE intermediaries 20 Manual record keeping 20 Part 2 - Record keeping and making payments 20 Paying PAYE to Inland Revenue 21 New Employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K 22 Payday filing 22 Completing your Employment information return - IR348 23 Child support codes 26 Correcting your employment information after it's filed 27 Electronic filing in myIR 29 How to pay your deductions 29 When an employee stops working for you 29 If you've stopped or are about to stop providing fringe benefits 30 If you stop employing staff 30 If you’re ceasing your business 30 Part 3 - Other payments 31 Allowances 31 Lump sums (extra pays) 36 Employee Share Scheme benefits 40 Regular bonuses 41 Holiday pay 42 Loss of earnings compensation paid by ACC 44 Honoraria 44 Payments to school trustees 44 Life insurance and personal accident premiums 44 Prize money paid at sporting events and competitions 45 Part 4 - Penalties 46 Late filing penalty 46 Interest 46 Late payment penalties 46 Non-electronic filing penalty 47 Shortfall penalties 47 Non-payment of employer deductions penalty 47 Failing to make deductions 47 Failing to pay deductions 48 Evasion 48 Additional child support penalties 48 Prejudice 48 Employees start and finish information penalties 48 Audit procedures 49 If you disagree 49 4 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Part 5 - Special types of workers 50 Casual agricultural workers 50 Commission agents 50 Directors 50 Drovers and musterers 50 Election-day workers 50 Fishers 51 Foreign fishing workers 51 IR56 taxpayers 51 Jockeys and trotting drivers 51 Musicians, dance bands and orchestras 51 Non-residents 52 Partners in a partnership 53 Piece-workers and outworkers 53 Recognised seasonal workers 54 Television and screen production industry workers 54 Shareholder-employees in close companies 54 Shearers, shearing shed hands and shearing contractors 55 Spouses or partners 55 Subsidised workers 56 Workers engaged in ‘activity in the community’ projects 56 Workers under labour-only contracts in the building industry 56 Working owners of a look-through company 57 Part 6 - Services you may need 58 Need to speak with us? 58 0800 self-service numbers 58 How to get our forms and guides 58 Voice ID 58 Supporting businesses in our community 58 Business Tax Update 58 Tax Information Bulletin (TIB) 58 Privacy 59 If you have a complaint about our service 59 Responsibilities 5ird.govt.nz Part 1 - Your responsibilities as an employer Here, we explain the tax codes and various amounts you'll need to deduct from your employee's pay. You must pay these amounts to us by the due dates. Who is an employee? It's very important you're sure the people who work for you are your employees, or if they're self- employed. This is because tax, KiwiSaver, student loan and accident compensation laws treat the 2 groups of people differently. You're responsible for your employees' tax deductions. It's illegal to treat a true employee as self-employed to avoid deducting tax. If you do this, you may be prosecuted, fined, and you will still have to pay the amount of PAYE (pay as you earn) you should have deducted. In most cases it’s clear if someone is an employee. Generally, if you control how and when the person's work is done, the person is your employee. If you answer yes to all or most of the following questions, the worker is probably your employee. • • Do they have to do the work, rather than being able to hire someone to help? • • Can you tell them what to do on the job, and when and how to do it? • • Do you pay them at a set rate (for example, hourly, weekly, monthly, or by unit of production)? A person paid by commission or on a piece-work basis may still be an employee, especially if there are other employees who work on the same basis. • • Can they get overtime or penal rates? • • Do they work set hours, or a given number of hours, each week or month? • • Do they work at your premises, or at a place you specify? • • Do you set the standards for the amount and quality of their work? A person can be self-employed in one line of work and still work for someone else as an employee. Note For more help If you need more help to decide whether your worker is an employee, see Self-employed or an employee? - IR336. If you're still not sure, call us on 0800 377 772. If you decide someone is not an employee, you may still have to deduct tax from any schedular payments you make to them (see page 10). Minimum employment rights and obligations It's important to know what the minimum employment rights and obligations are. Minimum employment rights include the following: • • Every employee must have a written employment agreement. • • Every employee is entitled to 4 weeks paid annual holidays at the end of each year of employment. • • Every employee aged 16 and over must be paid at least the applicable minimum wage. • • Every employee is entitled to 11 public holidays off work on pay if they’re days the employee would normally work. • • Every employee is entitled to 10 paid sick days after 6 months of employment. Employer's obligations include: • • keeping accurate records of the employees' time worked, payments, and holiday and leave entitlements • • keeping signed copies of employment agreements • • taking all practical steps to ensure employees' safety • • providing personal protective equipment for employees • • ensuring the person they're employing has the legal right to work in New Zealand. For more information on the minimum employment rights and obligations go to www.employment.govt.nz/minimum-rights- of-employees or call the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment on 0800 209 020. Responsibilities 6 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Amounts you'll need to deduct PAYE is the basic amount of income tax you take out of your employees' wages whenever you pay them. PAYE includes an ACC earners' levy - see page 11. Besides PAYE, there are other amounts you may have to deduct from your employees' pay - these include student loan repayments, child support and KiwiSaver deductions. Deducting PAYE You can use the PAYE calculator at ird.govt.nz to calculate the amount of tax to deduct from an employee's gross wages. You can also work out how much PAYE you'll have to account for, if you've paid the employee a net amount. Tax codes Tax code declaration All new employees must complete a Tax code declaration - IR330 when they start working for you. Employee's need to read the notes on the IR330 to work out their correct tax code. If an employee’s tax code changes while they are employed by you, they must fill out a new IR330 for you to apply the new code. If you are paying contractors schedular payments, they will need to complete the Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C. See page 7 for more details on contractors and schedular payments. You must keep the tax code declarations for 7 years after the last wages payment is made to the employee. If you need extra forms, you can print them from ird.govt.nz photocopy them or order them - see page 58. Employees on the wrong tax code It's important the right tax code is used because it helps your employee avoid a tax bill and or student loan underpayment at the end of the year. We regularly check the details on your Employment information - IR348 to make sure the right amount of tax and student loan repayments are deducted from employees’ salary or wages. When we identify an employee using the wrong tax and/or student loan repayment code, we'll ask you to change it. We'll tell you if employees are using incorrect tax codes and let you know the code they should be on. You'll need to change their tax code to the correct code starting the next pay period, to make sure they pay the correct amount of tax or student loan repayments as quickly as possible. We'll also let the employee know they’re using an incorrect tax code for their circumstances and we've asked you, as their employer, to change it from their next pay period. If any of your employees disagree with this change, ask them to contact us. However, if they provide a new IR330 after receiving the letter, you'll need to deduct according to their elected code. Main employment Most employees have 1 main or highest source of salary or wage income. This includes taxable pensions, benefits and student allowance. An employee can use only 1 main tax code, M or ME for their salary or wage income at any time. Employees repaying their student loan should use the M SL or ME SL tax code - see page 12. The IR330 explains how to select a tax code. When you have the employee's tax code, use the PAYE tables or our online PAYE calculator to work out how much PAYE to deduct from each pay. Secondary employment If an employee is already using a M or ME, M SL or ME SL tax code for their main source of income from a job or a benefit) and has another job, the other job is secondary employment. The employee must complete another IR330 for secondary employment, using one of the secondary tax codes: SB, S, SH, ST or SA. Employees with student loans must use the SB SL, S SL, SH SL, ST SL or SA SL code. Responsibilities 7ird.govt.nz See the PAYE tables for the current secondary tax rates. Employees can choose to have their secondary income taxed at a higher rate than would be deducted if they used the SB or S codes, by selecting SH, ST or SA codes on their IR330. Using the correct secondary tax code reduces the possibility of a tax bill at the end of the year. Unlike the main tax codes, an employee can use the secondary tax codes on more than 1 IR330 at the same time. Example Belinda has one full-time job and 3 part-time jobs. She uses a main tax code for her full-time job and a secondary tax code for her 3 part-time jobs. If an employee works for you using a main tax code and does different work for you outside normal working hours, add the payment for the unrelated work to the normal pay and calculate PAYE on the total payment. However, if the unrelated work covers a different period from the normal pay period, or separate wage records are kept (for example, the work is undertaken in a different department), use the secondary tax code. The employee must fill in a separate IR330 if the secondary code is used. Example Amy works in the spray-painting division of Cars & Cars Ltd between 8 am and 5 pm, Monday to Friday, and is paid fortnightly. She also works between 6 pm and 10 pm, Tuesdays and Thursdays, in the glass division of Cars & Cars Ltd, and is paid monthly. Amy has completed 2 IR330s - the 1 for the spray- painting division using tax code M, and the S tax code for the glass division. Non-notified rate - ND tax code Employees receiving salary and wages If an employee does not give you a completed tax code declaration, deduct PAYE at the non-notified rate. The IR330 must include their: • • name • • IRD number, and • • tax code. You must also deduct tax at the non-notified rate if they do not give you an IR330 at all. The non-notified rate is 46.6% (includes ACC earners' levy). If an employee does not fill in an IR330 form or complete it fully, enter ND as the tax code on your Employment information - IR348. How to calculate PAYE at the non-notified rate 1. Take gross earnings 2. Add the value of taxable allowances if any 3. The total is earnings for PAYE. 4. Work out PAYE at the rate of 46.6% on whole dollars only. Example Basic weekly pay is $385.75. The PAYE on whole dollars is $385 × 46.6% PAYE to be deducted is $179.41. Contractors receiving schedular payments If a contractor does not give you a Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C, you’re required to use the non-notified rate. You must also use this rate if they give you the IR330C without their name and IRD number. The rate you deduct is 45% unless the contractor is a non-resident contractor company where the rate is 20%. You still show the tax code as WT on your Employment information - IR348. If they give you a completed IR330C but have not provided a tax rate, use the standard rate for their activity located on page 3 of the IR330C. For more information on schedular payments see page 10. Responsibilities 8 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE People who receive wages or schedular payments may apply to us for a special rate authorising you to deduct: • • PAYE using a specified code • • tax at a certain rate • • ACC earners’ levy only, or • • student loan repayments at a specified rate. Tailored tax codes, rates and student loan special deduction rate certificates For some employees or other workers, you may have to deduct tax at a special rate, or not deduct tax at all. The employee or worker will give you a certificate showing the rate you should use. If you do not get a certificate, you must deduct the normal rate of tax and other deduction If the certificate authorises you to deduct earners' levy only (no PAYE) the ACC earners’ levy amount should be shown in the PAYE tax column of your employer information. Note \[IN CONFIDENCE\] E xample Responsibilities 9ird.govt.nz Checking the certificate Check the name on the certificate is the person working for you and the IRD number is the same as their IR330 or IR330C. The certificate must: • • be for the current tax year • • show the deduction rate • • show the period it applies for If the employee's tailored tax code/rate certificate expires and it is not replaced by another certificate or an IR330 or IR330C: • • if the employee previously gave you a completed IR330 or IR330C, use the tax code or rate specified • • if the employee has not previously given you an IR330 or IR330C then use the non-notified tax rate until an IR330 or IR330C or new certificate is provided Making deductions Calculate the tax by multiplying the employee's gross pay by the special rate shown. Example An employee's certificate shows the following: PAYE deducted at the rate of 24.6% (includes ACC earners' levy of 1.6%). Gross earnings for pay period are $1,000. PAYE is $246 ($1,000 x 24.6%) If a certificate includes a student loan special deduction rate, use this to calculate the amount to deduct. This replaces the standard student loan deduction. Example An employee's certificate shows the following: PAYE deducted under tax code S SL. Student loan repayments at the rate of 5% Fortnightly gross earnings are $1,000 Student loan deduction is ($1,000 × 5%) = $50. PAYE deduction is $191.00 If the certificate does not include a special deduction rate for an employee with a student loan, continue to deduct these repayments on gross pay over the student loan threshold of $464 per week at 12%. What to show on your Employment information form: • • If the certificate has a tailored rate for PAYE, use STC tax code. • • If the certificate has a special deduction rate for student loans, use the tax code shown on the certificate. • • If the certificate has a tailored rate for PAYE and a rate for student loans, use STC for the tax code. • • If the certificate shows a tailored tax rate for schedular payments, use tax code WT. If you pay a bonus to an employee who has a tailored tax code, you need to deduct tax at the rate shown on the certificate. Note Responsibilities 10 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Schedular payments Schedular payments are payments made to people who are employed on a contract-for-service basis - see page 5 for information to help you work out who is an employee or a contractor. Most contractors can choose the rate of tax to be deducted from their payments if they do not use the standard rate for their activity. The rate they can choose is subject to a minimum rate of: • • 15% for non-residents and those on a temporary entry class visa, and • • 10% for everyone else. Non-resident entertainers and professional sportspeople visiting New Zealand must use 20%. They cannot choose a different rate. The main activities and the standard tax rates are listed on the back of the IR330C. If you're paying someone to do the types of work listed, you must deduct tax from the payments using the rate for the activity. Tax is deducted even if the worker is registered for GST. The only exception is if they provide you with a Certificate of exemption - IR331 - see page 11, or a 0% tailored tax rate certificate. Some types of schedular payments - such as commissions, directors' fees and payments to non- resident contractors - are covered in more detail in Part 5. If the type of work you've hired your contractor to do is not listed on the back of the IR330C you do not need to ask them to complete an IR330C or deduct tax from payments you make to them. Voluntary schedular payments Contractors who otherwise would not be required to have tax deducted from their payments can opt to have tax deducted. They must discuss this with you first and if you agree you must have this agreement in writing. It's recommended the agreement include: • • your name and the name of the contractor • • agreement that all payments made to the contractor will be treated as voluntary schedular payments • • the period this applies to, and • • signature of both you and the contractor. They must also provide you with an IR330C. If they do not choose a tax rate use the standard rate of 20%. Do not deduct ACC earners’ levy, KiwiSaver deductions or student loan repayments from schedular payments – this is the worker's responsibility, not yours. Note Do not deduct tax from schedular payments made: • • to a company, except a company that is: - a non-resident contractor - a non-resident entertainer - receiving payments made to it under certain labour hire arrangements - involved in agriculture, horticulture or viticulture whose work or services are provided under a contract or arrangement for the supply of labour, or substantially for the supply of labour, on land in connection with fruit crops, orchards, vegetables or vineyards. This does not include: • post-harvest facilities for work or services provided • a management entity under a formal management agreement under which the entity is responsible for payment for the work or services provided. • • to a non-resident contractor who is eligible for total relief from tax through a double tax agreement, and/or is present in New Zealand for a total of 92 days or less in any 12-month period • • to or for the contract activities of a non-resident contractor who has been paid $15,000 or less in total from all payers in any 12-month period • • for work or services completed by a public, local or Māori authority • • to a holder of a current certificate of exemption. A worker who is GST-registered will charge GST on goods and services supplied. This means the worker's gross earnings will increase by the GST charged. If the worker gives you taxable supply information, work out and deduct tax on the amount, excluding GST. Responsibilities 11ird.govt.nz Example You receive taxable supply information showing: Cost of labour $ 500.00 Plus GST (15% of $500) $ 75.00 $ 575.00 Calculate tax on GST-exclusive amount: GST-exclusive amount $ 500.00 Less tax (20% of $500) $ 100.00 $ 400.00 Plus GST $ 75.00 Net payment $ 475.00 You deduct tax from the $500. Show the $500 as the gross payment and $100 PAYE in your employment information return. Show WT tax code in your employer information return for a contractor receiving schedular payments. If a worker has a Certificate of exemption - IR331 People who are in business for themselves, and who receive a schedular payment can apply for a certificate of exemption from PAYE. A certificate of exemption may also be held by a non-resident contractor undertaking contract activity in New Zealand. See page 53 for further information. If a worker has a certificate of exemption, you can make payments without deducting tax. It cannot be used to exempt an employee's salary or wages from deducting PAYE. A certificate of exemption cannot be used for payments made to a contractor who is receiving schedular payments under certain labour hire arrangements. Checking the IR331 When someone shows you a certificate of exemption, you must check it is valid and current. If the certificate is valid and current, do not deduct tax from payments you make to them. If the certificate is not valid or current, the worker must complete a Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C. You must deduct tax from payments you make. You do not need to include tax-exempt payments in your employment information return. However, you must keep a record of these payments. You should keep a record of the certificate number in case we review your records. ACC earners' levy All employees must pay an ACC earners' levy to cover the cost of non-work-related injuries. We collect this on behalf of the ACC. The ACC earners’ levy is built into the PAYE tables and is deducted along with the tax, so no extra calculations are needed. Almost all employee earnings for PAYE are liable for the levy. They include: • • salary and wages • • overtime pay • • backpay and holiday pay • • long-service leave pay • • bonuses or gratuities • • taxable allowances • • shareholder-employee salaries that have PAYE deducted • • salaries to partners in a partnership • • salaries to working owners of a look-through company. The main exceptions are schedular payments, retirement payments, redundancy payments, benefits from an employee share scheme (if they are provided in shares), jury fees, witness fees, taxable and non-taxable pensions, and tax-free allowances. ACC will invoice close company employers for ACC earners’ levy on shareholder-employee remuneration that does not have PAYE deducted. The levy is based on the shareholder-employee remuneration declared in the company's IR4 income tax return. Responsibilities 12 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Student loan pay period repayment thresholds FrequencyThreshold Weekly$464 Fortnightly$928 Three-weekly$1,392 Four-weekly$1,856 Monthly$2,010.66 Student loan deductions are calculated as: 1. gross earnings for the pay period (regular pay plus any extra pay) 2. minus pay period repayment threshold 3. multiply by 12% Example An employee has a student loan and is paid $1,700 fortnightly. Student loan deductions are calculated as follows: Pay$1,700 Threshold$928 Liable income$772 $772 × 12%$92.64 Student loan deductions on this pay are $92.64. You can also use the PAYE deduction tables for student loan repayments to be deducted from each pay. The student loan repayments must be paid to us together with the PAYE deducted. If your employee tells you part-way through the year they should have been using one of the tax codes with SL, deduct the repayments only from the time you get the new code. It's important the right tax and/or student loan repayment code is used because it helps your employee avoid a tax bill or underpayment of their student loan - see page 6 for more details. Student loan special deduction rates Sometimes the tax code your employee must use will mean they pay more than they need to for their student loan. For example, if your employee's tax code is SB SL or S SL, the 12% standard student loan deduction rate for their secondary earnings may be too high. Your employee may give you a student loan special deduction rate certificate to lower the amount of student loan deductions required from their earnings. KiwiSaver You must make KiwiSaver available to all employees. You are required to provide the KiwiSaver status for all employees. As an employer you're required to: • • check whether new employees are eligible to join KiwiSaver • • check whether new or returning employees who had previously opted out should be automatically enrolled • • give the KiwiSaver employee information pack - KS3 to: - new or returning employees who qualify for automatic enrolment, and - existing employees who want to opt in • • give us information about: - all new employees who qualify for automatic enrolment, and - eligible employees who want to opt in to KiwiSaver • • give new employees a written statement and product disclosure statement if you have an employer-chosen scheme • • contribute to your employee's KiwiSaver scheme or complying fund (some exceptions apply). Please read our KiwiSaver employer guide - KS4 for more information. Note Student loan deductions As well as deducting PAYE, you may need to make deductions for student loans. If your employee has a student loan, they'll use a tax code with the SL student loan repayment code (M SL, ME SL, SB SL, S SL, SH SL, ST SL or SA SL) on their Tax code declaration - IR330. Student loan repayment deductions are required to be made from each pay if the employee's gross earnings for the pay period is over the repayment threshold for their pay frequency: Responsibilities 13ird.govt.nz The certificate shows the rate to deduct student loan repayments at, and the length of time it's valid for. Only the employer named on the certificate is authorised to make the student loan deductions at the special deduction rate shown. The certificate may authorise you to do one of the following: • • deduct no student loan repayments at all or • • deduct student loan repayments at a rate lower than standard rate. Student loan repayment deduction exemptions Employees who study full-time and expect to earn under the annual repayment threshold ($24,128 for the 2025 tax year) may be exempt from having student loan repayments deducted from their salary or wages. You do not have to make student loan deductions for an employee who gives you a student loan repayment deduction exemption certificate. The certificate specifies the period covered by the exemption. Do not use an SL repayment code when you calculate their pay during this period. As soon as the exemption period ends add the SL repayment code back into your employee's tax code, and start making student loan deductions from their pay. If you do not do this, they may end up with a significant under-deduction. Student loan extra deductions Your employees may ask you to make extra deductions to pay off their loan faster or we may ask you to make compulsory extra deductions to catch up on an underpayment. These deductions are in addition to the amount you normally deduct using the student loan repayment code they've given you. You must show extra deductions separately on your employment information return as either: 1. SLBOR - employee requests voluntary extra deductions 2. SLCIR - we request you to make compulsory extra deductions. You'll need to keep separate records of PAYE and student loan repayments. By law, you cannot discriminate in any way against any employee because of their student loan responsibilities - see page 50 for more details. Do not deduct student loan repayments from schedular payments - see page 10. Note Child support deductions We assess and collect child support from parents who do not live with their children full-time. The payments we collect are paid to the receiving carer of the child. If they are a beneficiary, the payments are passed on to the government. If we’re assessing and collecting a person’s child support, it is compulsory for them to pay their child support by having deductions made from their employment income. If we ask you to deduct child support from any employee's wages, you're required to do this by law. We work out how much child support to deduct from a paying parent each pay. We use the employer information you provide about how often you pay your employees and their regular pay day, so it is important this information is correct. If an employee asks you to stop or start deducting child support, you should refer them to us. Child support deduction notice When we have all the information, we'll send you a child support deduction notice. This tells you to deduct child support payments from your employee's pay. The notice shows: • • your employee's name and IRD number • • the frequency and payday when you must start deducting child support • • the amount to deduct from each pay • • whether the notice replaces any earlier child support deduction notice. Do not make any deductions before the start date on the notice. Responsibilities 14 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE If the payday or pay frequency specified on the notice is different from your actual payday or pay frequency, it’s important you contact us so we can change our records. If our information is not correct it could mean the deductions we calculate for the employee may not cover the amount of child support they need to pay, or your employee may be charged unnecessary late payment penalties. When we need you to stop deducting child support, we will send you a notice with the date to make the final deduction If the amount changes during the year, we'll send you another child support deduction notice. This will show the new amount of child support and when you must start deducting it. If you have more than 1 employee you need to deduct child support for, we will send you a deduction notice with the details of all the employees you need to start, stop or change child support deductions for. These deduction notices are sent to your myIR account. If you do not have myIR we will post them to you. Child support has priority over any other deductions from an employee's net pay. This means after you have deducted PAYE, you must deduct child support before you deduct anything else (such as student loan repayments, insurances, KiwiSaver and other superannuation deductions, or union fees). We might ask you to deduct child support from payments to someone who is not your employee, such as a contractor or a commission agent. These should not be added to your employment information returns. The notice we send you explains how to make and pay the deductions. We will send you a deduction notice with the details of all the employees you need to start, stop or change child support deductions for. These deduction notices are sent to your myIR account. If you do not have a myIR account, we will post them to you. Protected net earnings All employees must be allowed to keep 60% of their net pay, after PAYE (but not the ACC earners’ levy) and child support is deducted. This is the employee's protected net earnings, to cover their living expenses. Example Weekly gross pay $1,250. Tax code M PAYE including earners' levy $245.40. ACC earners' levy ($1,250 × 1.60%) $20. Net earnings $1,250 − $245.40 + $20 = $1,024.60. Maximum child support that could be deducted is 40% of $1,024.60 = $409.84 Protected net earnings apply to child support only. You must still make other deductions such as student loan repayments, KiwiSaver deductions, insurances, superannuation and union fees from the protected net earnings. Protected earnings are usually only affected if your employee receives less pay than usual for some reason. If you're asked to deduct more than 40% of your employee's net pay, you must not deduct the full amount of child support. If you're not deducting the full amount of child support, do not make up the difference from future pays. We'll arrange with the employee to pay the balance owing. Example 1 - Full wages paid John is liable for payments of $70 child support each week. John's weekly wage $ 420.00 PAYE deducted (M tax code) $ 52.50 ACC earners' levy $ 6.72 Net earnings $ 360.78 40% of $360.78 is $ 144.31 Because $70 is less than 40% of John's net pay ($144.31) the full amount of child support can be deducted. h Responsibilities 15ird.govt.nz Example 2 - Less than full wages John had 3 days leave without pay in a week. John's reduced wage $ 168.00 PAYE deducted (M tax code) $ 17.64 ACC earners' levy $ 2.69 Net earnings $ 147.67 Protected net earnings (+$2.69) $ 150.36 40% of $150.36 is $ 60.14 Because $70 is more than 40% of John's protected net pay ($60.14) the full amount of child support cannot be deducted, as John would be left with less than 60% of his net pay. Deductions for student loan or KiwiSaver are still taken out of John's remaining pay if these apply. Paying child support deductions Show the amount deducted each pay day on your employment information return. You’ll need to tell us if you stop employing a person or if the amount you deduct is different from what we requested by using one of the child support codes on page 26. For help completing your Employment information - IR348 see pages 23-26. You must keep records of child support deducted along with your normal wage records. Child support deductions are paid at the same time as you pay the PAYE and other tax deductions. It's important your employer information returns show all deductions made in each pay period, no matter whether you pay it to us monthly or twice- monthly. Employee privacy and prejudice The law requires you to protect the privacy of your employees who pay child support. You cannot give out information about their child support responsibilities (with 2 exceptions - see page 49). By law, you cannot discriminate in any way against any employee because of their child support obligations. It's very important you read the full statements about privacy, prejudice and penalties on pages 46 to 49. Deducting arrears We may send you a notice asking you to deduct tax and/or student loan arrears from salary or wages paid to an employee, or schedular payments to a contractor. • • You're required to make the deductions requested in the notice. • • Child support payments (if applicable) must be deducted before tax or student loan arrears. • • Arrears must be paid to us by the end of each calendar month, separately from PAYE. • • Do not include deductions for arrears in your employment information return. Instructions on how to pay the arrears are included in the deduction notice. Payroll giving Payroll giving is a voluntary scheme where employees can make donations from their pay to support approved donee organisations. You choose to set up payroll giving and how it will run. You pass your employee's donations on to the chosen donee organisation and reduce their PAYE with a tax credit for payroll donations. To offer payroll giving, you'll need to complete your employment information return electronically. Employer's role If you offer payroll giving as an employer you're required to: • • deduct the requested donation amount from your employee's salary or wages • • calculate the correct tax credits for each payroll donation made • • record the tax credits for payroll donations on your employment information • • keep records of all tax credits for payroll donations, donation amounts, donee organisations and payment dates • • pass the donation on to the chosen donee organisation within the specified timeframe • • advise the donee organisation that the donations are made through payroll giving. For more information, please read our guide Payroll giving - IR617. Responsibilities 16 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Employer's superannuation cash contribution (employer contribution) and ESCT An employer's contribution is a monetary amount paid made to a superannuation fund, by an employer, for the benefit of their employees. A superannuation fund is a scheme registered under the Superannuation Schemes Act 1989. All employer contributions paid to a superannuation fund, including KiwiSaver schemes and complying funds, are liable for ESCT (employer superannuation contribution tax). The exception to this is if you and your employee have agreed to treat some or all the employer contribution as salary or wages under the PAYE rules. See pages 16 - 19 for more information If your employee asks you to make deductions from their wages and pay them to a superannuation scheme, these are not employer contributions. ESCT There are 2 options for calculating and withholding tax on employer contributions: • • If you and your employee agree, the amount of employer contribution can be treated as the employee's salary or wages and PAYE must be deducted. • • In all other cases, ESCT must be deducted. ESCT is calculated at a rate based on the employee's total annual salary or wages plus gross employer contributions for the previous tax year (1 April to 31 March). When employees have not worked for you for the full previous tax year, the rate is based on the employee's total salary or wages plus gross employer contributions you estimate they will receive in the tax year ESCT is being calculated for. Employers paying into a defined benefit fund can choose to apply ESCT at the flat rate of 39%. Note If you’re not treating the employer contributions as part of the employee's salary or wages, you must deduct ESCT at the time of making any employer contributions. If you do not to do this, the ESCT is worked out on the grossed-up amount of the employer's superannuation contribution. Calculate the tax using this formula: ESCT= a × b 1 - a Where: a is the rate of ESCT, and b is the actual amount paid to the fund. The grossed-up contribution is the: • • actual amount paid to the fund, plus • • amount of ESCT worked out using the formula. Example An employer contributed $1,000 to a superannuation fund. Using the formula, the amount of ESCT to be paid is: ESCT= 0.30 × $1,000= $428.57 0.70 The gross superannuation contribution is: The amount received by the superannuation fund $ 1,000.00 Plus the tax on that amount $ 428.57 Grossed-up contribution $ 1,428.57 Tax on $1,428.57 at 30% is $428.57. The ESCT is deducted from the grossed-up contribution. The above formula and example assume no ESCT has already been paid for the contribution. Note Responsibilities 17ird.govt.nz ESCT rate based on 17.5% Example Joe is a KiwiSaver member and employed by A & B Limited. Joe is contributing 3% of his salary and his employer agreed to match the employee contributions dollar for dollar. This means that A & B Limited is also contributing 3% as employer contributions. For the purposes of calculating ESCT: Joe's 4-weekly salary is $ 3,200.00 KiwiSaver deduction $ 96.00 Employer contribution $ 96.00 ESCT rate (0.175) × $96.00 = $ 16.80 A B Limited would return the following information in their employment information return: KiwiSaver deduction $ 96.00 Net KiwiSaver employer contribution $ 79.20 The employer contribution is made up of $96.00 less ESCT of $16.80. A & B Limited would also account for the $16.80 ESCT in their employment information return. Read pages 23 to 28 on how to complete your Employment information - IR348. Note Sometimes an employer may be ‘locked-in’ to an employment agreement where they contribute a set percentage of their employee's salary. In these cases, it may be necessary to gross up the employer contribution, so the employee receives their full entitlement. If this applied to A & B Limited's employment agreement with Joe the result would be: Example KiwiSaver deduction $ 96.00 Employer contribution $ 96.00 A & B Limited would then gross up their contribution to account for ESCT while ensuring Joe received the full 3% employer contribution using the following formula. ESCT rate (0.175) × $96.00 = $ 20.36 1 - ESCT rate (0.175) A & B Limited shows the information in their employment information return as: KiwiSaver deduction $ 96.00 Net KiwiSaver employer contributions $ 96.00 A & B Limited would also account for the $20.36 ESCT in their employment information return. If Joe's superannuation scheme was not a KiwiSaver scheme, the employer contribution is not shown in their employment information return, but ESCT must still be shown. Note ESCT rate based on employee salary or wages The ESCT rate is based on the employee's salary or wages plus gross superannuation employer contributions received in the previous tax year (1 April to 31 March). The tax rate is used for all employer superannuation contributions made in the current tax year. Employee's salary or wage income for year ended 31 March\* ESCT from 1 April $0-$16,80010.5% $16,801-$57,60017.5% $57,601-$84,00030.0% $84,001 - $216,00033.0% $216,001 upwards39.0% \* This includes gross superannuation employer contributions. ESCT is calculated on the whole dollar and is deducted from the gross employer contribution. Responsibilities 18 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Example Regan's Trucks Ltd employs John and makes employer's contributions on his behalf. John is not a KiwiSaver or complying fund member. He worked at Regan's Trucks Ltd for the full year 1 April 2023 to 31 March 2024, receiving a salary of $36,400 and employer contributions of $1,820. For the 2025 tax year, Regan's Trucks Ltd elected to tax the employer's contributions using a rate based on John's previous year's salary and employer contributions. Because his salary, plus gross employer contributions, was between $16,801 and $57,600, the ESCT rate is 17.5%. John's salary is now $39,000, or $750 per week. Regan's Trucks Ltd's contribution to John's superannuation is $37.50 (5%) of his salary a week. The amount paid to John's superannuation is not shown in the employment information return. If the superannuation contribution amount includes ESCT, the ESCT calculation is: $37.50 x 17.5% = $6.56 The amount passed to John's superannuation scheme is $30.94 ($37.50 - $6.56) and ESCT of $6.56 is shown in the employer information return. If the superannuation contribution amount excludes ESCT, the ESCT calculation is: 37.50 x 17.5% = $7.95 82.5% The amount passed on to John's superannuation is $37.50 and the ESCT amount of $7.95 is shown on the employment information return. If the employee did not work for the employer for the full year 1 April to 31 March, the employer must: • • estimate the amount of salary or wages and gross superannuation employer contributions that will be earned by the employee in the current year, and • • base the ESCT rate on the estimate. Example Regan's Trucks Ltd employs Matt on 1 October 2024. Matt's on a contract for salary of $30,000 and employer contributions of $1,500 a year. The company estimates Matt's ESCT rate based on the amount of salary or wages plus gross employer contributions he will earn in the remainder of this tax year (1 October 2024 to 31 March 2025)\*. Salary $ 30,000 Employer contributions $ 1,500 Total $ 31,500 $31,500 ÷ 12 months $ 2,625 $ 2,625 × 6 months $ 15,750 Because the estimate of $15,750 is between $0 and $16,800 the ESCT rate is 10.5%. \* There are only 6 months left in the tax year. If an employee is only employed for 3 months the employer would estimate how much the employee would earn in those 3 months and base the ESCT rate on the estimation. As the employee started part-way through the current tax year, the employer must make a second estimation of the employee's earnings as the basis for the ESCT rate at the beginning of the following tax year (1 April 2025 to 31 March 2026). Note You need to work out the ESCT rate for each employee. Do this at the start of the tax year (1 April). If an employee’s salary or wage changes during the tax year do not change the ESCT rate during the year. Change it at the start of the next tax year. Paying ESCT Pay any ESCT deducted with your PAYE by the due date. Taxing contributions at the employee's personal tax rate If you agree, your employee can choose all or part of your employer's contribution to be included in their gross salary or wage, and taxed under the PAYE rules. Employees must understand by classifying this amount as salary and wages it will affect their Working for Families and, independent earner tax credit entitlements, the amount of child support they pay and their student loan repayments. Employees can change back at any time. Responsibilities 19ird.govt.nz The actual employer contribution is paid into the superannuation fund - the employee does not receive the contribution in the hand. The value of the employer contribution will be added to the employee's gross wages for the pay period and taxed at the appropriate rate using the PAYE tables. The rate will depend on the employee's tax code. Contributions treated as salary and wages have ACC earners’ levy deducted (included in the PAYE tables). There are 2 ways of paying the employer contribution to the superannuation fund: • • the gross amount is paid to the superannuation fund and the employee's net salary or wage is reduced by the amount of PAYE, or • • the net amount is paid to the superannuation fund after deducting the income tax component of the PAYE. Example Rachel is employed by Red Bottle Ltd. She belongs to KiwiSaver. Her employment agreement includes Red Bottle Ltd contributing $50 (10%) a week to her KiwiSaver scheme, in addition to her normal weekly salary of $500. Rachel chooses to have these contributions included as part of her salary and her employer agrees. This means Red Bottle Ltd uses the total of her salary and the employer contributions of $550 to calculate her PAYE. 1. If the superannuation contribution is paid as a gross amount, the calculation is: Weekly gross $ 500.00 plus employer contribution $ 50.00 Total gross $ 550.00 PAYE on $550.00 $ 84.05 Weekly gross $ 550.00 less PAYE $ 84.05 less employer contribution $ 50.00 Net amount $ 415.95 Red Bottle Ltd shows this in their employment information return as: Gross earnings $ 550.00 Net KiwiSaver employer contribution $ 50.00 Example 2. If the superannuation contribution is paid as a net\* amount, the calculation is: Weekly gross $ 500.00 PAYE on $500.00 $ 74.50 Weekly gross $ 500.00 plus employer contribution $ 50.00 Total gross $ 550.00 PAYE on $550.00 $ 84.05 less PAYE on $500.00 $ 74.50 PAYE on employer contribution $ 9.55 Identify earner premium $50.00 × 1.60% = $0.76 Deduct the earner premium from the PAYE on the employer contribution $9.55 - $0.80 = $8.75 Subtract tax on employer contribution from gross employer contribution $50.00 − $8.75 = $41.25 Weekly gross $ 550.00 less PAYE $ 84.05 less net employer contribution $ 41.25 Net amount $ 424.70 Red Bottle Ltd enters the information in their employment information return as: Gross earnings $ 550.00 Net KiwiSaver employer contribution $ 41.25 \* Net refers to tax, not PAYE. The ACC earners’ levy must be removed before the tax is deducted from the gross employer contribution. Records and payments 20 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Your records must be in English or Māori unless you've asked us for approval to use another language. Records you need to keep You must keep all employment and wage records for at least 7 years, including all pay sheets and PAYE payment receipts. You also need to keep all tax code declaration forms, KiwiSaver forms and any certificates and notifications you receive from your employees or Inland Revenue. To help with your record keeping, you can get computer payroll packages or specially designed wage books. PAYE intermediaries Employers can hire a PAYE intermediary to complete their payroll requirements. If a PAYE intermediary is used, both the employer and the intermediary must meet the following requirements. Employers need to: • • provide information requested by the intermediary within the time agreed by the employer and intermediary • • pay employees' gross salary or wages (and compulsory employer contributions for employees' KiwiSaver schemes) for the pay period into a trust account established by the PAYE intermediary by the date specified by the intermediary • • keep records of the gross salary or wages paid for the period. PAYE intermediaries: • • calculate the employer's respective payroll information • • pay the employer's respective employees, including payment of any third-party deductions • • pay the employer's respective tax deductions (including student loans, KiwiSaver, child support, ESCT and additional employee-related deductions) to us • • meet all the employer record keeping and return filing requirements. Providing an employer has supplied the intermediary with all their relevant payroll information and gross payments, the intermediary is responsible for applying the PAYE rules correctly, not the employer. Manual record keeping • • Start a new page in your wage book as soon as an employee starts work with you or at the beginning of each tax year. Make sure they give you the personal details you need. • • Keep a separate page for each employee, even if they were only employed for one day. • • Complete all these wage details each payday: - total gross earnings, including taxable allowances (the amount before PAYE is deducted) - the amount of PAYE deducted - any child support deductions - any KiwiSaver deductions - any KiwiSaver employer contributions (gross) - any net KiwiSaver employer contributions - any student loan repayments - any student loan extra deductions - any ESCT (see page 16) - any tax credits for payroll donations (see page 15) - the value of tax-free reimbursing allowances. • • Summarise the details for each employee at the end of each deduction payment period. The information in your wage book will help you complete your Employment information - IR348 form - see page 23. Part 2 - Record keeping and making payments Records and payments 21ird.govt.nz Paying twice a month If your gross annual PAYE (including ESCT) is $500,000 or more in the previous year ended 31 March, you're required to pay PAYE: • • from wages paid between the 1st and 15th of the month by the 20th of the same month • • from wages paid between the 16th and the end of the month by the 5th of the following month, except for the second period of December, the due date is 15 January. Period PAYE deductedDue date 1 to 15 October20 October 16 to 31 October5 November 1 to 15 November20 November 16 to 30 November5 December If your payment is made late, you'll be charged interest and may also be charged late payment penalties and non-payment penalties - see page 47. Paying PAYE to Inland Revenue If the PAYE due date for payment falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or public holiday, you can make your payment on the next working day without penalty. Whether you pay your PAYE to us monthly or twice-monthly depends on your gross annual PAYE deducted. Gross annual PAYE is the total PAYE, including any ESCT, but excluding ACC earners’ levy, student loan repayments, KiwiSaver deductions and child support. Your payment can be made electronically - see page 29. If the gross annual PAYE and ESCT deductions are $50,000 or more, you must file your IR348 electronically. Note Paying once a month If your gross annual PAYE (including ESCT) is less than $500,000 you must pay PAYE monthly. PAYE is due by the 20th of the following month. Example An employer pays wages fortnightly on Wednesdays. Period PAYE deductedDue date October - (2 pay days) 10 and 24 October20 November Week Ending Gross payPAYE calculated Child support deductions Student loans deductions Student loans Extra deductions (SLBOR) Student loans Extra deductions (SLCIR) KiwiSaver deductions Total deductions Net after Tax & Deductions Non taxable Allowances Net Pay to worker KiwiSaver Employer Gross CEC ESCT KiwiSaver Employer Net CEC For WeekFor MonthFor WeekFor MonthFor WeekFor MonthFor WeekFor MonthFor WeekFor MonthFor WeekFor MonthFor WeekFor MonthFor WeekFor MonthFor WeekFor MonthFor WeekFor Month 4/08/24800001318051962500240023276567245005722424004201980 11/08/24800001318051962500240023276567245005722424004201980 18/08/24800001318051962500240023276567245005722424004201980 25/08/24800001318051962500240023276567245005722424004201980 August 20243,200005272020784100009600931042,2689620002,28896960016807920 Monthly summary of wages and tax deductions Employees Name Gross pay PAYE calculated Child support deductions Student loans deductions Student loan extra deductions (SLBOR) Student loan extra deductions (SLCIR) KiwiSaver deductions Total deductions Net after Tax & Deductions Non taxable Allowances Net Pay to worker KiwiSaver Employer ESCT Ross Davies (012-723-142) 3,00000489048902,5110250025360 Joe Bloggs (122-222-222) 3,20000527202078410009600931042,26896200022889679201680 Stacey Rawlins (12-111-222) 1920023232323168.7716 Wagebook (a)Name Joe Bloggs Employee’s IRD number 122-222-222 (b)Address 10 KiwiSaver Way, Wellington Employee’s tax code M SL Date applied 01/08/2024 (c)Occupation Designer KiwiSaver member Yes No Finish date (d)Date started 1 August 2024 KiwiSaver deduction rate 3.00% ESCT rate 17.50% ✓ Start a new page for each employee Your employee gives you this code on the Tax code declaration - IR330 Records and payments 22 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE To work out if you're required to pay twice- monthly, we treat the following as one employer: • • any companies in a group that have 66% or more common ownership • • all partners in a partnership • • all persons who have control of the same property, such as - a deceased person's estate, or - a company in liquidation. Note New employers As a new employer, you’re required to make payments to us monthly until your total amount of PAYE and ESCT is $500,000 or more. From then on you must make payments twice a month. To avoid late filing penalties, you need to let us know if you do not pay wages in any period. Find the best way to contact us at ird.govt.nz/contact-us New Employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K You'll need to fill out new employee details. You can do this through your myIR account or by completing a New Employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form for each new or returning employee and send it to us either: • • before their first pay day; or • • with the Employment information - IR348 form that includes their first pay. You’ll need their name, KiwiSaver status, IRD number, tax code and contact details. Include their date of birth if you have it. Payday filing Every payday you must complete your employment information return with details of your employees' gross wages and deductions made. If you are filing electronically the due date is within 2 working days after the payday If you are paper filing, you can choose to send in the information within 10 working days of each payday, or • • for payments between the 1st and the 15th of the month, within 10 working days of the 15th and • • for payments between the 16th of the month and the end of the month, within 10 working days of month end. • • Use the 15th and/or last day of the month as the payday(s) not the actual payday when filing employment information. If you choose to file your employment information twice a month, you must show each payday for each employee in a separate entry in your employment information return. This rule also applies to all payments made to employees including schedular payments and irregular payments to employees outside their regular pay day. Employers with gross annual PAYE of $50,000 or more must file their employment information returns electronically. See page 29 for more information on electronic filing. If you’re paper filing, on your first Employment information return - IR348, enter each employee's name, IRD number, tax code and start date. After your first return, this information will be filled out for you on the IR348, and you'll only need to enter details of any new employees. If any of the preprinted information is incorrect, cross it out and note the correct details on the form. Are you a new employer? For the first 6 months of employing staff, you can choose to file paper returns. If after 6 months you have gone over the $50,000 threshold, you’ll need to file your returns electronically Exempt employers If your gross annual PAYE is more than the $50,000 threshold, you can apply for an exemption from filing electronically. We’ll look at: • • the nature and availability of digital services to you, such as the reliability of the services • • whether you can use a computer, and • • whether the cost in delivering your employment information electronically would be unreasonable for your business’ circumstances. Records and payments 23ird.govt.nz Completing your Employment information return - IR348 Fill in the following details for each employee: Full name This can either be the employee’s legal name or their preferred name. Enter new employees who have started working for you if their name is not on your employer information return. Preference is first name last name: For example, Ross Davies. IRD number Enter the IRD number for new employees who have started working for you. Use the IRD number on their tax code declaration. Tax code Enter the tax code for new employees if they began working for you during the month and their details are not in your employment information return. Use the tax from their tax code declaration (or the tax code from a Tailored tax code or student loan special deduction rate certificate - see page 8). If an existing employee tells you during the month they have changed their tax code, you must change the tax code in your employment information return (for paper returns cross out the preprinted code and write in the new one). For employees who have used both a PAYE tax code and schedular payment tax code (WT) during the month, please show the respective details for each tax code on separate lines in your employment information return. Note Employment start and/or finish date If the employee has started or finished working for you during the month, enter the relevant start and/ or finish date. The start date is the actual date the employee starts working for you. The finish date is the earlier of the date when the employee stops working for you or the date they receive their final pay. If you cease employing, you can show the finish date for each employee on your final employment information return. You must also add the employees finish date to the employee details list in your payroll account in myIR, or via an Employee details file. Pay period Enter the start and finish date of the pay period. Pay frequency Enter the payday frequency code from the following table: CodePay frequency DADaily WKWeekly FTFortnightly 4W4 weekly MTMonthly AHIrregular/Ad-hoc Use the AH code for any non-regular or additional pays to make sure the correct tax is deducted for your employee. Note Gross earnings and/or schedular payments Enter the total gross earnings paid to each employee during the pay period. Include bonuses, backpay, taxable allowances and schedular payments (except where no tax has been deducted because the employee has a certificate of exemption - see page 11). Show whole dollars only. Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners' levy For each employee, enter the amount of any earnings not liable for ACC earners’ levy. The following payments are not liable for ACC earners’ levy: • • schedular payments • • redundancy payments • • benefits from an employee share scheme (if they are provided in shares) • • retiring allowances • • pensions from schemes not registered under the Superannuation Schemes Act 1989. If an employee earns over the maximum liable earnings threshold set for that year, the excess amount does not go in this column of your IR348. For information on maximum earnings visit ird.govt.nz Lump sums (extra pays) taxed at the lowest rate Tick the box if a lump sum was paid and taxed at the lowest rate. Lump sum payments, such as annual or special bonuses, gratuities, or backpay, can be taxed at 4 different rates. See page 37 for more information on the lump sum rates. Records and payments 24 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE PAYE including schedular tax deductions Enter the total PAYE deducted from each employee's gross earnings for the pay period. Child support Enter the total child support deductions made from each employee's earnings for the pay period. You may also need to fill in the child support (CS) code if the amount you have deducted is not what we are expecting, or you cease employing the person. See Child support codes on page 26 for more information. Student loan deductions Enter the total student loan repayment deductions made from each employee's gross earnings for the pay period. This is the amount deducted based on the PAYE tables or the amount set out in a tailored tax code certificate, a student loan special deduction rate certificate or a student loan repayment deduction exemption certificate. Student loan extra deductions (SLBOR/SLCIR) Enter student loan extra deductions for employees with SLBOR or SLCIR. Prior period adjustments (Gross/PAYE) Enter the amount of the adjustment being made for an employee in relation to a prior period. If you are making a negative adjustment, then the negative amount in these fields can only be equal to or less than the amounts in the corresponding gross earnings or PAYE fields for that employee. KiwiSaver deductions Enter the total KiwiSaver deductions made from each employee's gross earnings for the pay period. Net KiwiSaver employer contributions Enter the total net KiwiSaver employer contributions (net of ESCT) you've made to each employee's KiwiSaver scheme for the pay period. Employee share scheme benefits Enter any employee share scheme benefits. If filing paper returns, sign and date your employment information return - IR348. Records and payments 25ird.govt.nz IR348 April 2020 DeclarationI declare that the information given in this return is true and correct. OFFICE USE ONLY Corresp. indicator Date Signature / / Employment InformationFor help, refer to IR337 Completing Employment Information forms Employer name Employer IRD number 1 Month ending 2 Pay date 2A Day Month Year Employee name and IRD numberSurname First name(s) IRD number Tax code Employment date start Employment date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Child support code Pay frequency Pay Period date start Pay Period date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Gross earnings and/or schedular payments Employee share scheme income Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners’ levy 00 00 Lump sum payment made and taxed at lowest rate PAYE and/or schedular tax deductions Child support deductions Student loan deductions KiwiSaver deductions Net KiwiSaver employer contributions ESCT deductions SLCIR SLBOR Prior period gross adjustments Prior period PAYE adjustment Net income Employee name and IRD numberSurname First name(s) IRD number Tax code Employment date start Employment date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Child support code Pay frequency Pay Period date start Pay Period date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Gross earnings and/or schedular payments Employee share scheme income Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners’ levy 00 00 Lump sum payment made and taxed at lowest rate PAYE and/or schedular tax deductions Child support deductions Student loan deductions KiwiSaver deductions Net KiwiSaver employer contributions ESCT deductions SLCIR SLBOR Prior period gross adjustments Prior period PAYE adjustment Net income IR3480420 A&B Limited 1 2 3 5 3 3 4 1 0 3 1 0 8 2 0 2 4 1 5 0 8 2 0 2 4 Bloggs Joe 0 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 M SL W K 0 5 0 8 2 4 1 1 0 8 2 4 1 5 0 0 3 2 4 4 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 2 4 3 2 6 0 0 0 3 1 5 0 1 3 5 0 Davies Ross 0 1 2 7 2 3 1 4 2 WT 1 1 0 8 2 4 W K 0 5 0 8 2 4 1 1 0 8 2 4 2 0 0 2 0 0 2 1 0 0 RESET FORM Records and payments 26 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Child support codes If an employee stops working for you or the amount you deduct is different to the amount on the child support deduction notice, you’ll need to let us know by using one of the child support codes listed. We need to know why the payment is different so we can apply the amount correctly to the person’s child support account. Use one of these codes A - Payment in advance Use this code if you pay an employee in advance. Deduct the same amount of child support as you would if you were paying the employee on the usual payday. You must include the child support with the deductions for the period when the employee was given the advance pay. Your C - Ceased employment Use this code if an employee stops working for you. Deduct child support from the last full pay you gave them, and from any holiday pay owed. We will remove the employee from your records. D - Previously deducted Use this code if the full amount of child support requested from an employee's wages is not deducted because you made an advance payment. Your child support will be less than usual for period P - Protected earnings Use this code if you're unable to deduct the full amount of child support requested from an employee's wages due to protected net earnings. S - Short-term absences Use this code if an employee is off work on unpaid leave for a short period of time and you're unable to deduct any of the child support requested. O - Other Use this code if none of the other variation codes can be used to explain why the amount of child support deducted does not equal what was expected If an employee stops working for you, the ceased employment code takes priority, even if another code, for example protected earnings, might also apply. Records and payments 27ird.govt.nz For more help If you have any questions about filling in the child support part of your employment information return, call us on 0800 220 222. Correcting your employment information after it's filed Electronic filing amendments If you file your employment information returns electronically you can make changes in myIR or you can call us on 0800 377 772. If you are paper filing, you can fill in an Employment information amendments - IR344 form and send it to us. You have 4 years from the date you originally filed the employment information return to make any changes. After 4 years, your assessment becomes final and changes can only be made to child support deductions by completing an Employment information amendments - IR344 form or you can call us on 0800 377 772. Note Completing the IR344 Enter your business name, IRD number and the pay period you're changing, on the top of the IR344. To amend an employee's pay details, enter the employee's name and IRD number on the form, the figures you originally sent in, and what these should be changed to. We need this information to match your details. You can amend up to 3 employees' details per form. If an employee's details were missed off your IR348, complete the "changed to" line only. Example After checking your wage records, you see you transposed an employee's PAYE amount. Enter the employee's full name, IRD number and PAYE amount for the original details. You only need to enter the changed PAYE amount. The IR344 form can only be used for amendments to 1 pay period's PAYE details. If changes cover more than 1 pay period, you should use a separate form for each period. Note Making KiwiSaver adjustments All contributions made to a KiwiSaver scheme are passed to the scheme provider. If you make adjustments to your employee's KiwiSaver deductions and/or contributions, we'll pass this information to the scheme provider as well. For more information about making amendments to KiwiSaver please see our KiwiSaver employer guide - KS4. Making ESCT adjustments If you need to amend your ESCT because of an under or overpayment, or an employee has opted out or is closing their KiwiSaver account, complete the ESCT column of the IR344 form. Enter the original details for ESCT and the changed amount. Employer IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Pay date Day Month Year Underpayment or overpayment (see notes on back)Underpayment (please send payment) Overpayment Day Month Year Paid electronically Transfer to PAYE period endingTransfer to other tax type (complete panel on back)Refund (Please provide explanation of changes on back) Employee details(Amounts advised must be for the whole month)Original details sent Surname First name(s) IRD number Tax code Start Finish Full name Employment date Day Month Year Day Month Year Start Finish Child support code Pay frequency Pay period date Day Month Year Day Month Year Gross earnings and/or schedular payments Employee share scheme income Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners’ levy 00 00 Lump sum payment made and taxed at lowest rate PAYE and/or schedular tax deductions Child support deductions Student loan deductions KiwiSaver deductions Net KiwiSaver employer contributions ESCT deductions SLCIR SLBOR Prior period gross adjustments Prior period PAYE adjustment Net income Change to Surname First name(s) IRD number Tax code Start Finish Full name Employment date Day Month Year Day Month Year Start Finish Child support code Pay frequency Pay period date Day Month Year Day Month Year Gross earnings and/or schedular payments Employee share scheme income Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners’ levy 00 00 Lump sum payment made and taxed at lowest rate PAYE and/or schedular tax deductions Child support deductions Student loan deductions KiwiSaver deductions Net KiwiSaver employer contributions ESCT deductions SLCIR SLBOR Prior period gross adjustments Prior period PAYE adjustment Net income Employment information amendments IR344 April 2020 Declaration I declare that the information given is true and correct. Signature Employer name Please read the notes on the back of this form. If details for more than two employees need amending for this pay date, attach additional amendment forms and show the pay date on each form. Use a separate form for each pay date that needs amendment. Records and payments 28 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE 270 20 89012345 30 04 24 A C Design Limited Davies, Robyn 12345678 385 40 3 M SL 2 , 400 1 , 800 39 84 11 1 84 54 00 72 00 44 92 59 40 Records and payments 29ird.govt.nz Electronic filing in myIR You can file new employee and KiwiSaver details and employment information returns in your Payroll account in myIR. There are 3 electronic filing options: • • on-screen entry in myIR, • • file upload via myIR, or • • direct from payroll software using our gateway services. If you're using payroll software, file upload in myIR or with Gateway services is the best method to use. Payroll software developers have our specifications and can help you buy a suitable package or upgrade any existing software. If you keep a manual wage book, the onscreen form option may suit you. This is an onscreen version of the paper form you can send us electronically. You’ll need to register for myIR before you can file electronically. To register, you'll need: • • a computer that can connect to the internet • • an internet connection and browser • • an email address. Once registered, log in with your user ID and password. To register, go to ird.govt.nz/myIR If the PAYE amount deducted is $50,000 or more, you must file electronically. We'll contact you to let you know what to do when this happens. How to pay your deductions Go to ird.govt.nz/pay to find out about paying by: • • internet banking • • by credit or debit card • • direct debit. If you're paying PAYE you need to select the EMP tax type for employer deductions (PAYE or any combination of PAYE, child support, student loan, KiwiSaver and ESCT). When an employee stops working for you You will need to enter each employee's finish date in your employment information return. You must also enter the employees finish date in the employees list in myIR or via an Employee details file. If you are deducting child support, you must provide the employee’s finish date and child support code. An automatic cease date is added by us if an employee has not been ceased by you and, for 3 consecutive months: • • has not been included in your employment information return, or • • has been included and no earnings have been recorded. If an employee stops working for you and is rehired then they must complete another Tax code declaration – IR330. You’ll also need to show the employee’s new start date in your employment information return. If an employee is being rehired or has returned to work for you within 30 days of the automatic cease date, process their pay as usual. If the employee is paid 30 days after the automatic cease date, you may need to confirm the employee’s KiwiSaver status. • • If the employee is an active KiwiSaver member, you can process their pay as usual. • • If the employee has previously opted out of KiwiSaver, you should confirm with them they wish to remain this way and provide us with a new KiwiSaver opt-out request Employee rehired in the same year If an employee stops working for you and is rehired in the same year ended 31 March, you must get another Tax code declaration - IR330. You'll also need to show the employee's new start date in your employee information return. Employee on transfer If an employee transfers from a branch of a company to another and is paid by the new branch office on a separate payroll: • • the old branch treats the transfer as if the employee has stopped work • • the new branch must get the employee to fill in another Tax code declaration - IR330 and will show the employee's start date in your employment information return. If the employee is paid from a central or head office, that office continues deducting PAYE from the employee's earnings. The employee does not need to complete a new IR330. Records and payments 30 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE If you've stopped or are about to stop providing fringe benefits If you are no longer providing fringe benefits or closing down your business, you need to cancel your fringe benefit tax (FBT) registration. You cancel your registration through myIR or on your final return. If your company is still in business but you want to opt out of FBT, go to ird.govt.nz/fbt-close- companies If you stop employing staff If you've stopped paying wages permanently, on your final employer information return you must include finish dates for all employees. You can cancel your registration in myIR. If you are paper filing, include a note with your final employment information return saying you’ve stopped employing and the date this applies from, or call 0800 377 772 and let us know, even if your business is still going. A company has not stopped paying wages permanently until all its wages, including shareholder-employee salaries, have been finally calculated. Shareholder-employee salaries with no tax deducted are included in the company's IR4 tax return. If you’re ceasing your business You can cease your business registration in myIR or complete a Business cessation - IR315 form and send it to us. Other payments 31ird.govt.nz Besides normal salaries and wages, you may make other payments to, or on behalf of, your workers. This part covers the most common payments and explains the tax treatment for each. Allowances Allowances can be taxable or tax-free, and are usually paid because of: • • an industrial collective agreement, or • • an agreement made between the employer and employees - commonly known as an inhouse agreement. Taxable allowances are added to an employee's gross earnings and PAYE is deducted from this total. If you do not do this, you could be liable for the PAYE that should have been deducted, as well as penalties. Include the total taxable allowances with your employees' gross wages in your employment information return Tax-free allowances should be added to your employees' net wages (wages after PAYE) when you pay them. Show the total amount of tax-free allowances paid in your wage book. You do not need to apply for our approval to pay tax-free allowances to your employees. Use our guidelines to decide if the allowance you want to pay will be tax-free or not. The 5 types of allowances commonly paid are: • • accommodation allowances • • meal and clothing allowances • • benefit allowances • • reimbursing allowances • • travelling allowances. We can also issue binding rulings on which allowances may be paid tax free. Accommodation allowances Generally, if you provide accommodation or pay an accommodation allowance to an employee it is a benefit allowance for the employee and is taxable. Accommodation includes board or lodging provided by or paid for by you, as well as the use of a house or living premises, whether permanent or temporary. However, certain accommodation or accommodation payments may be tax exempt, if provided: • • in specific locations, for out-of-town secondments or capital projects • • when an employee is required to work in multiple locations on an ongoing basis • • when required to stay overnight to attend a meeting, training course or conference. You might choose to provide accommodation or an accommodation allowance when an employee needs to continuously work at a distant work location that is not within reasonable daily travelling distance of their home. This accommodation may be exempt from tax, provided 1 of the following conditions are met: • • There’s a reasonable expectation the employee's secondment will be for a period of no more than 2 years, in which case the maximum exemption is 2 years. • • The employee is sent to work on a capital project at a distant work location for no more than 3 years, in which case the maximum exemption period is 3 years. A capital project is a project of limited duration whose principal purpose is the creation, enhancement or demolition of a capital asset, which involves work for a client not related to the employer. Note However, if the accommodation or accommodation allowance is being provided under a salary trade- off arrangement, it will not be tax exempt under these rules, and will be treated as a taxable benefit allowance. Part 3 - Other payments Other payments 32 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Example Adam is an accountant in Auckland. His employer sends him to New Plymouth for 3 months to audit a client before returning to the Auckland office. Adam's employer reimburses his hotel costs in New Plymouth. Because Adam's employer expects him to work in New Plymouth for less than 2 years, the payment Adam receives as reimbursement for his accommodation costs in New Plymouth is exempt income. Example Bill lives in Wellington. His job is moved permanently to Auckland, but he chooses not to move his family and commutes on a weekly basis. Bill's employer pays him an allowance towards his Auckland accommodation costs. Bill and his employer expect him to work at the Auckland workplace for more than 2 years. The accommodation allowance is not tax exempt under the 2-year rule. The exemption ends when any of the following occur: • • You pay the employee's costs associated with buying a house in or near the distant work location, as a reimbursing relocation expense. • • There's a change in the expectation the employee will be at the distant work location for longer than the maximum period of 2 years or 3 years, as applicable. • • The employee's involvement in the secondment or project comes to an end before the maximum time is up. If you expect the secondment or role on the project will last a certain length and that expectation changes, you’ll need to keep accurate and clear records including when the secondment began and when the expectation changed. Evidence of the original expectation and any subsequent change may take the form of: • • a modification in the employee's terms of employment • • board minutes • • planning documents • • correspondence with the third party you’re carrying out the capital project for. There are some circumstances where an employee must work at more than 1 workplace on an ongoing basis. These may be because of the nature of their duties or because the additional workplaces are beyond reasonable daily travelling distance from their home. This could be the case, for example, for senior managers of large organisations. In these circumstances there is an exemption for employer-provided accommodation and accommodation payments, without an upper time limit, given there will be genuine ongoing additional costs in such cases. Example Andrew manages 2 offices, one in Dunedin where he lives and one in Christchurch. He works in Dunedin for 3 days a week and in Christchurch for 2. When he works in Christchurch, it's unreasonable for him to travel back to Dunedin every day. The Christchurch accommodation is exempt under the multiple workplace rule. The Dunedin accommodation is not tax exempt. There is no time limit on tax-exempt accommodation or accommodation payments for an employee who attends a work-related meeting, conference or training course that requires an overnight (or longer) stay. The exemption also applies to locally-held courses that may require employees to stay overnight for reasons like networking and team-building. If you provide a taxable accommodation allowance or accommodation, it becomes a benefit allowance. To tax it as a benefit allowance, you must first determine its taxable value. If you pay for accommodation on behalf of an employee, or pay an accommodation allowance to an employee, the taxable value is the amount paid: • • less any rent or other contributions from the employee • • after any adjustments for business/work use of the premises. Other payments 33ird.govt.nz If you provide an employee with accommodation, the taxable value is the market rental value of the accommodation: • • less any rent paid by the employee • • after any adjustments for business/work use of the premises • • after any adjustments for when employees share accommodation. Specific rules determine the taxable value of accommodation for: • • employees working overseas • • ministers of religion • • New Zealand Defence force personnel. For more information on the tax treatment of accommodation allowances and how to determine the taxable value for accommodation go to ird.govt.nz/allowances Meal and clothing allowances You may pay for an employee's meals linked to work-related duties, because these meals may be more expensive for the employee than normal meal costs at home. There are 2 specific exemptions for meals and meal allowances paid to employees: • • An exemption of up to 3 months applies to meals if the employee is required to work away from their normal workplace because they are travelling on business. This may be for a specific short-term, work-related journey or for a longer period such as a secondment to a distant work location. • • Payments to cover working meals and light refreshments when working away from your business premises are exempt without any time limit. The full amount of any meal payment will be exempt in both situations. The exemption includes meal allowances, reimbursement of meal expenses and paying for the employee's meal. However, a meal allowance provided under a salary trade-off arrangement is not tax exempt and treated as a taxable benefit allowance. There are 2 types of clothing payments exempt from tax. They are payments: • • provided to cover the cost of distinctive work clothing such as uniforms, and • • to meet the costs of plain clothes allowances paid to members of a uniformed service, provided certain conditions are met. Distinctive work clothing is defined as a single item of clothing: • • worn by an employee as, or as part of, a uniform that can be identified with the employer: - through the permanent and prominent display of a name, logo or other identification that the employer regularly uses in carrying on their activity or undertaking, or - because of the colour scheme, pattern or style is readily associated with the employer • • is worn during, or as an incident of, employment, and • • is not clothing that employees would normally wear for private purposes. This would include uniforms worn by nursing staff, members of the armed forces and police officers. Specialist clothing might include overalls and protective clothing worn for health and safety reasons. Uniformed service workers, such as police officers meeting specific conditions, may be entitled to an exemption for plain clothes allowances that were in place on 1 July 2013. Note Benefit allowances Benefit allowances are payments made in addition to salary or wages, that benefit the employee. A taxable benefit allowance is included with the employee's wages and taxed in the pay period it's paid in. Food or accommodation provided to employees may also be a benefit allowance. The taxable value of the benefit is the difference between the market value of the benefit provided, and any amount the employee pays. Add the taxable value of the benefit to the employee's wages each pay period and deduct PAYE from the total. Other payments 34 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE incurred. • • The expenditure is incurred before the end of the tax year following the tax year in which the employee relocates. • • Reimbursements for assets costing less than $1,000 are exempted. Travelling allowances A cash allowance paid to an employee for travel between home and work is tax-free if: • • the amount paid reimburses an employee's additional transport costs, and • • there are one or more special circumstances. Special circumstances are where the employee: • • is working outside the normal hours of work (for example, in overtime, shift or weekend work) • • needs to carry work-related tools and equipment (for example, usually they take the bus but must use other transport to shift work- related gear) • • is travelling to fulfil a statutory obligation • • has a temporary change in workplace • • has some other condition of their job, or • • has no adequate public transport system that serves the workplace. For all the special circumstances given, except the lack of adequate public transport, the tax-free amount is the actual cost of travelling between home and work, less the employee's usual travel costs. Example Market value of accommodation $ 250 a week Less rent paid $ 100 a week Value to be added to wages and taxed $ 150 a week If the employee paid no rent, the value to be taxed would be $250 per week. These rules do not affect the existing exemptions applying to overtime meal payments, sustenance allowances and when you provide distinctive work clothing to an employee. The rules also do not apply in the case where FBT (fringe benefit tax) is payable on meals directly provided by you such as a discount in the work canteen. The rules limiting employers' deductions of entertainment expenses also continue to apply. Note Reimbursing allowances Reimbursing allowances are payments made to employees to compensate them for expenses they've incurred while doing their job, for example, kilometre allowances, clothing allowances, tool money, meal allowances or overtime meal allowances. Reimbursing allowances are not taxable. However, if the payment is more than the employment related expenses, the excess is taxable. Work-related relocation payments made to your employees are tax-free, provided they meet all the following conditions: • • Your employee's relocation is required as the result of: - taking up new employment with a new employer, or - taking up new duties for you at a new location, or - continuing in their current position but at a new location. • • Your employee's existing home is not within reasonable travelling distance of their new workplace (unless accommodation is provided as part of the job). • • The expense is on the list of eligible relocation expenses, go to ird.govt.nz/allowances • • The payment reflects actual expenditure Other payments 35ird.govt.nz Example You change the roster, requiring some of your employees to work the night shift. There are no additional transport costs if your employee's usual travel from home to work is by: • • bus during the day and bus to do the new night shift, or • • private car during the day and private car to do the new night shift. Any travelling allowance paid is taxable. But, if your employee's usual travel from home to work is by bus, costing $6 during the day, and they have to travel 22 km by private car to do the new night shift because there is no late bus, part of the travel is tax-free. Actual cost: 22 km @ $1.04 for each km\* $22.88 Less usual travel costs $ 6.00 Additional transport costs (tax-free amount) $16.88 • • if the travelling allowance paid is: $22.88, $16.88 is tax-free and $6.00 is taxable • • $13.00, all is exempt as it is below the increased cost of $16.88. \* From the 2023-24 income year, the Inland Revenue kilometre rate is $1.04 per km for the business portion of the first 14,000 km. For further kilometres travelled different rates apply, depending on vehicle type. For more information, go to ird.govt.nz/vehicle-expenses Add the taxable amount to your employee's gross income and work out PAYE on the total. If you pay a travelling allowance because there's a lack of adequate public transport, only the first $5 of the daily travelling allowance is taxable. Any additional amount is tax-free. For a combination of any of the special circumstances set out above and there's no adequate public transport, you will need to choose a calculation method to use. Example - no public transport There's no public transport so an employee travels 22 km by private car between their home and work, for their employer's benefit. Actual cost: 22 km @ $1.04 for each km\* $22.88 Less $5.00 per day $ 5.00 Additional transport costs (tax-free amount) $17.88 $17.88 is payable tax-free. Example - no usual transport costs A paramedic works during the day at a medical centre. They're called out at night to a car accident, travelling 57 km return in their private car. Actual cost: 57 km @ $1.04 for each km\* $59.28 Less usual travel costs $ 0.00 (nil cost, because this is additional to the usual travel from home to work) Additional transport costs (tax-free amount) $ 59.28 You may make a reasonable estimate of the likely costs for an employee or a group of employees and use an average. You do not have to calculate the costs for each employee in each pay period. If your employee travels more than 70 km a day you must let us know why this travel is necessary for the purposes of the additional transport cost calculation. If a group of employees has a travelling arrangement, such as sharing 1 employee's car, you must calculate the non-taxable amount. This amount will be based on either the average expenses of each individual or the average expenses of that group of employees. Other payments 36 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE GST on allowances You can claim a business expense for reimbursing your employee’s actual expenses if: • • you're registered for GST • • they incur the expenditure in the course of your business. Keep taxable supply information for your employees purchases and expenses, such as invoices, receipts, or other documents to claim GST. You cannot claim GST if the allowance is a general one that does not reimburse the employee's actual expenses incurred on your behalf, or if it's paid to meet the employee's private expenses. Lump sums (extra pays) Lump sum payments include annual or special bonuses, retiring or redundancy payments, payments for accepting restrictive covenants, exit inducement payments, gratuities, back pay and holiday pay paid in addition to the regular pay for the pay period. These are also called "extra pays". Overtime or any regular payments are not lump sum payments. You can choose how you calculate tax on holiday pay paid as a lump sum to an employee before they take their leave. You can choose to calculate tax on this payment: • • as an extra pay, or • • as if you're paying the lump sum to the employee in their regular pay cycle. Refer to page 43 for more details on this calculation. Note There are 6 tax rates for lump sums. These are shown in the current PAYE deduction tables. Earners' levy is included in the rates, except for: • • retiring or redundancy payments, • • employee share scheme benefits (if they are provided in shares), or • • where the combined earnings of the employee, including the lump sum, is more than or likely to be more than the ACC earners’ levy maximum. If your employee's annual salary or wages plus the lump sum will be more than $14,000, you must deduct tax at 1 of the higher rates. This means your employee will be less likely to have a large tax bill at the end of the year from an under-taxed lump sum payment. Your employees can also elect to have any lump sums taxed at a higher rate. They may choose to do this if, they have another job or other untaxed income, such as rent. They will tell you if they want to use a higher rate. The PAYE deducted on the lump sum is paid with the other PAYE for the pay period it occurs in. If the lump sum is taxed using the lowest rate, tick the box in your employment information return to show this. If an employee is on the non-notified rate (ND tax code) or they are a non-resident seasonal worker on the NSW tax code (see page 54), any lump sum extra pays will have PAYE calculated based on the flat rate that applies to each tax code - 10.5% for the NSW code (plus ACC earners levy, if applicable), 45.0% for the ND tax code (plus ACC earners levy, if applicable). Lump sum payments from main employment The calculation for tax on an extra pay for employees using a main tax code (M, ME, M SL or ME SL) is: 1. the amount of the extra pay 2. plus annualised income\* 3. equals the annual income estimate. The whole lump sum is then taxed at a flat rate based on the appropriate income range from table 1. \* Calculate annualised income by adding up the PAYE income payments for the 4 weeks ending on the date of the extra payment, whether this is the normal pay cycle or not, and multiplying by 13. Do not include the amount of the extra pay in this total. Do not include any other amounts of extra pay that may have been made in the pay period. Note Other payments 37ird.govt.nz The income thresholds tables in this section should be used for any lump sum payments, including redundancy and retiring allowances for main and secondary job employees, up to 31 March 2025. The new threshold rates do not apply until after this date. Note Table 1: Income range and tax rates Annual income estimateTax rateACC rate $0 - $14,00010.5%1.6% $14,001 - $48,00017.5%1.6% $48,001 - $70,00030.0%1.6% 70,001 - $142,28333.0%1.6%\* $142,284 - $180,00033.0%0% $180,001 upwards 39.0%0% \* The ACC earners' levy is only added to the tax rate up to the maximum threshold of $142,283 (from 1 April 2024). Amounts above this level only have 33% and 39% deducted. • • ACC earners' levy does not apply to retiring or redundancy payments. These should have PAYE applied at 10.5%, 17.5%, 30.0%, 33.0% or 39.0% according to annualised income. • • If the lump sum has tax applied using the lowest rate (10.5%), tick the box on the IR348 to show this. Note Example Tama is paying an employee a bonus payment of $400. The employee's gross earnings for the last 4-weeks was $2,500. The calculation is: Annualised income (13 × $2,500) $ 32,500 Add the bonus payment $ 400 Total $ 32,900 In this example, the income level is less than $48,000, so the PAYE rate (tax rate plus earners' levy) applied to the bonus payment is 19.1% (19.1 cents in the dollar). $400 (bonus) × 19.1% (tax + ACC earners' levy) = $76.40 (PAYE) If the employee uses a student loan tax code (M SL or ME SL) you'll also have to deduct student loan repayments. See pages 12 to 13 for details on calculating student loan repayment deductions. In addition, if the employee is a KiwiSaver member, you'll need to deduct contributions from lump sum payments. Lump sum payments from secondary employment The calculation for lump sum payments for secondary employment uses the minimum income the employee expects to receive from their main job employment, based on the secondary tax code they have selected. The calculation for PAYE on an extra pay for employees using a secondary tax code is: • • the amount of the extra pay • • plus annualised income\* • • plus the low threshold amount, based on the secondary tax code used (see the following table) The total is the annual income estimate. \* Annualised income is calculated by adding up the PAYE income payments for the 4 weeks ending on the date of the extra pay , whether this is the normal pay cycle or not, and multiplying by 13. The amount of the extra pay is not included in this total. Do not include any other amounts of extra pay that may have been made in the pay period. Note The whole lump sum is then taxed at a flat rate (including student loan if needed) based on the appropriate income range from Table 3. Table 2: Low threshold amounts Tax codeLow threshold SB$0 S or S SL$14,001 SH or SH SL$48,001 ST or ST SL$70,001 SA or SA SL$180,001 Table 3: Income range and PAYE rates (including ACC earners’ levy up to $142,283) Annual income estimate P AY E PAYE + student loan $0 - $14,00012.1%24.1% $14,001 - $48,00019.1%31.1% $48,001 - $70,00031.6%43.6% $70,001 - $142,28334.6%46.6% $142,284 - $180,00033%45.0% $180,001 upwards39%51.0% Other payments 38 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE • • If the annual income estimate is less than $142,283, the amount of PAYE is calculated on the full extra pay using the rate shown. • • If the annualised income plus the low threshold amount is more than $142,283, the total extra pay is not liable for ACC earners’ levy. The PAYE rate is 33% for income up to $180,000, and 39% for income of $180,001 and over. • • If the annualised income plus the low threshold is $142,283 or less, but the annual income estimate is more than $142,283: - the amount of PAYE applied to the extra pay amount below the threshold is calculated at 34.6% - the extra pay amount above $142,283 has no ACC earners' levy, PAYE is calculated at 33.0%. Example Jane has a secondary job and uses the ST tax code. Jane’s secondary employer wants to pay her a bonus of $30,000. In the last 4 weeks Jane has earned $3,298 from her second job. Jane’s employer works out the amount of PAYE on her bonus: Annualised income ($3,298 × 13) $ 42,874 plus low threshold (ST) $ 70,001 $112,875 plus extra pay $ 30,000 Total amount $142,875 The annualised income plus the low threshold amount is below $142,283. But when the lump sum is added, the annualised income of $142,875, it’s more than $142,283. The earner’s levy only applies to $29,408 of the extra pay (PAYE rate is 34.6%). The remaining $592 does not have any earner’s levy applied, the PAYE rate is 33.0%. In the next example PAYE (including earner’s levy) is calculated on the full bonus and then the excess earner’s levy is deducted: Example $30,000 × 34.60% = $10,380 Annual income estimate – ACC earners’ levy = amount not liable for ACC earners’ levy $12,875 − $142,283 = $592 $592 × 1.60% = $9.47 $10,380 − $9.47 = $10,242.53 Amount of PAYE applied to the lump sum = $10,370.53 Paying a net bonus If you want to pay an employee a net bonus, you must calculate the gross amount to include in your wage records. The PAYE and any student loan repayment calculated on the bonus must be paid with other deductions for that pay period. The method for working out the gross bonus depends on the employee's tax code. Example – no student loan Balvant is being paid a net bonus of $60. Their tax code is M, and his annual income will be $49,000. The PAYE rate is 19.1%: To work out the gross bonus Deduct 19.1% from $1 (1 - 19.1% = 0.809) $60 ÷ 0.809 = gross bonus $74.16 Calculate the PAYE Gross bonus x 19.1% PAYE rate = $14.16 Net bonus $60.00 Example – with a student loan Freya is also being paid a net bonus of $60. Their tax code is M SL, and her annual income will be $51,000. The PAYE rate 19.1% + 12.0% student loan = 31.1%: To work out the gross bonus Deduct 31.1% from $1 (1 - 19.1% = 0.689) $60 ÷ 0.689 = gross bonus $87.08 Calculate the PAYE Less gross bonus x 19.1% PAYE = $14.16 Less student loan deduction $87.08 x 12.0% = $10.45 Net bonus $60.00 Other payments 39ird.govt.nz Restrictive covenant and exit inducement payments These payments are taxable as follows: Restrictive covenant payments These are payments made in return for a person agreeing to restrict their ability to perform services. This includes payments made to an employee when their employment is terminated, and they agree not to carry on business in competition with their former employer. It also includes payments made when an employee enters a restrictive covenant with a wholly owned company and then sells the shares in that company to their employer. These types of payments are classed as source deduction payments, so PAYE must be deducted. Exit inducement payments Exit inducement payments are made by a prospective employer or contractor to a person to give up a status or position. These include payments to employees whose job status changes, even if they do not have a career change. These types of payments are also defined as source deduction payments, so PAYE must be deducted. Both restrictive covenant and exit inducement payments are taxed at the lump sum rate. See the PAYE deduction tables for the current lump sum rates. Retiring and redundancy payments Retiring allowances A retiring allowance is a payment made to an employee on retirement. The employment must have been fully terminated because of: • • the employee's decision • • the terms of any union contract • • the length of service of the employee, or • • the employer's policy. It's not based on the age of the employee. Retiring allowances are taxable in full but not liable for ACC earners’ levy. See pages 39 to 42 for information on how to calculate the correct tax. Example Retiring payment $ 10,200 PAYE at 30% \* $ 3,060 \* This example assumes the employee's gross annual income is between $48,001 and $70,000. Redundancy payments A redundancy payment is different from a retiring allowance. The decision to terminate employment is the employers. Redundancy payments may be made: • • to an employee whose position is no longer needed, or • • to a seasonal worker whose usual seasonal position is no longer needed (the employee works for you at a regular time each year for a continuous period of less than 12 months). The following are not redundancy payments, and are liable for ACC earners’ levy: • • any payment made to an employee solely because of a seasonal lay-off • • any payment made at the end of a fixed-term contract or a contract for a predetermined amount of work • • any payment made instead of giving an employee notice • • any payment of deferred wages made to an employee when finishing work (such as holiday pay, accrued bonuses and commissions) • • any payment by a company under its articles of association to any of its directors. A severance payment may be a redundancy payment for tax purposes. A lump sum severance payment made to a permanent employee when a specific job or project is finished is a redundancy payment if the position of the employee has been fully terminated, and the position is no longer required by the employer. If the employee stays with the same employer on another job or project, any payment is liable for ACC earners’ levy. If the employee uses an M SL, ME SL, SB SL, S SL, SH SL, ST SL or SA SL code, you'll also have to deduct student loan repayments from retiring and redundancy payments. Other payments 40 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Termination of employment To treat any payment as a retiring allowance or redundancy payment, the person's employment must have been terminated. If employment is not terminated, the payment is liable for ACC earners’ levy. Employment is not terminated if the employee: • • is still employed by a company that is at least 50% owned by the same shareholders, or under the control of the same persons • • is still employed by the same employer, even if the employer's business has changed • • is still with the same business, even if the ownership of the business has changed • • has remained in substantially the same employment. This means if the employee continues to work under a contract of employment with substantially the same employer. The following 2 types of payment are not retiring allowances or redundancy payments and are liable for ACC earners’ levy. • • Payments for accumulated annual leave, long- service leave and sick leave. These are payments that do not relate to retirement or redundancy. • • Payments made because of a merger, takeover, amalgamation or reconstruction between 2 parties if: - the employee is rehired by any party to the transaction within 6 months of termination of employment, and - the employee's new job is substantially the same kind of employment they had before. Substantially the same kind of employment means doing the same type of work. This is based on such things as similarity of duties, similar conditions of employment and a similar job description. For example, if you rehire an employee to do most of the old duties but with slightly different salary and leave arrangements, the employment is substantially the same kind. However, if you rehire the employee in a different area that needs new skills, it's not substantially the same. Employee Share Scheme benefits In some situations, you must withhold tax from an employee share scheme (ESS) benefit. In other situations, you can choose whether to withhold tax. Your withholding obligations depend on whether the ESS benefit is provided in shares or in cash. You must file employment information about the value of an ESS benefit provided to an employee, even if you do not withhold tax from the benefit. Cash-settled ESS benefits An ESS benefit is usually provided in shares. However, if the share scheme taxing date is triggered by the cancellation or transfer of shares or share rights and you’ve paid the employee cash instead, then the benefit is a cash-settled ESS benefit. If an ESS benefit is in cash, it is an extra pay, and you must withhold tax. In this situation: • • Use the ‘extra pay’ tax rate that applies • • Deduct ACC and student loan (if they apply) • • KiwiSaver does not apply. Share-settled ESS benefits If an ESS benefit is in shares, you can choose to withhold tax. However, you do not have to withhold. If you choose to withhold tax: • • Use the ‘extra pay’ tax rate that applies • • Deduct student loan (if it applies) • • KiwiSaver and ACC do not apply. If your employee agrees, you can sell some shares to pay any tax owing. If you fund the tax (and student loan repayment, if any) on the ESS benefit, this amount is treated as income to the employee. However, it is not part of the value of the ESS benefit. Treat it like an ordinary extra pay. If you do not withhold tax on a share-settled benefit, then the employee pays the tax through the end-of-year tax process (and provisional tax if it applies). You should let your employee know they’ll have to pay tax on their ESS benefit. Completing employment information What you need to tell us You must file employment information about the value of an ESS benefit you provide to an employee, even if no tax is withheld from the benefit. You need to show the following information: • • The employee’s name and IRD number. • • The value of the ESS benefit in the employee share scheme earnings field. ESS benefits have their own separate field and are not included in the gross earnings field. Other payments 41ird.govt.nz Filing twice a month If your ESS deferral date is between the 1st and 15th of the month, treat the benefit as if the employee received it on the 15th of the month. If it's between the 16th and end of the month, treat the benefit as if the employee received it on the last day of the month. Example Sam's employer provides him with an ESS benefit on 14 July 2023. The 20th day after Sam receives the benefit is 3 August 2023 (that is, between the 1st and 15th of August 2023). Sam’s employer files electronically. Sam’s employer can choose to report information about the ESS benefit either • • within 2 working days of 3 August 2023; or • • within 2 working days of 15 August 2023. Exempt ESS An ‘exempt ESS’ is not an ESS and different tax rules apply. For more information about employee share scheme benefits go to ird.govt.nz/employee-share-schemes. Regular bonuses Regular incentive or production bonuses Add these bonuses to wages for the pay periods they were earned. Use the PAYE tables to work out the amount of PAYE to deduct. Remember, if your employee uses an M SL, ME SL, SB SL, S SL, SH SL, ST SL or SA SL code you must also deduct student loan repayments from the bonus. Use the student loan columns in the PAYE tables. The following notes refer only to PAYE, but the same method applies for employees with student loans. Bonuses for 1 pay period Add the bonus to other wages for the pay period the bonus was earned in. Deduct PAYE from the total earnings. Example Ordinary wages for pay period $ 270 Bonus for same pay period $ 54 Total earnings $ 324 • • The value of the ESS benefit in the earnings not liable for ACC earners’ levy field (if the benefit is provided in shares). • • The total PAYE and any student loan deducted from the benefit. Record the ESS income under the employee’s current tax code. The employment information return no longer has the ESS tax code option. If you fund the tax (and student loan repayment, if it applies), this amount is not part of the value of the ESS benefit. The amount is a separate extra pay and you report it in the gross earnings field. You are not required to provide employment information about an ESS benefit provided to a former employee if the benefit is in shares and you have chosen not to withhold tax. We recommend you let the employee know they will have to include the value of their ESS benefit in their income tax return – IR3 themselves and may have to pay tax on the shares. When you need to tell us When you need to tell us about an ESS benefit depends on the ‘share scheme taxing date’ and the ‘ESS deferral date’. The share scheme taxing date is the date that the value of the ESS benefit is calculated. It is the earlier of the following dates. • • The date the employee beneficially holds the shares and there are no conditions or protections under the scheme that would defer the taxing date. For example, the taxing date will be deferred if: o The employee is required to sell their shares back to the employer (other than for market value) if they leave the company, or o The employee has the benefit of a limited recourse loan. • • The date the shares or share rights are cancelled or transferred to a non-associated person. The ESS deferral date is 20 days after the share scheme taxing date. You can either file the information on a payday basis or twice a month. The ESS deferral date is treated as the payday. Filing on a payday basis If you are filing on a payday basis, file the employment information within 2 working days of the ESS deferral date if filing electronically, or within 10 working days if filing by paper. Other payments 42 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Monthly bonuses - more than 1 pay If you pay a monthly bonus relating to more than 1 pay period: 1. Add up the gross wages paid in the month. 2. Add on the bonus and work out the PAYE (using the monthly tables) on the total. 3. Work out the PAYE on the gross wages (excluding the bonus) for the month and subtract this from the PAYE on the total calculated at step 2 above. This is the PAYE on the bonus. Example Margaret is paid weekly. She is also given a monthly production bonus. 1. Add together the gross wages paid for the month: $222 + $240 + $274 + $264 $1,000.00 2. Add bonus $ 300.00 Total $1,300.00 3. PAYE on $1,300 (monthly tables) $ 157.30 4. Deduct PAYE on $1,000 (M code) $ 121.00 PAYE deducted from the bonus is $ 36.30 Use the same method if a bonus is paid fortnightly or 4-weekly. Use the fortnightly or 4-weekly PAYE deduction tables to work out how much PAYE to deduct. Add the PAYE on the bonus to the PAYE on the wages for the period the bonus was actually paid. Bonuses covering more than 1 month For a bonus covering more than 1 month: 1. Divide the bonus by the number of months it covers. This gives you the monthly bonus amount. 2. Add the monthly bonus to the normal pay for the month and use the monthly PAYE tables to calculate the PAYE. 3. Calculate the PAYE on the normal monthly pay and subtract this amount from the PAYE calculated at step 2. This gives you the PAYE on the monthly bonus. 4 Multiply this by the number of months the bonus covers to get the total PAYE to be deducted from the bonus Example Patrick gets a monthly salary of $1,120. He's paid a 3-monthly incentive bonus of $720. Bonus $720 ÷ 3 $ 240.00 Plus normal monthly pay $1,120.00 Total monthly amount $1,360.00 PAYE on $1,360 x 19.1% $ 168.76 Less PAYE on normal pay $ 135.50 Difference $ 33.26 PAYE on bonus $33.26 x 3 $ 99.78 (amount to deduct from bonus) Include the bonus PAYE with the wages PAYE for the period the bonus was actually paid. Bonuses for a broken period If a bonus covers a broken period, such as when an employee leaves, treat the bonus as being for the whole of the pay period. Add the bonus to wages in that pay period. Holiday pay Include holiday pay and statutory holiday pays as earnings in the period you pay them. PAYE for holiday pay can be calculated either as standard salary or wages, or as an extra pay. To calculate tax on your employee’s holiday pay, decide whether it should be calculated as an extra pay or not. Holiday pay treated as standard salary or wages If the holiday pay is included in the employee’s regular pay at 8% of the employee’s gross pay or linked to the workdays within the pay period (such as not working but being paid for a public holiday or annual leave) then it’s treated as salary or wages for the pay period. Other payments 43ird.govt.nz Holiday pay treated as an extra pay Holiday pay paid in addition to the regular pay for the pay period is treated as an extra pay. These are payments that are not normally paid in the pay period, such as when accumulated leave is paid out at the end of employment. Holiday pay paid in advance If you pay your employee annual leave in a lump sum before the leave is taken, you can choose to calculate tax as a lump sum either as: • • an extra pay, or • • if the lump sum were paid to the employee in their regular pay cycle over the pay periods their holiday covers (the alternative approach). This calculation also applies to lump sum payments of salary/wages in advance. Calculate PAYE using the alternative approach by: • • apportioning the lump sum payment across the pay periods the payment relates to • • calculating PAYE on each of these apportioned amounts as if they were the only payments made to the employee in each pay period, and • • add PAYE amounts together and deduct the amount from the lump sum payment. A more complex PAYE calculation is needed when the whole pay period is not taken as annual leave and the annual leave was taxed using the alternative approach. This can happen when an employee takes leave for part of a pay period and works as normal for the remainder. PAYE is calculated by: • • adding together the amount of the holiday pay and the regular salary/wages for the pay period, • • calculate PAYE on the total as a single payment, this is the total PAYE payable for the pay period, and • • subtract the PAYE deducted from the amount of the holiday pay apportioned to the pay period from the amount of PAYE calculated in the previous step. This is the amount of PAYE to be deducted from the payment of salary/wages. Example Kim is taking 3 weeks annual leave and asks her employer Dan to pay the holiday pay in a lump sum before the leave is taken. Dan agrees and calculates PAYE using the alternative approach. Kim is paid fortnightly and uses the M tax code. Regular fortnightly pay is $1,492.00, 3 weeks holiday pay is $2,238.00. The holiday pay covers 3 weeks across 2 fortnightly pay periods. Kim is back at work in the last week of the 2nd fortnight. Dan apportions the holiday pay across Kim’s pay periods and calculates the PAYE using the alternative approach: Holiday pay PAYE 1st fortnight $1,492.00 $242.97 2nd fortnight $ 746.00 $100.49 Totals $2,238.00 $343.46 Dan calculates the PAYE he needs to deduct for the week Kim worked in the 2nd fortnight: Amount PAYE 1 week's holiday pay $ 746.00 1 week's normal pay $ 746.00 Totals $ 1,492.00 $ 242.97 Less PAYE deducted on week 3 of holiday pay $ 100.49 Total PAYE for the week Kim worked $ 142.48 Dan deducts $142.48 from Kim’s pay for the week she worked after her annual leave. If your employee is a member of KiwiSaver or has a student loan, these will be calculated on the whole lump sum, even if you choose to calculate PAYE using the alternative approach. Note Refer to ird.govt.nz/holiday-pay for more information on how to categorise holiday pay. You can use our online PAYE calculator at ird.govt.nz/tools-calculators to calculate tax on holiday pay when it is treated as salary or wages. You can also view or print our PAYE tables - IR340 or IR341, go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides If it is taxed as an extra pay, see page 37. Other payments 44 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Before calculating your employees' holiday pay, please check your obligations under the Holidays Act 2003. Loss of earnings compensation paid by ACC Loss of earnings compensation paid by ACC to your employees is liable for PAYE. ACC will deduct PAYE using the employee's tax code. Similarly, if an injury occurs at work and you pay an employee for the period up until the time compensation is payable, you must deduct PAYE using the employee's tax code. If you subsidise an employee receiving compensation, deduct PAYE on the extra payment you make using the secondary tax rates. If you pay the employee salary or wages and ACC then reimburses you, deduct PAYE using the employee's tax code. Honoraria Sometimes payments are made for a service where the usual custom is that a price is not set. These payments are called honoraria. Generally honoraria are made to volunteers and are schedular payments, subject to a standard tax, or a rate chosen by the volunteer. The standard rate is listed on the back of the Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C. However, if honoraria are paid to employees, they should be treated as wages and taxed using the PAYE tables. Where both honoraria and reimbursement expenses are paid to a person for volunteer activities, and provided records are kept showing how much of the payment relates to each, the reimbursement expenses will be tax free. Note Payments to school trustees Part of any honoraria paid to school trustees for attending board meetings is treated as reimbursement of expenditure and not subject to tax as follows: • • for the chairperson, the first $75 per board meeting (up to a maximum of $825 a year) • • for any other board member, the first $55 per board meeting (up to a maximum of $605 a year). However, if the chairperson or a board member receives more than the amounts above, the exemption is reduced by the amount of the additional reimbursement. Example If a board member received $70, made up of a payment of $50 and reimbursement for travel expenses of $20, the first $55 is reduced by the amount of the reimbursement for travel. Amount exempt for board members $55 Less reimbursement for travel expenses $20 Exempt amount $35 Payment received $50 Less exempt amount $35 Balance $15 Tax on schedular payments applies to balance amount of $15. Life insurance and personal accident premiums Policies payable on maturity or surrender Examples of these policies are endowment or whole-of-life policies. If you pay the whole premium of the policy and all the proceeds of the policy will go to the employee, the premiums you pay are treated as salary or wages. Include the gross premium with wages for the period in which the premium was paid to the insurance company. If the proceeds of the policy are payable to the employer, the premiums are not taxable to the employee. Do not deduct PAYE or record payment information on your employment information return. Other payments 45ird.govt.nz Policies payable on accident or death only Several accident, temporary or term life insurance policies are available on the market, and these can have different tax implications. See the following table if you pay the premiums for personal sickness, accident or life insurance on behalf of the employees or for your employees who are the beneficiaries of the policy. Policy TypeTaken out byPremium liable for Life insuranceEmployerFBT EmployeePAYE and is treated as normal salary and wages Personal sickness or accident EmployerFBT EmployeePAYE and is treated as normal salary and wages Group insurance policy (either life or accident/ medical) EmployerFBT Prize money paid at sporting events and competitions If winning prize money forms part of a participant’s taxable activity, you must deduct withholding tax from prize money at any sporting event or competition, not just professional events. The prize money threshold is $500. For any amount won over this threshold, you must deduct tax of 20%. This applies to each separate participant, for each separate event the participant enters at the competition or sporting event. Example 1 A doubles team in a tennis tournament win their division. First prize is $900. The prize money is shared equally - $450 each. Although the total prize money exceeds $500, the amount per person is under the $500 threshold so the payer does not have to deduct tax. Example 2 One of the tennis players from the doubles team also wins the singles title in her division. First prize is $700. The prize money is over the $500 threshold so tax must be deducted, but only from the portion that exceeds the threshold. The total amount of tax to be deducted is $200 × 20 cents = $40. The player has won total prize money of $1,150. However, the threshold applies to each separate participant for each separate event. You'll need to get a Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C form from the recipient of the prize money. They'll use a WT tax code. If they do not give you an IR330C or it is not completed, deduct tax at the non-notified rate - see page 7. Include the gross amount and the tax on your employment information return and show WT tax code for the prize recipient. If winning prize money does not form part of a participant’s taxable activity (for example if they are competing as an amateur) then no withholding tax is required to be deducted from the prize money. Penalties 46 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Part 4 - Penalties As an employer you're responsible for making various deductions, such as PAYE, KiwiSaver, ESCT (employers' superannuation contribution tax), student loans and child support, from your employees' gross wages. It's a serious matter if any employer does not properly deduct or pay employees' PAYE or other deductions. You face penalties if you do not meet your responsibilities. If you believe you'll be unable to file or pay by the due date, contact us as soon as possible. By contacting us before the due date, you may be able to reduce penalties that will be charged. The information on pages 47 to 50 applies to all these employer deductions: • • PAYE (including ACC earners' levy) • • child support • • student loan • • KiwiSaver deductions • • KiwiSaver compulsory employer contributions • • ESCT. For more help For more information about penalties, see our guide Penalties and interest - IR240. Late filing penalty By law you must file your tax returns on time. If you do not file your employment information returns by the due date, you may have to pay a late filing penalty. The first time you are late with your filing we will give you a warning. If you are late again in the next twelve months we will charge a late filing penalty. A late filing penalty of $250 will then be charged for each month your employment information return is not filed by the due date. We'll send a statement advising you of the late filing penalty and the due date for paying it. Late payment penalties and interest are also charged on late filing penalties not paid by the due date. Interest These rules apply when you either overpay or underpay the amount due. If you overpay the amount due, we'll generally pay you interest from the day after the original due date (within certain rules). If you underpay the amount due, we'll charge interest on the unpaid amount from the day after the original due date. We do not charge interest on • • unpaid amounts less than $100. • • any overdue KiwiSaver employer contributions. The interest rates are set by government and are based on market rates. You can check the current rates at ird.govt.nz Late payment penalties A payment is late if it's posted or delivered to us after the due date. See page 21 for information about due dates. Penalties are not charged on unpaid amounts less than $100. We'll charge you interest if you do not make your tax payment by the due date. We'll also charge you a late payment penalty if you miss a payment, but if you have a good payment history with us, we may contact you before we do this. Otherwise, we'll charge an initial 1% late payment penalty on the day after the due date. We'll charge a further 4% penalty if there is still an amount of unpaid tax (including penalties) 7 days after the due date. Every month the amount owing remains unpaid after the due date, a further 1% incremental penalty may be charged. Penalty notice If a payment is late, and the penalty is not paid, we'll send a separate notice showing the penalty charged. If the due date for a payment falls on a Saturday, Sunday or public holiday, you can make your payment on the next working day without penalty. Note Penalties 47ird.govt.nz Non-electronic filing penalty If you do not file online when you should, we may charge you a non-electronic filing penalty. The penalty is the greater of: • • $250, or • • $1 for each person employed at any time during the month. For example, if there are 500 employees listed on the employment information return each month, the penalty will be $500 each month. The penalty is due 30 days after the end of the month the return was due. You'll only be charged 1 non- electronic filing penalty for a month. Shortfall penalties Shortfall penalties apply to certain offences, including failing to deduct PAYE or failing to pay PAYE to Inland Revenue. We charge shortfall penalties on top of any normal tax. The shortfall penalty is a percentage of the tax shortfall (deficit or understatement of tax), resulting from certain actions by the employer. There are 5 types of penalties: • • not taking reasonable care 20% • • unacceptable tax position 20% • • gross carelessness 40% • • abusive tax position 100% • • evasion 150%. The rate of shortfall penalty may be reduced for previous good behaviour. In addition to these penalties, you could be fined and/or imprisoned for up to 5 years. Disputing shortfall penalties You may dispute a shortfall penalty if you feel it is wrongly imposed. See page 49 for further information about disputes. Non-payment of employer deductions penalty If you file your employment information returns but do not pay the amount calculated by the due date, we'll send you a reminder letter. If you do not pay the overdue amount or enter an instalment arrangement, we'll charge you a non-payment penalty (NPP) as well as the late payment penalties and interest. The non-payment penalty is 10% of the amount outstanding. Every month you do not pay in full or enter an instalment arrangement, a further 10% penalty will be added. If you pay in full or enter an instalment arrangement within that month, the non-payment penalty will be at a reduced rate of 5% of the unpaid tax. NPPs are not charged on outstanding amounts of less than $100 or if you make payments under an instalment arrangement. The total amount of NPP will not exceed 150% of the returned amount that is unpaid when the first penalty was imposed. For more information, see our guide Penalties and interest - IR240 or go to our website ird.govt.nz/ employers Failing to make deductions Example Tom's payment for 30 June period is due on 20 July. Tom files his employment information every payday but does not make the payment. A month later, Tom receives a reminder letter asking him to make full payment or enter an instalment arrangement within one month to avoid becoming liable to pay non-payment penalties. If Tom takes no action, after 1 month he will be liable for a non-payment penalty. The amount of the penalty is 10%, unless full payment is received, or an instalment arrangement entered, within the following month, then the penalty is reduced to 5%. Employers must deduct PAYE, KiwiSaver deductions, ESCT, student loan repayments or child support when required, from any payments made to employees. Failure to do this is a serious offence and can result in penalties and fines being imposed. Anyone who knowingly fails to make deductions can be fined up to $25,000 for a first offence and $50,000 for subsequent offences. Shortfall penalties may also be charged. If you cannot make the student loan, child support, KiwiSaver and/or PAYE deductions, contact us straightaway. You must still file your employment information returns and make your payments by the due dates. Note Penalties 48 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Failing to pay deductions You must pay deductions to us by each due date. The money deducted does not, at any stage, belong to you. Under no circumstances should the deductions be used for any other purpose other than payment to us. We'll help employers who try to meet their responsibilities but will take legal action against those who do not comply with the tax laws. Failing to pay deductions to us is a serious offence and can result in prosecution. An employer who is convicted may be: • • fined up to $50,000 and/or • • sent to prison for up to 5 years. The name of anyone convicted will also appear in the New Zealand Gazette. The imprisonment penalty does not apply to ESCT offences. Note Evasion You can be fined up to $50,000 and/or be imprisoned for up to 5 years if you’re convicted of knowingly attempting to evade your responsibilities. It's also illegal for you to aid or assist another person to commit an offence. Additional student loan penalties You must give us details about your employees who have student loans, such as IRD number, name and amounts deducted. Failing to provide the correct information is an offence and you may be prosecuted. If convicted, you can be fined up to $25,000 for the first offence and $50,000 for subsequent offences. Shortfall penalties may also be charged. Additional child support penalties Employee privacy The law requires you to protect your employees' privacy by not giving out any information about their child support responsibilities. There are only 2 exceptions when: 1. Inland Revenue Child Support asks you for information. 2. You must give the information as part of running your business, for example, when you have to show your records to our investigators. If convicted of violating this law, you can be fined up to $15,000. Prejudice It's an offence to discriminate against an employee or potential employee because of student loan and/ or child support responsibilities. You may not: • • refuse to employ the person, or refuse to pay wages • • dismiss or threaten to dismiss the employee • • stop or threaten to stop paying wages • • show or threaten prejudice against the employee • • intimidate, coerce, penalise, or discipline the employee because of student loan and/or child support responsibilities. If convicted of prejudice, you may be ordered to pay compensation to the employee and act to remedy or reduce the loss suffered. You may be fined up to $2,000 if convicted of prejudice in relation to student loan responsibilities. Employees start and finish information penalties You must provide us with your employees' start and finish dates. Failing to provide the correct details is a serious offence and you may be prosecuted and penalised. Penalties 49ird.govt.nz Audit procedures You can expect to be audited by us from time to time. This will involve checking your PAYE records against the returns filed to make sure they are correctly completed. Remember, you must keep all financial records of your taxable activity for 7 years. We may ask you to keep your records for an additional 3 years when auditing or investigating you. Failure to keep adequate records is a very serious matter and can result in a fine. If you want to know more about audit procedures, read our guide Inland Revenue audits - IR297. Voluntary disclosure If there's any omission or error in your PAYE affairs, you should tell us about it. We may still charge shortfall penalties but, if you tell us before we notify you of an audit or investigation, we may reduce these by up to 100%. For more help If you'd like to know more about this process, read our guide Putting your tax returns right - IR280. If you disagree We make every effort to apply the tax laws fairly and correctly, but sometimes you may disagree with how we've assessed your tax. In most cases we can correct the assessment before you need to make a formal complaint. If we cannot agree, there is a formal process to follow, so your rights are protected in case the matter goes to court. For more information, read our factsheet If you disagree with an assessment - IR778. Special types of workers 50 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Part 5 - Special types of workers This part explains what you need to do for the following types of workers: • • casual agricultural workers • • commission agents • • directors • • drovers and musterers • • election-day-workers • • fishers • • foreign fishing workers • • IR 56 taxpayers • • jockeys and trotting drivers • • musicians, dance bands and orchestras • • non-residents • • partners in a partnership • • piece-workers and outworkers • • recognised seasonal workers • • screen production industry workers • • shareholder-employees in close companies • • shearers, shearing shed hands and shearing contractors • • spouses or partner • • subsidised workers • • workers engaged in "activity in the community" projects • • workers under labour-only contracts in the building industry. • • working owners of a look-through company. For the tax rates, see the current PAYE tables - IR340 or IR341. Casual agricultural workers Casual agricultural workers are employees who do casual seasonal agricultural work on a day-to-day basis, for up to 3 months. They use the CAE tax code on their Tax code declaration - IR330. These workers are taxed through the PAYE system at a flat rate of 19.1% (includes ACC earner’s levy). Agricultural contractors are independent contractors, not employees, and have tax deducted on schedular payments. Note Commission agents For agents receiving commission only, tax the gross commission as a schedular payment - see page 10 Some agents get a salary or other fixed remuneration plus commission from the same employer. If an agent is an employee, add the gross commission to the fixed remuneration for the period it was paid in. Calculate PAYE using the current PAYE tables. Whether you deduct PAYE or deduct tax from schedular payments depends on if the agent is an employee or is self- employed. For more information on employment status, see page 5 -Who is an employee? Directors Fees paid to directors are generally schedular payments. Tax the fees paid using the standard rate shown on the back of the IR330C, or the rate chosen by the director, provided it’s not less than the applicable minimum. Some directors who are shareholder-employees of the company may pay provisional tax. Drovers and musterers For employees doing occasional droving and mustering work, calculate PAYE using the current PAYE tables. If they supply their own dogs, horses or saddlery and receive allowances, deduct the allowances paid. Reimbursements for assets costing less than $500 are exempted. Deduct tax from the gross payments made to a droving contractor using the standard rate shown on the back of the IR330C, or the rate chosen by the drover, provided it's not less than the applicable minimum Election-day workers Election-day workers are employed on a casual basis immediately before, on, or after polling day. Election-day workers use tax code EDW and have PAYE taxed at a flat rate 19.1% (includes ACC earners' levy). Special types of workers 51ird.govt.nz If you’re an IR56 taxpayer, you must complete and send in your employment information return within 10 working days of the end of the month and make payments on the 20th of the month following the pay period. For more information see our guide IR56 taxpayer's handbook - IR356. Jockeys and trotting drivers You must deduct PAYE from wages and any riding or driving fees paid to apprentice jockeys or probationary drivers. Use the standard rate shown on the back of the IR330C, or the rate chosen by the jockey or trotting driver, provided it's not less than the applicable minimum. See page 10 of this guide for more information on schedular payments. Musicians, dance bands and orchestras If bands or other entertainers are actual employees, you must deduct PAYE from payments made to them. Each performer in a band must fill in an IR330. Musicians hired on a casual basis are usually paid schedular payments. Every performer in a group must fill in an IR330C using a WT tax code. In the case of larger bands where the leader is in business and files income tax returns for that business, a Certificate of exemption - IR331 may be used - see page 11 of this guide for more information. The leader must make deductions of PAYE or tax (as the case may be) from payments made to musicians involved in the band. If the band is registered with us as a partnership, show the IRD number of the partnership on the IR330C (use the WT tax code). Door charges Where a band member collecting door charges is accompanied by an employee of a licensed premises, and the employee performs the licensing responsibilities of the licensee or manager (for example, allows or restricts entry), do not deduct tax from the door charges. Where the band member is not accompanied by an employee, tax must be deducted from the door charges made. Fishers Fishers may be employees or self-employed contractors depending on the terms of their contracts. If you're unsure whether a fisher is an employee or self-employed, read page 5 of this guide. For fisher employees, deduct PAYE from their wages using the current PAYE tables. Payments to fishers who are not employees are taxed as schedular payments. Use the standard rate shown on the back of the IR330C, or the rate chosen by the fisher, provided it's not less than the applicable minimum. Foreign fishing workers Foreign crew working on a fishing vessel are non- residents for New Zealand tax purposes, but they must pay New Zealand tax on their New Zealand income (income paid to them while fishing in New Zealand waters). If they hold a work visa as foreign crew of a vessel fishing New Zealand waters, they use the NSW (non-resident seasonal worker) on their IR330 and are taxed through the PAYE system at a flat rate of 12.1% (includes ACC earners' levy). Use the NSW tax code for any foreign fishing workers on your employment information return. You may be required to make deductions for child support. Student loan repayments are not deducted and as non-residents, they are not be eligible to join KiwiSaver. IR56 taxpayers An IR56 taxpayer is a worker whose employer is not required to deduct PAYE from their earnings. They are responsible for paying their own PAYE. You cannot be an IR56 taxpayer if you are self- employed. Examples of IR56 taxpayers are: • • part-time private domestic workers, such as home helpers, attendant caregivers, nannies, gardeners and domestic odd-jobbers • • embassy staff • • New Zealand-based representatives of overseas companies • • United States Antarctic program personnel. Special types of workers 52 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Non-residents Generally, someone who comes to New Zealand, stays less than 183 days in any 12-month period, and who does not have an ‘enduring relationship’ with New Zealand, is taxed as a non-resident. A non-resident is liable for New Zealand tax on income for personal services performed in New Zealand, and other income from New Zealand sources. For more help If you want more information about tax residency, see our guide New Zealand tax residence - IR292. Non-resident employees Employers must deduct PAYE from wages paid to non-resident employees in the same way as for resident employees (see page 5 of this guide for a definition of an employee). However, a non- resident may be entitled to an exemption from New Zealand tax, either under a double tax agreement, or under the 92-day rule. In general, the 92-day rule applies if all the following criteria are met: • • the visit is less than 92 days • • the person's income is being taxed in another country • • the employer is also a non-resident. If you need more information about the 92-day rule, call us on 0800 377 772. It may not be clear if a non-resident qualifies for the exemption straight away. So, any PAYE deducted before exemption is established may have to be refunded later. Also, if a foreign tax administration requires tax payments, you may have to make double deductions. If it turns out the employee is not entitled to an exemption, you'll have to pay the PAYE on past wages paid. We'll tell you when the payment is due. If the person is employed over more than 1 income year, you must apportion the PAYE to the years the income was earned. Non-resident contractors Payments to non-resident contractors must have tax deducted, unless they hold a valid certificate of exemption or are present in New Zealand for 92 days or less in any 12-month period. This means you will not be required to deduct any tax. However, the non-resident contractor must have come from a country New Zealand has a double tax agreement with, and the activity or service carried out is exempt under the double taxation agreement. Payments for contract work amounting to $15,000 or less in a 12-month period will be exempt from non-resident tax. The non-resident contractors themselves will be responsible for paying any New Zealand tax owing at the end of the year. Specified contract activities or services are: • • work carried on in New Zealand for construction, installation, assembly and similar projects, or consultancy, advisory and other professional or technical services for these projects • • the hire of personnel or equipment to be used in New Zealand. 60-day grace period for late payments of tax If the contractor was expected to have an exemption or the exemption has been breached, all payments are liable for tax to be deducted. You may have a 60-day grace period to rectify the breach and pay the tax due without penalties being applied. For more information, refer to ird.govt.nz/apply-for-exemption-nr-contractor Backdated non-resident contractor exemptions For applications received after 1 April 2024, an exemption can be backdated for up to 92 days before the date of the application for exemption. This means that if the exemption is issued after the date of the first contract payment, the exemption can cover payments made before its issue date. Applications before 1 April 2024 cannot be backdated. Before 1 April 2024 a non-resident contractors' tax (NRCT) exemption was valid for future payments only (from the date the exemption was issued). Special types of workers 53ird.govt.nz Nominated taxpayer A non-resident contractor can enter in an arrangement with a nominated taxpayer. This allows the good compliance history of the nominated New Zealand entity to be used for the purpose of obtaining an exemption for the non- resident contractor. The non-resident contractor needs to provide authority for the resident nominated taxpayer to act in that capacity. The resident nominated taxpayer then needs to advise in writing they are taking over the agreed non-resident contractors’ obligations. The nominated taxpayer will be responsible for filing for all parties included in the agreement. All parties will be jointly and severally liable for the tax payable. For more help If you have any questions about how to treat non-resident contractors, contact the Non-resident Contractors Team on nr.contractors@ird.govt.nz or call us on +64 4 890 3056. Non-resident entertainers Deduct tax from payments to non-resident entertainers, except from payments for a performance: • • that is part of a New Zealand or foreign government sponsored cultural programme, or • • that forms part of a programme of an overseas non-profit organisation, or • • in relation to a game or sport, where the participants are the official representatives of the organisation that administers the game or sport in an overseas country. If you have any questions about non-resident entertainers, call Inland Revenue Large Enterprises, Auckland, on 09 984 4329. For more help If you have any questions about taxing non- residents and visitors to New Zealand, other than non-resident contractors and non-resident entertainers, contact the: Non-resident Centre Inland Revenue Private Bag 1932 Dunedin 9054 Phone 03 951 2020 Partners in a partnership A partnership (except an investment partnership) may make payments to a working partner for services personally performed. These payments are treated as salary or wages if all the following apply: • • the partner is employed under a binding written contract of service, signed by all the partners • • the contract states the amount payable to the working partner for the services • • the working partner personally and actively performs the services for the partnership. These services may be of any kind needed for the partnership's business. The payments are treated as salary and wages for the period between the date the contract became binding and the date the contract is terminated. The partnership must deduct PAYE and pay it to us. Piece-workers and outworkers If the payment is for piece-work or is based on output, and is solely for personal services, deduct PAYE as usual. If you do not pay salary or wages regularly, average the taxable earnings over the number of weeks in the working period. Treat any odd days as an extra week. Calculate the PAYE for each week separately and add up the PAYE to arrive at the total amount to deduct. Payments to a labour-only contractor in the building industry are liable for tax. To work out whether a worker is an employee or a contractor, see page 5 of this guide. Special types of workers 54 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Recognised seasonal workers You must be a registered employer for the Recognised seasonal employer (RSE) scheme to employ recognised seasonal workers. Recognised seasonal workers are generally employed in the horticulture and viticulture industries. They're non-resident for New Zealand tax purposes. However, they must pay tax on their New Zealand income. Recognised seasonal workers use the tax code NSW (non-resident seasonal worker) on their IR330 and are taxed at a flat rate of 12.1% (includes ACC earners’ levy). Use the NSW tax code for any recognised seasonal workers on your employment information returns. You may also have to make deductions for child support payments. Recognised seasonal workers do not have student loan deductions and they are not eligible to join KiwiSaver. The RSE scheme is administered by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. To find out more information go to www.employment.govt.nz Television and screen production industry workers Television and screen production industry workers are generally resident contractors working behind the camera in television, video and film in the screen production industry. Resident contractors must have tax deducted at the standard rate shown on the back of the IR330C, unless they choose their own rate provided it is not less than the applicable minimum. If they do not provide a Tax rate notification for contractors - IR330C or have not provided their name and IRD number on the form, use the non-notified rate of 45%. Any contractors who wants to use a lower rate of deduction than the applicable minimum can apply to us for a special tax rate certificate or a certificate of exemption. Taxing daily allowances Daily allowances paid to resident and non-resident contractors and entertainers working in the screen production industry in New Zealand, are included in their gross income for PAYE. However, if you pay a contractor or entertainer a daily allowance for services provided to a screen production, where they are working away from their town of normal residence, $60 each day is considered as expenses, and you do not need to deduct tax from this amount. If the daily allowance is more than $60, deduct tax from the portion over $60. Example You pay a contractor a $45 daily allowance as they're required to work away from their town of normal residence. You do not have to deduct tax because the total payment is less than $60. However, if the contractor or entertainer is also provided with goods or services for the allowance paid, either by the payer or another party acting on the payer's behalf, the amount regarded as expenses reduces on a pro-rata basis. This is because the contractor receiving the allowance has not incurred the expense. Example You pay a contractor a $60 daily allowance. The contractor is also provided with all meals while working, either on the set or at another location. The contractor has not incurred the expense so you must deduct tax from the allowance. Shareholder-employees in close companies Deduct PAYE from: • • regular salaries paid to shareholder-employees for pay periods of 1 month or less • • other payments made to shareholder-employees we consider to be liable for PAYE. Do not deduct PAYE from irregular salary payments made to a shareholder-employee. You include all shareholder-employee salaries where PAYE has not been deducted in the IR4 company tax return. Special types of workers 55ird.govt.nz Shearers, shearing shed hands and shearing contractors Shearers and shearing shed hands have PAYE deducted at a flat rate and use the tax code CAE. Combined farming and shearing If a shearer does ordinary farm work because shearing is impossible, include any wages for this work with shearing wages. If you employ someone for normal farm work and they also do shearing work at shearers' rates of pay, treat the shearing wages as part of the normal pay for the pay period. Calculate the PAYE using the current PAYE tables. Do not use the special rate for shearers and shearing shed hands. If a farmer does part-time shearing for another farmer, an IR330 declaration should be completed, and PAYE deducted using the CAE tax code Shearing contractors There are several different situations for shearing contractors and shearing gangs working for you: • • The contractors pay their own shearers and shows you a current Certificate of exemption - IR331 - see page 11. • • You do not deduct tax - pay the full contract price to the contractor. • • The contractors pay their own shearers but they do not show you a current IR331. • • You must get an IR330C from the contractor (WT tax code). The contractor may also have a special tax rate certificate - see page 8. If you do not get an IR330C, or the IR330C is not fully completed, deduct tax at the non-notified rate. The contractor must deduct PAYE from wages paid to employees. • • You pay the wages of the contractor's employees. Treat them as if you were employing them directly: - Get a completed IR330 from each employee. If an IR330 is not given to you or is not completed in full, deduct PAYE at the non- notified rate. - Deduct PAYE for shearers and shed hands using the CAE tax code. - If the contractor has a current Certificate of exemption - IR331, pay the contractor the contract price less the wages you've paid to the employees. - If the contractor does not have a current Certificate of exemption - IR331, you must get an IR330C from them and deduct tax from the contract payment. If they have a special tax rate certificate, you can deduct tax at the rate shown but you must still obtain an IR330C. • • Farmers who employ open-shed shearers or shed hands must: - Get a fully completed IR330 from each employee. If the IR330 is not completed, deduct PAYE at the non-notified rate. - Deduct PAYE for shearers and shed hands at the current rates using the CAE tax code. Contractors who pay shearers If you're a contractor and employ shearers and shed hands , you must deduct PAYE from any payments you make. Allowances Travelling allowances and hand-piece allowances are non-taxable. All other types of allowances, including the value of free meals and board, are taxable. Add the value of these allowances to wages. Show any tax-free allowances paid in your wage book. Spouses or partners The term spouse or partner means a husband or wife, or a civil union or de facto partner you're living with. It does not include a person you have separated from. If you employ your spouse or partner in your business (unless your business is a company) you must get approval from us to be able to claim a deduction of the wages paid for income tax purposes. Approval must be applied for and given before a deduction for wages paid to your spouse may be claimed. Approval cannot be given if you have already claimed this deduction in your return. We give approval if: • • the payment is solely for services given while carrying on the business, and • • the payment is not excessive. The rates must be the same as those you would pay to an unrelated employee for doing similar work. Special types of workers 56 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE When you apply to us, include the following details: • • The type of business your spouse or partner is employed in. • • Full details of the work done by them. • • The average number of hours they will work each week, and the number of weeks worked during the year. • • Details of any other workers you employ, and the total amount paid as wages, not including the wages paid to your spouse or partner. • • How payment of wages is made, such as cash at regular intervals, periodically, or crediting to an account. • • The amount of wages paid to your spouse or partner. You should apply for approval before you start paying your spouse or partner wages. You need to make another application if you increase the wages because of: • • an increase in the duties performed by your spouse or partner, or • • an increase in pay that is not a general wage increase. Subsidised workers If you employ someone who has been unemployed for a certain time, Work and Income may subsidise their wages. Deduct PAYE from the employee's wages using the current PAYE tables. Tax deductions should be made from the gross wage, not the gross wage less the subsidy. You must keep a record of the grants or subsidies received and how you've used them. There are GST obligations for these grants.If you're registered for GST, the wages subsidy received will be GST-inclusive and the GST component will need to be returned in your GST return. You cannot claim GST on wages paid out. Workers engaged in ‘activity in the community’ projects Under current benefit laws, people may choose to participate in a recognised community activity. The sponsor is the organisation that provides the recognised community activity. As an employer, you may be a sponsor. Participants of ‘activity in the community’ projects still receive income support. Those who choose to participate in a recognised community activity receive an allowance in addition to their income support. The sponsor is responsible for paying this allowance and can claim it back from Work and Income every 4 weeks. The sponsor is not an employer of any community work participants - they are acting as an agent of Work and Income in paying the allowance to the participant. This means the allowance is not subject to GST or income tax in the hands of the sponsor. You're not required to make any deductions from this allowance. Workers under labour-only contracts in the building industry Payments made under labour-only contracts for the following activities in the building industry are liable for tax: • • erecting, extending, protecting, decorating, repairing or renewing buildings, other constructions, prefabricated or precut buildings • • carpenters under a building contract (excluding employees - their earnings are liable for PAYE) • • laying concrete, bricks, blocks, tiles, slabs or stones of any description • • fixing roofs or fences • • hanging wallpaper, other decorative wall- coverings or furnishings • • painting, decorating and plastering • • installing any fibrous plaster, wallboard, insulating material, interior tiles, carpets, linoleum or other floor coverings. Special types of workers 57ird.govt.nz Working owners of a look- through company A look-through company may make payments to a working owner for services personally performed. These payments are treated as salary or wages if employed under a contract of employment. A contract of employment is an agreement that: • • sets out the terms and conditions of the services to be carried out by the working owner • • sets out the amount payable to the working owner for the services • • is in writing. Payments under certain labour hire arrangements This type of schedular payment activity applies when labour hire businesses supply workers to perform work directly for their clients. You must deduct tax from payments you make where: • • 1 of your main activities is the business of arranging for a person to perform work or services for your client(s), and • • you make a payment for work, or services provided directly for your client, or the client of another person. Payments described above by a labour hire business to a company are also subject to tax on schedular payments. To find out more about labour hire arrangements go to ird.govt.nz/schedular-payments Services you may need 58 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE Part 6 - Services you may need Need to speak with us? Have your IRD number ready and call us on one of these numbers. General tax, tax credits and refunds 0800 775 247 Employer enquiries 0800 377 772 General business tax 0800 377 774 Overdue returns and payments 0800 377 771 Find out more at ird.govt.nz/contact-us 0800 self-service numbers Our 0800 self-service numbers are open 7 days a week - except between 5am and 6am each day. Make sure you have your IRD number ready when you call. For access to your account-specific information, you'll need to be enrolled with voice ID or have a PIN. Order forms, guides and returns 0800 257 773 All other services 0800 257 777 When you call, confirm what you want from the options given. If you need to talk with us, we'll re-direct your call to someone who can help you. How to get our forms and guides You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Voice ID Voice ID identifies you through your unique voiceprint. Voice ID makes your calls to us faster and simpler, and your account more secure. You can access our self-service options, eg resetting your myIR password, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. We'll ask you to enrol for voice ID when you call. Supporting businesses in our community Our Community Compliance officers offer free tax education and advice to businesses and small organisations, as well as seminars for personal tax and entitlements. Our Kaitakawaenga Māori offer a free advisory service to help meet the needs of Māori individuals, organisations and businesses. Go to a seminar or workshop, or request a visit from us to find out more about: • • records you need to keep • • taxes you need to know about • • using our online services • • completing your tax returns (eg GST, employer returns) • • filing returns and making payments • • your KiwiSaver obligations. Go to ird.govt.nz/contact-us and select Request a business advisory visit to find out about requesting a visit. Find a seminar or workshop near you at ird.govt.nz/seminars Business Tax Update We've made some changes to the way we share our updates with you. business.govt.nz produce a newsletter covering a range of topics important to business. Along with several other Government agencies we'll have updates in this newsletter. You can still get up-to- date information about changes and improvements at Inland Revenue by reading our news and updates and articles on our media site. For information topical to business you can subscribe to this newsletter at business.govt.nz/ join-us/subscribe-to-our-newsletter/ Tax Information Bulletin (TIB) The TIB is our monthly publication containing detailed technical information about all tax changes. Subscribe at taxtechnical.ird.govt.nz/ subscribe and we'll send you an email when we publish each issue. Services you may need 59ird.govt.nz Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your tax and entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you do not. We may also exchange information about you with: • • some government agencies • • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them, and • • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). You can ask for the personal information we hold about you. We'll give the information to you and correct any errors unless we have a lawful reason not to. Find our full privacy policy at ird.govt.nz/privacy If you have a complaint about our service We're committed to providing you with a quality service. If there's a problem, we'd like to know about it and have the chance to fix it. Find out more about making a complaint at ird.govt.nz/disputes 60 EMPLOYER’S GUIDE