Notes to help you complete these forms Employer Details – complete the following on each page • • Employer name – enter your name. • • Employer IRD number – enter your IRD number. • • Month ending – the last day of the month that the pay date falls in • • Pay date: – Payday filing – this is the actual date you paid your employees – Twice-monthly filing – either the 15th or last day of the month. Refer to general information section for more details. Employee Details – complete the following for each employee/contractor’s pay period. For twice monthly filing, you may need to complete multiple entries for employees if they had more than one pay period. Refer to general information section for more details • • Employee name – enter the employee/contractor name. Can be legal or preferred name. • • IRD number – enter the employee/contractor IRD number. • • Tax code – use the code provided by your employee on their Tax code declaration (IR330) or contractor on their Tax rate notification for contractors (IR330C). • • Employment start/finish dates – only complete these when an employee/contractor starts or finishes working for you. • • Gross earnings and/or schedular payments – enter employee/contractor gross earnings and/or schedular payments. Include any gross earnings for a contractor with a 0% special tax rate. • • Child support code – refer to our Employer’s guide (IR335) for more information. • • Pay frequency – use the code for the relevant pay frequency from the table below: CodePay frequency DADaily WKWeekly FTFortnightly 4W4 weekly MTMonthly AHIrregular/Ad-hoc • • Pay period start/finish dates – enter the relevant dates for the pay period(s) • • Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners’ levy – Enter the amount of gross earnings and/or schedular payments that is not liable for ACC earners’ levy. • • PAYE and/or schedular tax deductions – enter the amount of tax deducted from the gross earnings or schedular payments. • • Child support deductions – enter the amount of child support deducted from the gross earnings or schedular payments. • • Student loan deductions – enter the amount of student loan deductions from the employee’s gross earnings. If you’ve made student loan deductions from an employee under two different tax codes, e.g. M SL and SLBOR and/or SLCIR, you need to show a separate entry for each type of deduction. • • KiwiSaver deductions – enter the amount of KiwiSaver deducted from the gross earnings or schedular payments. • • Net KiwiSaver employer contributions – enter the net amount of KiwiSaver employer contributions. • • ESCT deductions – include ESCT deductions for any employees with KiwiSaver employer contributions. Payday filing is easy online – Go to ird.govt.nz and log in or register for myIR to send us new employee details, file returns and make amendments. The Employers guide (IR335) has information about all your employer obligations. Any questions? Call us on 0800 377 772 IR349 Completing Employment Information forms IR337 July 2024 IR348 IR348 April 2020 Declaration I declare that the information given in this return is true and correct. OFFICE USE ONLY Corresp. indicator Date Signature / / Employment Information For help, refer to IR337 Completing Employment Information forms Employer name Employer IRD number 1 Month ending 2 Pay date 2A Day Month Year Employee name and IRD number SurnameFirst name(s)IRD number Tax code Employment date start Employment date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Child support code Pay frequency Pay Period date start Pay Period date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Gross earnings and/or schedular payments Employee share scheme income Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners’ levy 0000 Lump sum payment made and taxed at lowest rate PAYE and/or schedular tax deductionsChild support deductionsStudent loan deductionsKiwiSaver deductionsNet KiwiSaver employer contributionsESCT deductions SLCIRSLBORPrior period gross adjustmentsPrior period PAYE adjustmentNet income Employee name and IRD number SurnameFirst name(s)IRD number Tax code Employment date start Employment date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Child support code Pay frequency Pay Period date start Pay Period date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Gross earnings and/or schedular payments Employee share scheme income Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners’ levy 0000 Lump sum payment made and taxed at lowest rate PAYE and/or schedular tax deductionsChild support deductionsStudent loan deductionsKiwiSaver deductionsNet KiwiSaver employer contributionsESCT deductions SLCIRSLBORPrior period gross adjustmentsPrior period PAYE adjustmentNet income IR3480420 A&BLimited 123533410 3 10 82 0 2 4 1 50 82 0 2 4 BloggsJoe 01222222 2 M SL W K 0 50 82 4 1 1 0 8 2 4 1 5 0 0 3 2 4 4 01 0 0 0 01 2 4 3 26 0 0 03 1 5 0 1 3 5 0 DaviesRoss 01272314 2 WT 1 10 82 4 W K 0 50 82 4 1 10 82 4 2 0 0 2 0 0 2 1 0 0 RESET FORM IR349 April 2020 Employment Information For help, refer to IR337 Completing Employment Information forms Employer name Employer IRD number 1 Month ending 2 Pay date 2A Day Month Year Employee name and IRD number SurnameFirst name(s)IRD number Tax code Employment date start Employment date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Child support code Pay frequency Pay Period date start Pay Period date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Gross earnings and/or schedular payments Employee share scheme income Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners’ levy 0000 Lump sum payment made and taxed at lowest rate PAYE and/or schedular tax deductionsChild support deductionsStudent loan deductionsKiwiSaver deductionsNet KiwiSaver employer contributionsESCT deductions SLCIRSLBORPrior period gross adjustmentsPrior period PAYE adjustmentNet income Employee name and IRD number SurnameFirst name(s)IRD number Tax code Employment date start Employment date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Child support code Pay frequency Pay Period date start Pay Period date finish Day Month Year Day Month Year Gross earnings and/or schedular payments Employee share scheme income Earnings and/or schedular payments not liable for ACC earners’ levy 0000 Lump sum payment made and taxed at lowest rate PAYE and/or schedular tax deductionsChild support deductionsStudent loan deductionsKiwiSaver deductionsNet KiwiSaver employer contributionsESCT deductions SLCIRSLBORPrior period gross adjustmentsPrior period PAYE adjustmentNet income IR3490420 123533410 3 10 82 0 2 4 1 50 82 0 2 4 RawlinsStacey 12112222 2 M 0 50 82 4 W K 0 50 82 4 1 10 82 4 6 2 0 9 7 4 21 8 6 01 5 4 5 3 1 5 BloggsJoe 01222222 2 M SL W K 0 50 82 4 1 10 82 4 1 5 0 0 3 2 4 4 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 3 5 1 2 6 0 0 0 3 1 5 01 3 5 0 RESET FORM General Information If you’re a paper filer you can choose to complete Employment information (IR348/349) forms for each payday, or twice monthly. Twice monthly filers need to file Employment Information (EI) forms for the pay dates: • • the 15th of the month showing an employee line item for each pay from 1st to 15th of that month (for example if you paid an employee/contractor weekly on the 2nd and 9th of the month then you would record two separate lines for each weekly pay this employee/contractor received); and • • the last day of the month showing an employee line item for each pay from 16th to the last day of that month (for example if you paid an employee/contractor weekly on the 16th and 30th of the month then you would record two separate lines for each weekly pay this employee/contractor received). Paper filers need to send us completed EI forms within 10 working days of the pay date, otherwise a late filing penalty of $250 may be charged. The IR348 is page 1 of the EI form and includes the income and deductions fields for all employees/ contractors and the declaration. The IR349 is page 2 onwards of the EI form. You don’t need to send us nil EI forms if you haven’t paid any wages during a pay period, and you also don’t include non-taxable allowances on your EI. Paying online – when making payments electronically, select the “EMP” tax type. This means you can make a single payment for all your employer deductions and KiwiSaver contributions. Payday filing is mandatory from 1 April 2019 New employee and KiwiSaver details (IR346K) form You must complete one of these for any new employee(s) who start working for you and send it to us either: • • before their first pay day; or • • with the Employment Information (IR348) form that includes their first pay. Details you need to provide on this form include KiwiSaver status, tax code, address details, and date of birth (if you hold this). The picture below shows the section of the form that requests the details mentioned above. The New employee details forms can be downloaded from our website. Go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides. Employee Name Date of Birth DDMMYYYY First name(s) IRD number Surname Email AddressKiwiSaver Status Physical AddressTax Code Street address Suburb City Postcode