Goods and services tax return for goods sold in satisfaction of debt IR373 March 2019 Payment slip GSD 199 Creditor’s (ie seller) GST number Date of sale Day Month Year Amount of payment 7 Copy your total from Box 6 to Box 7 and include any late payment penalties and interest, for this period only.Return and payment must be received by the due date Please read the notes on the back page before completing this form.Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 Person selling the goods NameGST number 1 (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) AddressDate of sale 2 Street address Day Month Year Town or city Contact person Contact numbers PhoneFax Person whose goods were sold NameGST number 4 (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Address Street address Town or city Schedule Date of saleDescription of goods soldSelling priceGST content Day Month Year(GST-inclusive) Multiply selling price by 3 and divide by 23 equals or show 0.00 if zero-rated Declaration Total sales 5 $ The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. GST payable 6 $ Signature Date Notes General This form is used to file a special GST return when a creditor sells a debtor’s goods in satisfaction of a debt. If a creditor repossesses and then resells goods that were used in a taxable activity, the GST must be accounted for on the sale, unless either: • the debtor advises the creditor in writing that the sale would not be taxable if they had sold the goods themselves, and the reasons why such a sale would not be taxable, or • the creditor holds enough reasonable information to conclude that a sale by the debtor would not have been taxable. If the debtor and purchaser are both registered for GST then the zero-rated rules may apply. Please refer to the GST guide (IR375). The creditor’s responsibility to file a special GST return is not affected by whether or not they are registered for GST. Registration number Print the GST registration number for the person selling the goods (creditor) in Box 1 and the person whose goods were sold (debtor) in Box 4. If the creditor or the debtor is not GST-registered, please provide their IRD numbers instead. Month of sale Show the last day of the month when the sale(s) were made. This is the basis for when your return and payment will be due. Schedule Show a clear description of the goods sold. Continue on a separate sheet if you need more space. Selling price For each of the items listed, show the total amount the goods were sold for. This amount is GST-inclusive. GST content Multiply the selling price by 3 and divide by 23 equals or show 0.00 if zero-rated. Refer to GST guide IR 375 for further details on the zero-rated rules. Filing • The creditor must complete a separate return for each person whose goods were sold, and for each month of sale. • The creditor must send the special return and payment to Inland Revenue and keep the bottom copy for their records. • For any sales from March 2007 onwards you must file this special return and account for the GST by the 28th of the month following the month of sale. There are two exceptions to this, the month of November, the special return is due on the 15th of January and the month of March, the special return is due on the 7th May. For any sales up to February 2007 you must file this special return and account for the GST by the last working day of the month following the month of sale. • The creditor must also provide the information shown on the return to the debtor by this date. Declaration Please make sure that you have signed the declaration. Need to contact us? Find the best way to contact us at www.ird.govt.nz/contact-us www.ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR to manage your tax and entitlements online. • Demonstrations – learn about our services by watching short videos. • Get it done online – complete forms and returns, make payments, give us feedback. • Work it out – use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides – download our forms and guides. Forgotten your myIR user ID or password? Request a reminder of your user ID or reset your password online. You’ll need to know your IRD number and have access to the email address we hold for you. Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities or your entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you don’t. We may also exchange information about you with: • some government agencies • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask for the personal information we hold about you, we’ll give it to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Call us on 0800 775 247 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keyword: privacy). Please send the completed return to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre Goods and services tax return for goods sold in satisfaction of debt IR373 March 2019 Payment slip GSD 199 Creditor’s (ie seller) GST number Date of sale Day Month Year Amount of payment 7 Copy your total from Box 6 to Box 7 and include any late payment penalties and interest, for this period only.Return and payment must be received by the due date Please retain this copy for your records.Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 Person selling the goods NameGST number 1 (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) AddressDate of sale 2 Street address Day Month Year Town or city Contact person Contact numbers PhoneFax Person whose goods were sold NameGST number 4 (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Address Street address Town or city Schedule Date of saleDescription of goods soldSelling priceGST content Day Month Year(GST-inclusive) Multiply selling price by 3 and divide by 23 equals or show 0.00 if zero-rated Declaration Total sales 5 $ The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. GST payable 6 $ Signature Date