Return and payment due Registration no. Period covered by the return 2 1 If your correct postal address for GST is not shown above, print it in Box 3. 3 If your correct daytime phone number is not shown here, print it in Box 4. 4 Area codePhone number Total sales and income for the period (including GST and any zero-rated supplies) 5 Goods and services tax on your sales and income Zero-rated supplies included in Box 5 6 Subtract Box 6 from Box 5 and enter the difference here 7 OFFICE USE ONLY Correspondence indicator Multiply the amount in Box 7 by three (3) and then divide by twenty-three (23) 8 Adjustments from your calculation sheet 9 Add Box 8 and Box 9. This is your total GST collected on sales and income 10 Goods and services tax on your purchases and expenses Total purchases and expenses (including GST) – excluding any imported goods. Keep the records required to support your claims. 11 Multiply the amount in Box 11 by three (3) and then divide by twenty-three (23) 12 Declaration The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. Credit adjustments from your calculation sheet 13 Add Box 12 and Box 13. This is your total GST credit for purchases and expenses 14 Print the difference between Box 10 and Box 14 here 15 / / Signature Date (Tick one) If Box 14 is larger than Box 10 the difference is your GST refundRefund If Box 10 is larger than Box 14 the difference is GST to payGST to pay GST101A April 2023 Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 Goods and services tax return For help in completing this return go to ird.govt.nz/gst Please turn over to complete any additional information and payment slip IR 378 April 2023 Model cashbook Example How to complete your GST return using a cashbook Step 1 – Multiply each bank reference which includes GST by 3 and divide by 23 Cashbook – sales and income DATEREFERENCE INV# BANKGST RECEIVED TOTALS Step 2 – Total each column Step 3 – Transfer GST received total to Box 8 Step 4 – Calculate any GST adjustments. Transfer the GST portion of the adjustment to Box 9 Step 1 – Multiply each bank reference which includes GST by 3 and divide by 23 Cashbook – purchases and expenses DATEREFERENCE CHQ BANKGST PAID TOTALS Step 2 – Total each column Step 3 – Transfer GST paid total to Box 12 Step 4 – Calculate any GST adjustments. Transfer the GST portion of the adjustment to Box 13 Adjustments Box 9—debit adjustments • private use of business goods and services • assets costing less than $18,000 • assets kept when ceasing to be registered • entertainment expenses (once a year only) • change of accounting basis • goods and services used in making exempt supply • other (such as barter, bad debts recovered, exported secondhand goods or insurance payments received). Box 13—credit adjustments • business use of private goods and services • assets costing less than $18,000 • change of accounting basis • other (such as bad debts written off or payments to the New Zealand Customs Service). Note: Remember the amounts included in Boxes 9 and 13 of your return are the GST portion. See our website ird.govt.nz/gst for an explanation of different types of adjustments. You can file your GST returns in myIR. Register or log on at ird.govt.nz Multiply by 23 and divide by 3 Multiply by 23 and divide by 3 Payments basis Return and payment due Registration no. Period covered by the return 2 1 If your correct postal address for GST is not shown above, print it in Box 3. 3 If your correct daytime phone number is not shown here, print it in Box 4. 4 Area codePhone number Total sales and income for the period (including GST and any zero-rated supplies) 5 Goods and services tax on your sales and income Zero-rated supplies included in Box 5 6 Subtract Box 6 from Box 5 and enter the difference here 7 OFFICE USE ONLY Correspondence indicator Multiply the amount in Box 7 by three (3) and then divide by twenty-three (23) 8 Adjustments from your calculation sheet 9 Add Box 8 and Box 9. This is your total GST collected on sales and income 10 Goods and services tax on your purchases and expenses Total purchases and expenses (including GST) – excluding any imported goods. Keep the records required to support your claims. 11 Multiply the amount in Box 11 by three (3) and then divide by twenty-three (23) 12 Declaration The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. Credit adjustments from your calculation sheet 13 Add Box 12 and Box 13. This is your total GST credit for purchases and expenses 14 Print the difference between Box 10 and Box 14 here 15 / / Signature Date (Tick one) If Box 14 is larger than Box 10 the difference is your GST refundRefund If Box 10 is larger than Box 14 the difference is GST to payGST to pay GST101A April 2023 Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 Goods and services tax return For help in completing this return go to ird.govt.nz/gst Please turn over to complete any additional information and payment slip Cashbook – sales and income DATEREFERENCEINV#BANK GST RECEIVED SALESGRANTS FUNDS INTRODUCED (NO GST) INTEREST (NO GST) SUNDRY 3 JuneCustomer (sale)72,00000260871,73913 5 JuneGovernment (grant)45000587039130 8 JuneSale of computer (fixed asset)1,125001467497826 15 JuneOwner – Partner8000080000 22 JuneBank interest15351535 25 JuneCustomer (sale)81,75000228261,52174 26 JuneCommission sales92,50000326092,17391 TOTALS8,640351,020665,434783913080000153597826 Model cashbook How to complete your GST return using a cashbook Before you can start filling in your GST return, you need to reconcile your cashbook with your bank statements. This simply means balancing your bank statement against the money you’ve paid or received. If you have difficulty reconciling your cashbook, your tax agent or bank should be able to help. Cashbook – purchases and expenses DATEREFERENCECHQBANKGST PAIDPURCHASES COMMERCIAL RENT MOTOR VEHICLE WAGES (NO GST) LOAN REPAYMENT (NO GST) PRIVATE DRAWINGS (NO GST) SUNDRY 3 JuneStock Ltd (purchase)1003,50000456523,04348 3 JuneH. Elp (wages)1018810088100 8 JuneLandlord (commercial rent)10275000978365217 15 JunePetrol co10355006524348500 22 JunePAYE paid to IRD1041950019500 25 JunePartner drawings1054000040000 28 JuneGST paid to IRD1063109831098 30 JuneBank feesDD10251025 30 JuneLoanAP8000080000 TOTALS6,90223560873,043486521743481,07600800004050032123 Step 1 Write the GST content for each bank reference which includes GST in the GST received or paid column (multiply each bank total by 3 and divide by 23). Remember, there are some sales and income, and purchase and expense items that have no GST included in the bank total. Leave the GST column blank for these items. Step 2 Once you have reconciled your cashbook to your bank statement, total the columns of your cashbook. For more information on reconciling your cashbook and bank statements. Step 3 GST on sales and income Transfer the GST received total from your cashbook to Box 8 of your GST return. Multiply the amount in Box 8 by 23 and divide by 3. This will give you the total sales and income amount including GST. Write this figure in Box 7. If you have any zero-rated supplies write the total in Box 6. Add Box 7 and Box 6. This is your total for Box 5. GST on purchases and expenses Transfer the total GST paid on purchases and expenses to Box 12 of your return. Multiply the amount in Box 12 by 23 and divide by 3 and put your answer in Box 11. This will give you the total purchases and expenses amount including GST. Step 4 If you have any GST adjustments to make, add them up and show the adjustment totals in Boxes 9 and 13. Remember, the amount to enter is the GST portion only. Keep a record of how you calculated your adjustments for Boxes 9 and 13. For more information see “Adjustments” on the other page or see our ird.govt.nz/gst If you’re using the payments basis of accounting you’ll find the cashbook a very easy and convenient system of accounting for GST. A M BROWN AND M A SMITH PARTNERSHIP PO BOX 2198 WELLINGTON 6000 28 JULY 2023 from 01/06/11 30/06/23 20 07 23 ✓ 7 825 0 6 7 825 0 6 1 020 6 6 1 020 6 6 4 300 0 0 560 87 560 87 459 79 04 497 7777 909128438 ONE MONTHLY 398765432198L2 Multiply by 23 and divide by 3 Multiply by 23 and divide by 3