New Zealand non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) Refund request or certification of NRWT paid 882168\_IR 386 Sept 07 fin 20/9/07 2:10 PM Page 1 CMYCMMYCYCMYK New Zealand non-resident withholding tax (NRWT) Refund request or certification of NRWT paid Reason for filling in this form (Please tick one) IR 386 September 2007 Please read the Non-resident withholding tax – payer’s guide (IR 291) and the notes on the back page to help you fill in this form. If you need more help completing this form, contact the Non-resident Centre on 64 3 951 2020, fax 64 3 951 2216 or email nonres@ird.govt.nz Refund request Certification of NRWT paid Period ended Recipient’s New Zealand IRD number Recipient’s full name Recipient’s postal address BankBranchAccount numberSuffix Recipient’s bank account number (if applicable) Gross NRWI in NZ$ Tax deducted in NZ$ Correct NRWT in NZ$ Dividends Interest Royalties Copyright royalties Total Difference to be refunded Street address Town, city, country Note: If recipients have a New Zealand IRD number they should file a Non-resident income tax return (IR 3NR) for refund requests instead of using this form. Recipient’s overseas address Street address Town, city, country Tick to show where you would like this refund sent: Payer’s postal address Recipient’s overseas address Payer’s bank account Recipient’s bank account Recipient’s postal address Day MonthYear Recipient’s details Type of non-resident withholding income (NRWI) (8 digit numbers start in the second box.) Please read the Non-resident withholding tax – payer’s guide (IR 291) and the notes on the back page to help you fill in this form. If you need more help completing this form, contact us on +64 4 832 5205. Reason for filling in this form (Please tick one) Refund request Certification of NRWT paid Period ended Day Month Year Recipient’s New Zealand IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Note: If recipients have a New Zealand IRD number they should file a Non-resident income tax return (IR 3NR) for refund requests instead of using this form. Recipient’s details Recipient’s full name Recipient’s postal address Street address Town, city, country Recipient’s overseas address Street address Town, city, country Recipient’s bank account number (if applicable) Bank Branch Account number Suffix Tick to show where you would like this refund sent: Payer’s postal address Payer’s bank account Recipient’s postal address Recipient’s overseas address Recipient’s bank account Type of non-resident withholding income (NRWI) Gross NRWI in NZ$ Tax deducted in NZ$ Correct NRWT in NZ$ Dividends Interest Royalties Copyright royalties Total Difference to be refunded IR386 December 2023 Payer’s details Payer’s IRD number Payer’s name Payer’s postal address Payer’s bank account number (if applicable) Bank Branch Account number Suffix Certification Contact name (by payer or Inland Revenue) Authorised person Contact phone number / / Date Signature Inland Revenue authority or bank authority (stamp and initial) Notes When to use this form Current year NRWT over-deduction Any NRWT over-deduction for the current year can be adjusted by simply deducting less NRWT from the next payment to the recipient. If you do this, please send a letter of explanation with your reduced payment, so we do not charge you penalties. You will need to know the period you over-deducted, so we can transfer the credit. If the recipient is no longer one of your clients, you cannot alter a future payment. The recipient must apply for the refund using this form. Back-year NRWT over-deduction If there is any NRWT over-deduction for previous financial years, use this form for each affected recipient and attach a covering letter explaining the situation. You will also need to send the recipient(s) a letter showing correct income and NRWT details. Please do not amend the certificates or file an amended reconciliation. We will change the reconciliation you file, as well as the NRWT certificate(s). How to use this form In some cases, the payer of NRWT will fill in all the details on this form. In others, the recipient will ask the payer to complete or certify the form that they have started. Please fill in all the information requested, as we need to arrange the refund. Refund requests You must clearly show where the refund is to go. The fastest option is for us to refund the credit to the payer, as the credit is in the payer’s account and is linked to the payer’s IRD number. In some cases the refund may have to go directly to the nonresident, particularly if they are no longer a client of the payer. If the non-resident has an IRD number and an account with us, we will transfer the credit from the payer’s account and refund it to the recipient’s account. When you have completed this form, send it to Inland Revenue PO Box 39010 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045 New Zealand For more information Please read our NRWT - payer’s guide - IR291. You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools.