Page 1 Approved issuer levy (AIL) - payer election IR396 April 2021 DLN Please answer all the questions and make sure you sign the declaration on page 2. You may use this form to register your security. However if you have more than one security to register, you need to complete a separate Application to register security or securities for approved issuer levy (AIL) - IR397 for each one. Please see the notes on page 3 to help you complete this form. Payer's details IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Print your full name, or the name of your estate, trust or partnership, or the registered name of your company MrMrsMissMsNon-individual (Tick one) If your trade name is different from the name shown above, print it here Your contact numbers ( )( ) BusinessMobile Your email address Print the street address of your place of business (do not use a box number) Street address Suburb or RDTown or cityPost code Print your usual postal address if it is different from your street address Street address or PO Box number Suburb, RD or box lobbyTown or cityPost code Do not show your tax agent's address here. Your tax agent maintains a client list with us. Ask them to give us the address for your AIL mail. Bank Account Details Bank Branch Account number Suffix Name on bank account Credit union or building society Reference number Proof of bank account If you are a non-resident/offshore entity, attach proof of an active bank account with the name and number, such as a bank statement. If you are a New Zealand resident entity you do not need to provide evidence. When did you start paying interest to the recipient(s)? Day Month Year How much AIL do you expect to be liable for each year? $500 or more - we will register you on a monthly basis under $500 each month - you will need to file once the deduction exceed $500 Page 1 Page 2 Print the full name of the person we can contact about this registration in case we need to clarify anything Contact phone number ( ) Declaration I declare that the information given in this form is true and correct Signature of authorised person Date Send this form to Inland Revenue, PO Box 39050, Wellington Mail Centre, Wellington 5045. Security details Print full name of borrower/issuer Individual (indicate first and last names) Non-individual (Tick one) Name Address Country of residence/incorporation Print full name of lender Individual (indicate first and last names) Non-individual (Tick one) Name Address Country of residence/incorporation Description of security to be registered (attach copy of loan/security agreement) Description Amount Te r m Purpose Security Is the security a corporate bond qualifying for zero-rating? Ye s No Currency Is the security a fixed or variable principal instrument? Fixed Variable Show the issue and redemption date of the expected security Issue date Redemption date Day Month Year Day Month Year Show the face value of the security in New Zealand dollars Face value Redemption value Show the interest or coupon rate (per annum) Is interest being paid to an associated person or persons? Yes (AIL is not applicable and NRWT must be deducted) (see notes page 3) No Page 3 Notes You must file your AIL information and pay your AIL electronically unless you have an electronic filing exemption. You can apply for an exemption if you are unable to supply your AIL information electronically. In considering your request we will assess: • your capabilities • the digital services available to you • the compliance costs to you. Go to ird.govt.nz/filing-exemption for more information. IRD number Show the IRD number that you will be using for all approved issuer levy (AIL) payments for your whole organisation. If you have several branches and would like to account for AIL separately for each: • use the IRD number for each individual branch • use a separate form for each branch (you may photocopy this registration form). Full name Show the full name of the interest payer. Trade name This is needed if you trade under a different name from your registered name. Street address Show the physical street or location address, not a PO Box number. Postal address This is the usual mailing address for your business. Do not show your tax agent's address here - if you want your agent to receive your approved issuer levy forms, they will need to let us know separately. We suggest you ask your agent to do this straightaway. When did you start paying? Show the date that you first paid interest if you know it (leave it blank if you're unsure). Do not show the date that the first approved issuer levy is due to Inland Revenue. Due date Your AIL return and payment must be completed by the 20th of the month following the month interest was paid. If you expect to pay less than $500 AIL in any income year, you may pay on a six-monthly basis. If the due date falls on a weekend or a New Zealand public holiday, the due date is the next working day. AIL of $500 or more each year If you pay AIL of $500 or more each year, the due date for payment is the 20th of the month following the month the interest was paid. Associated persons Associated persons are: • any relative to the second degree by blood, marriage, civil union or adoption • any two or more companies where a group of persons have: • 50% or more of the voting interests, or • 50% or more of the market value interests, or control of both companies by any other means • any company and any individual who holds at least 25% of the capital of the company, either individually or with a spouse and/or children, or a trustee for the spouse or children • a partnership and a partner or any person who is an associated person of any partner. You must deduct NRWT if you are making a payment of interest to associated persons. Registering a security If you do not already have approved issuer status, you can apply to be an approved issuer when you register your first security. You can apply and register one security in myIR. All other securities must be registered separately on an Application to register security or securities for approved issuer levy (AIL) or zero-rating - IR397. You must tell us about any changes to your securities before maturity or redemption, as this may affect whether AIL still applies. You can send a secure email in myIR to do this. Contact person Show the name and phone number of the person we can contact if we need any further information. ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools.