Income tax return Income Tax Act 2007 • Tax Administration Act 1994 Non-resident individual taxpayers IR3NR 2020 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020 See page 5 of the guide. 1 If your IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 1 2 If your correct name is not shown above, print it in full in Box 2. 2 MrMrsMissMs Please put first names above and surname below 3 If your correct postal address is not shown above, print the full address in Box 3. Don't print your tax agent's address here. See page 5 of the guide. 3 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town or city below 4 If your full overseas address is not shown below, print it in Box 4. 4 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, city and country below 5 If your correct date of birth is not shown below, print it in Box 5. 5 Day Month Year 6 If your correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in Box 6. 6 Country code Prefix Phone number 7 If your correct New Zealand bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 7. 7 Bank Branch Account number Suffix 8 Did you receive New Zealand Superannuation? 8 No Ye s Go to Question 9. See page 5 in the guide. • You can file your return online at ird.govt.nz • The 2020 IR3NR guide is available on our website. To view a copy go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides • Please see page 4 in the IR3NR guide to see if you need to complete this return. Non-resident passive income 9Did you have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to you? Include any interest from partnerships and trusts. Keep your interest statements or certificates. No Go to Question 10.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 7 of the guide. Don't include any interest subject to approved issuer levy. See page 8 in the guide. If you have income from a PIE see page 22 in the guide. Name of payerRWTGross interest To t a l RW TTotal gross interest (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 9A9B Work out the NRWT on your total interest from the rates given on our website ird.govt.nz/nrwt and print your answer in Box 9C. 9C 10Did you have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to you? Include any dividends from partnerships and trusts. Keep your dividend statements. Do not include fully imputed dividends where you have a 10% or greater direct voting interest - see page 9 in the guide. No Go to Question 11.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 9 in the guide. If you have income from a PIE see page 22 in the guide. Name of companyDividend withholding taxGross dividend Total dividend creditsTotal gross dividends 10A10B Work out the NRWT on your total dividends from the rates given on our website ird.govt.nz/nrwt and print your answer in Box 10C. 10C 11Did you have any New Zealand royalties paid or credited to you? Include any royalties from partnerships and trusts. Keep your royalty statements. No Go to Question 12.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 10 in the guide. Total tax Total gross royalties 11A11B Work out the NRWT on your total royalties from the rates given on our website ird.govt.nz/nrwt and print your answer in Box 11C. 11C 12Total tax credits and total NRWT Total tax credits Add Boxes 9A, 10A and 11A. Print the total in Box 12A. Copy this amount to Box 30E on page 5. 12A To t a l N RW T Add Boxes 9C, 10C and 11C. Print the total in Box 12C. Copy this amount to Box 30C on page 5. 12C Other income 13Did you receive New Zealand income with tax deducted? Show interest, dividends and royalties above. Don't include them here. No Go to Question 14.Ye sCopy the details from your Summary of Income - SOI to the boxes below. See page 11 in the guide. Total tax deductionsTotal gross income 13A13B 14Did you receive any taxable distributions from a Māori authority? Keep your distribution statement. No Go to Question 15.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 12 in the guide. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distributions 14A14B 15Did you receive any New Zealand partnership income? Show interest, dividends and royalties on page 2. Don't include them here. No Go to Question 16.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 12 in the guide. Name of partnership IRD numberType of incomePartnership tax creditsPartnership income Name of partnership IRD numberType of incomePartnership tax creditsPartnership income Add all partnership tax credits and print the total in Box 15A. Add all partnership income and print the total in Box 15B. Total partnership tax creditsTotal partnership income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 15A15B 16Did you receive any New Zealand estate or trust income? Show interest, dividends and royalties on page 2. Don't include them here. No Go to Question 17.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 13 in the guide. Name of estate or trust IRD numberType of incomeEstate or trust tax creditsEstate or trust income Name of estate or trust IRD numberType of incomeEstate or trust tax creditsEstate or trust income Add all estate or trust tax credits and print the total in Box 16A. Add all estate or trust income and print the total in Box 16B. Total estate or trust tax creditsTotal estate or trust income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 16A16B 17Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? (Exclude any income/losses received that you've included at Questions 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23.) No Go to Question 18.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 14 in the guide. Total LTC tax credits 17A Total active LTC income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 17B Non-allowable deduction this year 17C Prior years' non-allowable deduction claimed this year 17D Adjusted LTC income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Either add Boxes 17B and 17C or subtract Box 17D from Box 17B. Print your answer in Box 17E. 17E 18Total tax credits and subtotal of other income. Add Boxes 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A and 17A. Print the total in Box 18A. Copy this total to Box 30F on page 5. Add Boxes 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, and 17E. Print the total in Box 18B. Total tax creditsOther income (subtotal, if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 18A18B 19Did you receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? No Go to Question 20.Ye sPrint the totals below. See page 14 of the guide. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 19A19B Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 19C Not applicable 19D Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxExcess residential rental deductions carried forward 19E19F 20Did you receive any other New Zealand rents? Don't include any income already shown at Question 19. No Go to Question 21.Ye sPrint your net rents below. See page 18 in the guide. Net rents (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 20 21Did you receive income from self-employment in New Zealand? No Go to Question 22.Ye sPrint details here. See page 19 in the guide. Net self-employed income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 21 22Did you receive any income from taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in the return? (Do not include any bright-line loss) No Go to Question 23.Ye sPrint your details below. See pages 20 & 21 in the guide. Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) creditProfit/loss from sale of property - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 22A22B 23Did you receive any other income, (including PIE income - see page 22 in the guide) from New Zealand? No Go to Question 24.Ye sPrint the details and total below. See page 21 in the guide. Please put name of payer above and type of income belowAny other income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 23 Name of payer 24Total other income Total other income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Add Boxes 18B, 19E, 20, 21, 22B, and 23. Print the total in Box 24. 24 25Are you claiming other expenses against your income? Note: If you've claimed expenses somewhere else in the return, do not show them here. No Go to Question 26.Ye sPrint the details and total below. See page 22 in the guide. If you paid someone to complete your return, print that person's name in the panel below.Total other expenses 25 26Income after expenses Income after expenses (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Subtract Box 25 from Box 24. Print your answer in Box 26. 26 27Are you claiming net losses brought forward? No Go to Question 28.Ye sPrint the loss amounts below. See page 23 in the guide. Amount brought forwardAmount claimed this year 27A - 27B - 28Your taxable income Taxable income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Subtract Box 27B from Box 26. Print your answer in Box 28. Copy this total to Box 30A. If this amount is a loss, print 0.00 in Box 30A. 28 Tax credits 29Did you work in New Zealand at any time from 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020? 29 No Go to Question 30.Ye s You may be entitled to a tax credit. Please answer the questions below so we can work out the amount of your tax credit. Print the amount of income earned. Print the number of weeks and days you worked in New Zealand to earn this income. weeks days Print the dates you arrived in and left New Zealand below. Period from to Day Month Year Day Month Year We will work out any tax credits you are entitled to and show them on your notice of assessment. Tax calculation 30Calculate your tax here Copy your taxable income from Box 28 to Box 30A. 30A To work out the tax on your other income use the "Tax on annual income calculator" on our website or page 24 in the guide. Print your answer in Box 30B. 30B Copy your total NRWT from Box 12C to Box 30C. 30C Add Box 30B and Box 30C and print your answer in Box 30D. 30D Copy your total tax credits from Box 12A to Box 30E. 30E Copy your total tax credits from Box 18A to Box 30F. 30F Copy any residential land withholding tax credit from Box 22A to Box 30FA. 30FA Add Boxes 30E, 30F and 30FA and print the total in Box 30G. 30G Subtract Box 30G from Box 30D and print your answer in Box 30H. 30H If Box 30G is larger than Box 30D the difference is a credit. If Box 30D is larger than Box 30G the difference is a debit. (Tick one) Credit Debit This is your residual income tax. Print any 2020 provisional tax paid in Box 30I. 30I If Box 30H is a credit, add Box 30H and Box 30I. Print your answer in Box 30J. If Box 30H is a debit, subtract Box 30I from Box 30H. Print your answer in Box 30J. 30J If Box 30I is larger than Box 30J the difference is your refund. (Tick one) Refund Tax to pay Refunds and/or transfers 31Getting a refund - how do you want it paid? Copy your refund from Box 30J to Box 31A. 31A Print any overpayment of 2021 provisional tax you would like refunded in Box 31B. 31B Add Box 31A and Box 31B and print your answer in Box 31C. 31C Do you want the refund transferred: to your 2020 provisional tax? Print the amount in Box 31D. 31D to someone else's income tax account? Are you "associated"? See page 27 in the guide. 31E Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving your refundTheir IRD number 31F Year ended 31 MarchAmount 31G If you want your: • refund transferred to another period or tax type • overpaid 2021 provisional tax transferred to pay your 2020 residual income tax debt staple a note to the top of the front page of this return. Subtract Boxes 31D and 31G from Box 31C. Print your answer in Box 31H. This is your balance, which is the amount we will refund. 31H The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your New Zealand bank account. Please check the bank account number is preprinted at Question 7. If your New Zealand bank account isn't preprinted please include it at Question 7. 2021 provisional tax 32Is the amount in 30H more than $5,000? No Go to Question 33.Ye sYou may have to pay 2021 provisional tax. See page 29 in the guide, then print the details below. Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 32A. 32A Print your 2021 provisional tax payable in Box 32B. 32B 33Is this return for a part-year? No Go to Question 34.Ye sSee pages 4 and 31 in the guide and tick the situation below that applies to you. 33A You left New Zealand permanently (for more than 325 days) You were declared bankrupt This return is for a deceased person to the date of their death Your balance date changed during the year. Fromto Print the start and end dates the return is for in the spaces provided 33B33C Day Month Year Day Month Year 34If you have ever lived in New Zealand, print the date you left New Zealand Day Month Year and how long you plan to be away. Notice of assessment and declaration Please see page 32 in the guide. 35Please read and sign the following: The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2020 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. There are penalties for not filing a tax return or for filing a false return. See page 32 in the guide. Signature Date / / Please make a copy of this return for your own records. 36What to do next • Remember - your return is due on 7 July 2020 unless you have an extension of time. • Remember - if you have tax to pay, you need to pay it by 7 February 2021 to avoid any penalties (if you have a tax agent see page 32 in the guide). You can pay earlier if you want to. If you want to pay now, you can make a payment electornically. For more information about making payments go to ird.govt.nz/pay • Post your return to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045, New Zealand. Keep a copy for your records. Privacy - to find out what may happen to the information you provide in this form, see page 34 in the guide. OFFICE USE ONLY 37 Correspondence indicatorAccounts Included?Ye sNo March 2020