Income tax return Income Tax Act 2007 • Tax Administration Act 1994 Non-resident individual taxpayers IR3NR 2022 1 April 2021 to 31 March 2022 See the guide for further details. 1 If your IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 1 2 If your correct name is not shown above, print it in full in Box 2. 2 MrMrsMissMs Put first names above and surname below 3 If your correct postal address is not shown above, print the full address in Box 3. Do not print your tax preparers address here. See the guide for further details. 3 Put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town or city below 4 If your full overseas address is not shown below, print it in Box 4. 4 Put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, city and country below 5 If your correct date of birth is not shown below, print it in Box 5. 5 Day Month Year 6 If your correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in Box 6. 6 Country code Prefix Phone number 7 If your correct New Zealand bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 7. 7 Bank Branch Account number Suffix 8 Did you receive New Zealand Superannuation? 8 No Ye s Go to Question 9. See the guide for further details. • You can complete your return in myIR • The 2022 IR3NR guide is available on our website. To view a copy go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides • See the IR3NR guide to check if you need to complete this return. Non-resident passive income 9Did you have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to you? Include any interest from partnerships and trusts. Keep your interest statements or certificates. No Go to Question 10.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Do not include any interest subject to approved issuer levy. See the guide for further details. If you have income from a PIE see the guide for further details. Name of payerRWTGross interest To t a l RW TTotal gross interest (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 9A9B Work out the NRWT on your total interest from the rates given on our website ird.govt.nz/nrwt and print your answer in Box 9C. 9C 10Did you have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to you? Include any dividends from partnerships and trusts. Keep your dividend statements. Do not include fully imputed dividends where you have a 10% or greater direct voting interest - see the guide for further details. No Go to Question 11.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. If you have income from a PIE see the guide for further details. Name of companyDividend withholding taxGross dividend Total dividend creditsTotal gross dividends 10A10B Work out the NRWT on your total dividends from the rates on our website ird.govt.nz/nrwt and print your answer in Box 10C. 10C 11Did you have any New Zealand royalties paid or credited to you? Include any royalties from partnerships and trusts. Keep your royalty statements. No Go to Question 12.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Total tax Total gross royalties 11A11B Work out the NRWT on your total royalties from the rates on our website ird.govt.nz/nrwt and print your answer in Box 11C. 11C 12Total tax credits and total NRWT Total tax credits Add Boxes 9A, 10A and 11A. Print the total in Box 12A. Copy this amount to Box 32E on page 5. 12A To t a l N RW T Add Boxes 9C, 10C and 11C. Print the total in Box 12C. Copy this amount to Box 32C on page 5. 12C Other income 13Did you receive New Zealand income with tax deducted? Show interest, dividends and royalties above. Do not include them here. No Go to Question 14.Ye sCopy the details from your Summary of Income to the boxes below. See the guide for further details. Total tax deductionsTotal gross income 13A13B 14Did you receive any taxable distributions from a Māori authority? Keep your distribution statement. No Go to Question 15.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distributions 14A14B 15Did you receive any New Zealand partnership income? Show interest, dividends and royalties on page 2. Do not include them here. No Go to Question 16.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Name of partnership IRD numberType of incomePartnership tax creditsPartnership income Name of partnership IRD numberType of incomePartnership tax creditsPartnership income Add all partnership tax credits and print the total in Box 15A. Add all partnership income and print the total in Box 15B. Total partnership tax creditsTotal partnership income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 15A15B 16Did you receive any New Zealand estate or trust income? Show interest, dividends and royalties on page 2. Do not include them here. No Go to Question 17.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Name of estate or trust IRD numberType of incomeEstate or trust tax creditsEstate or trust income Name of estate or trust IRD numberType of incomeEstate or trust tax creditsEstate or trust income Add all estate or trust tax credits and print the total in Box 16A. Add all estate or trust income and print the total in Box 16B. Total estate or trust tax creditsTotal estate or trust income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 16A16B 17Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? (Exclude any income/losses received that you've included at Questions 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22 and 24.) No Go to Question 18.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Total LTC tax credits 17A Total active LTC income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 17B Non-allowable deduction this year 17C Prior years' non-allowable deduction claimed this year 17D Adjusted LTC income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Either add Boxes 17B and 17C or subtract Box 17D from Box 17B. Print your answer in Box 17E. 17E 18Total tax credits and subtotal of other income. Add Boxes 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A and 17A. Print the total in Box 18A. Copy this total to Box 32F on page 5. Add Boxes 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, and 17E. Print the total in Box 18B. Total tax creditsOther income (subtotal, if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 18A18B 19Did you receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? No Go to Question 20.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 19A19B Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 19C19D Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxExcess residential rental deductions carried forward 19E19F 20.Did you incur any interest from residential property? No Go to Question 21.Ye s Print the totals below. See the guide for further details. Total interest on residential propertyInterest expense claimed 20A20B Reason for interest expense claimed 20C A Māori exempt company or not a residential land company New build exemption Certain schedule 15 exclusions or property not in NZ Development or land business exemption Loans drawn down prior to 27 March 2021 or interest incurred before 1 October 2021 Emergency, transitional, social or council housing 21Did you receive any other New Zealand rents? Do not include any income already shown at Question 19. No Go to Question 22.Ye sPrint your net rents below. See the guide for further details. Net rents (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 21 22Did you receive income from self-employment in New Zealand? No Go to Question 23.Ye sPrint details here. See the guide for further details. Net self-employed income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 22 23Did you receive any income from taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in the return? (Do not include any bright-line loss) No Go to Question 24.Ye sPrint your details below. See the guide for further details. Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) creditProfit/loss from sale of property - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 23A23B 24Did you receive any government subsidy? Do not include subsidy amounts here which have been included in the NZ income with tax deducted section of your return. No Go to Question 25Ye sPrint the details here. See the guide for further details. Total Government subsidies 24 25Did you receive any other income, (including PIE income - see the guide for further details) from New Zealand? No Go to Question 26.Ye sPrint the details and total below. See the guide for further details. Put name of payer above and type of income belowAny other income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 25 Name of payer 26Total other income Total other income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Add Boxes 18B, 19E, 21, 22, 23B, 24 and 25. Print the total in Box 26. 26 27Are you claiming other expenses against your income? Note: If you've claimed expenses somewhere else in the return, do not show them here. No Go to Question 28.Ye sPrint the details and total below. See the guide for further details. If you paid someone to complete your return, print that person's name in the panel below.Total other expenses 27 28Income after expenses Income after expenses (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Subtract Box 27 from Box 26. Print your answer in Box 28. 28 29Are you claiming net losses brought forward? No Go to Question 30.Ye sPrint the loss amounts below. See the guide for further details. Amount brought forwardAmount claimed this year 29A - 29B - 30Your taxable income Taxable income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Subtract Box 29B from Box 28. Print your answer in Box 30. Copy this total to Box 32A. If this amount is a loss, print 0.00 in Box 32A. 30 Tax credits 31Did you work in New Zealand at any time from 1 April 2021 to 31 March 2022? 31 No Go to Question 32.Ye s You may be entitled to a tax credit. Please answer the questions below so we can work out the amount of your tax credit. Print the amount of income earned. Print the number of weeks and days you worked in New Zealand to earn this income. weeks days Print the dates you arrived in and left New Zealand below. Period from to Day Month Year Day Month Year We will work out any tax credits you are entitled to and show them on your notice of assessment. Tax calculation 32Calculate your tax here Copy your taxable income from Box 29 to Box 32A. 32A To work out the tax on your other income use the "Tax on annual income calculator" on our website or refer to the guide. Print your answer in Box 32B. 32B Copy your total NRWT from Box 12C to Box 32C. 32C Add Box 32B and Box 32C and print your answer in Box 32D. 32D Copy your total tax credits from Box 12A to Box 32E. 32E Copy your total tax credits from Box 18A to Box 32F. 32F Copy any residential land withholding tax credit from Box 22A to Box 32FA. 32FA Add Boxes 32E, 32F and 32FA and print the total in Box 32G. 32G Subtract Box 32G from Box 32D and print your answer in Box 32H. 32H If Box 32G is larger than Box 32D the difference is a credit. If Box 32D is larger than Box 32G the difference is a debit. (Tick one) Credit Debit This is your residual income tax. Print any 2021 provisional tax paid in Box 32I. 32I If Box 32H is a credit, add Box 32H and Box 32I. Print your answer in Box 32J. If Box 32H is a debit, subtract Box 32I from Box 32H. Print your answer in Box 32J. 32J If Box 32I is larger than Box 32J the difference is your refund. (Tick one) Refund Tax to pay Refunds and/or transfers 33Getting a refund - how do you want it paid? Copy your refund from Box 32J to Box 33A. 33A Do you want the refund transferred: to your 2023 provisional tax? Print the amount in Box 33B. 33B to someone else's income tax account? Are you "associated"? See the guide for further details. 33C Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving your refundTheir IRD number 33D Year ended 31 MarchAmount 33E If you want your: • refund transferred to another period or tax type • overpaid 2023 provisional tax transferred to pay your 2022 residual income tax debt staple a note to the top of the front page of this return. Subtract 33B and 33E from Box 33A. Print your answer in Box 33F. This is your balance, which is the amount we will refund. 33F The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your New Zealand bank account. Check the bank account number is preprinted at Question 7. If your New Zealand bank account is not preprinted include it at Question  7. 2023 provisional tax 34Is the amount in 32H more than $5,000? No Go to Question 35.Ye sYou may have to pay 2023 provisional tax. Refer to the guide, then print the details below. Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 34A. 34A Print your 2023 provisional tax payable in Box 34B. 34B 35Is this return for a part-year? No Go to Question 36.Ye sRefer to the guide and tick the situation below that applies to you. 35A You left New Zealand permanently (for more than 325 days) You were declared bankrupt This return is for a deceased person to the date of their death Your balance date changed during the year. Fromto Print the start and end dates the return is for in the spaces provided 35B35C Day Month Year Day Month Year 36If you have ever lived in New Zealand, print the date you left New Zealand Day Month Year and how long you plan to be away. Notice of assessment and declaration See the guide for further information. 37Please read and sign the following: The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2022 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. There are penalties for not completing a tax return or for filing a false return. See the guide for further details. Signature Date / / Please make a copy of this return for your own records. 38What to do next • Remember - your return is due on 7 July 2022 unless you have an extension of time. • Remember - if you have tax to pay, you need to pay it by 7 February 2023 to avoid any penalties (if you have a tax agent see the guide for further details.). You can pay earlier if you want to. If you want to pay now, you can make a payment electronically. For more information about making payments go to ird.govt.nz/pay • Post your return to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045, New Zealand. Privacy - to find out what may happen to the information you provide in this form, see the guide for further details. OFFICE USE ONLY 39 Correspondence indicatorAccounts Included?Ye sNo March 2022