Income tax return Income Tax Act 2007 • Tax Administration Act 1994 Non-resident individual taxpayers IR3NR 2023 1 April 2022 to 31 March 2023 1 If your IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 1 2 If your correct name is not shown above, print it in full in Box 2. 2 MrMrsMissMs Put first names above and surname below 3 If your correct postal address is not shown above, print the full address in Box 3. Do not print your tax preparers address here. See the guide for further details. 3 Put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town or city below 4 If your full overseas address is not shown below, print it in Box 4. 4 Put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, city and country below 5 If your correct date of birth is not shown below, print it in Box 5. 5 Day Month Year 7 If your correct New Zealand bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 7. 7 Bank Branch Account number Suffix • You can complete your return in myIR • The 2023 IR3NR guide is available on our website. To view a copy go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides • See the IR3NR guide to check if you need to complete this return. 6 I f your correct daytime phone number is not s hown below, print it in Box 6. 6 Country code Prefix Phone number 8 Your jurisdiction of tax residency. See the guide for further details. 8 9 Tax Identification Number (TIN) 9 If you don't have a TIN number go to question 10 and tick the box that applies 10 J urisdiction does not issue TIN 10 TIN not required in jurisdiction Non-resident passive income 12Did you have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to you? Include any interest from partnerships and trusts. Keep your interest statements or certificates. No Go to Question 13.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Do not include any interest subject to approved issuer levy. See the guide for further details. If you have income from a PIE see the guide for further details. Name of payerRWTGross interest To t a l RW TTotal gross interest (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 12A12B Work out the NRWT on your total interest from the rates given on our website ird.govt.nz/nrwt and print your answer in Box 12C. 12C 13Did you have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to you? Include any dividends from partnerships and trusts. Keep your dividend statements. Do not include fully imputed dividends where you have a 10% or greater direct voting interest - see the guide for further details. No Go to Question 14.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. If you have income from a PIE see the guide for further details. Name of companyDividend withholding taxGross dividend Total dividend creditsTotal gross dividends 13A13B Work out the NRWT on your total dividends from the rates on our website ird.govt.nz/nrwt and print your answer in Box 13C. 13C 14Did you have any New Zealand royalties paid or credited to you? Include any royalties from partnerships and trusts. Keep your royalty statements. No Go to Question 15.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Total tax Total gross royalties 14A14B Work out the NRWT on your total royalties from the rates on our website ird.govt.nz/nrwt and print your answer in Box 14C. 14C 15 Total tax credits and total NRWT Total tax credits Add Boxes 12A, 13A, and 14A. Print the total in Box 15A. Copy this amount to Box 35E on page 5. 15A To t a l N RW T Add Boxes 12C, 13C, and 14C. Print the total in Box 15C. Copy this amount to Box 35C on page 5. 15C Other income 16Did you receive New Zealand income with tax deducted? Show interest, dividends and royalties above. Do not include them here. No Go to Question 17.Ye sCopy the details from your Summary of Income to the boxes below. See the guide for further details. Total tax deductionsTotal gross income 16A16B 11 Did you receive New Zealand Superannuation? 11 No Ye s Go to Question 12. See the guide for further details. 17Did you receive any taxable distributions from a Māori authority? Keep your distribution statement. No Go to Question 18.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distributions 17A17B 18Did you receive any New Zealand partnership income? Show interest, dividends and royalties on page 2. Do not include them here. No Go to Question 19.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Name of partnership IRD numberType of incomePartnership tax creditsPartnership income Name of partnership IRD numberType of incomePartnership tax creditsPartnership income Add all partnership tax credits and print the total in Box 18A. Add all partnership income and print the total in Box 18B. Total partnership tax creditsTotal partnership income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 18A18B 19Did you receive any New Zealand estate or trust income? Show interest, dividends and royalties on page 2. Do not include them here. No Go to Question 20.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Name of estate or trust IRD numberType of incomeEstate or trust tax creditsEstate or trust income Name of estate or trust IRD numberType of incomeEstate or trust tax creditsEstate or trust income Add all estate or trust tax credits and print the total in Box 19A. Add all estate or trust income and print the total in Box 19B. Total estate or trust tax creditsTotal estate or trust income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 19A19B 20Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? (Exclude any income/losses received that you've included at Questions 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 22, 23, 24, 25 and 28.) No Go to Question 21.Ye sPrint the details below. See the guide for further details. Total LTC tax credits 20A Total active LTC income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 20B Non-allowable deduction this year 20C Prior years' non-allowable deduction claimed this year 20D Adjusted LTC income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Either add Boxes 20B and 20C or subtract Box 20D from Box 20B. Print your answer in Box 20E. 20E 21 Total tax credits and subtotal of other income. Add Boxes 16A, 17A, 18A, 19A and 20A. Print the total in Box 21A. Copy this total to Box 35F on page 5. Add Boxes 16B, 17B, 18B, 19B and 20E. Print the total in Box 21B. Total tax creditsOther income (subtotal, if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 21A21B 22Did you receive any income or incur any expenses from residential property? No Go to Question 23.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Gross residential rental incomeNet bright-line profit (excluding losses) 22B Total combined residential income. Add Boxes 22A, 22B, and 22C. Print the total in Box 22D. 22D Excess residential rental deductions brought forward 22F Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 22H 22A Other residential income 22C Residential rental deductions 22E Residential rental deductions claimed this year 22G Excess residential rental deductions carried forward 22I 23.Did you incur any interest from residential property? No Go to Question 24. Ye s Print the totals below. See the guide for further details. Total interest on residential propertyInterest expense claimed 23A 23B Reason for interest expense claimed 23C A Māori exempt company or not a residential land company New build exemption Certain schedule 15 exclusions or property not in NZ Development or land business exemption L oans drawn down prior to 27 March 2021 Emergency, transitional, social or council housing A pproved build-to-rent exclusion 24Did you receive any other New Zealand rents? Do not include any income already shown at Question 22. No Go to Question 25.Ye sPrint your net rents below. See the guide for further details. Net rents (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 24 25Did you receive income from self-employment in New Zealand? No Go to Question 26.Ye sPrint details here. See the guide for further details. Net self-employed income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 25 26Did you receive any income from taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in the return? (Do not include any bright-line loss) No Go to Question 27.Ye sPrint your details below. See the guide for further details. Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) creditProfit/loss from sale of property - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 26A26B 27Did you receive any government subsidy? Do not include subsidy amounts here which have been included in the NZ income with tax deducted section of your return. No Go to Question 28Ye sPrint the details here. See the guide for further details. Total Government subsidies 27 28Did you receive any other income, (including PIE income - see the guide for further details) from New Zealand? No Go to Question 29.Ye sPrint the details and total below. See the guide for further details. Put name of payer above and type of income belowAny other income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 28 Name of payer 29 Total other income Total other income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Add Boxes 21B, 22H, 24, 25, 26B, 27 and 28. Print the total in Box 29. 29 30Are you claiming other expenses against your income? Note: If you've claimed expenses somewhere else in the return, do not show them here. No Go to Question 31.Ye sPrint the details and total below. See the guide for further details. If you paid someone to complete your return, print that person's name in the panel below.Total other expenses 30 31 Income after expenses Income after expenses (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Subtract Box 30 from Box 29. Print your answer in Box 31. 31 32Are you claiming net losses brought forward? No Go to Question 33.Ye sPrint the loss amounts below. See the guide for further details. Amount brought forwardAmount claimed this year 32A - 32B - 33 Your taxable income Taxable income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Subtract Box 32B from Box 31. Print your answer in Box 33. Copy this total to Box 35A. If this amount is a loss, print 0.00 in Box 35A. 33 Tax credits 34Did you work in New Zealand at any time from 1 April 2022 to 31 March 2023? 34 No Go to Question 35.Ye s You may be entitled to a tax credit. Please answer the questions below so we can work out the amount of your tax credit. Print the amount of income earned. Print the number of weeks and days you worked in New Zealand to earn this income. weeks days Print the dates you arrived in and left New Zealand below. Period from to Day Month Year Day Month Year We will work out any tax credits you are entitled to and show them on your notice of assessment. Tax calculation 35 Calculate your tax here Copy your taxable income from Box 33 to 35A. 35A To work out the tax on your other income use the "Tax on annual income calculator" on our website or refer to the guide. Print your answer in Box 35B. 35B Copy your total NRWT from Box 15C to Box 35C. 35C Add Box 35B and Box 35C and print your answer in Box 35D. 35D Copy your total tax credits from Box 15A to Box 35E. 35E Copy your total tax credits from Box 21A to Box 35F. 35F Copy any residential land withholding tax credit from Box 26A to Box 35FA. 35FA Add Boxes 35E, 35F, 35FA and print the total in Box 35G. 35G Subtract Box 35G from Box 35D and print your answer in Box 35H. 35H If Box 35G is larger than Box 35D the difference is a credit. If Box 35D is larger than Box 35G the difference is a debit. (Tick one) Credit Debit This is your residual income tax. Print any 2023 provisional tax paid in Box 35I. 35I If Box 35H is a credit, add Box 35H and Box 35I. Print your answer in Box 35J. If Box 35H is a debit, subtract Box 35I from Box 35H. Print your answer in Box 35J. 35J If Box 35I is larger than Box 35J the difference is your refund. (Tick one) Refund Tax to pay Refunds and/or transfers 36 Getting a refund - how do you want it paid? Copy your refund from Box 35J to Box 36A. 36A Do you want the refund transferred: to your 2024 provisional tax? Print the amount in Box 36B. 36B to someone else's income tax account? Are you "associated"? See the guide for further details. 36C Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving your refundTheir IRD number 36D Year ended 31 MarchAmount 36E If you want your: • refund transferred to another period or tax type • overpaid 2024 provisional tax transferred to pay your 2023 residual income tax debt staple a note to the top of the front page of this return. Subtract Box 36B and Box 36E from Box 36A. Print your answer in Box 36F. This is your balance, which is the amount we will refund. 36F The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your New Zealand bank account. Check the bank account number is preprinted at Question 7. If your New Zealand bank account is not preprinted include it at Question  7. 2024 provisional tax 37Is the amount in 35H more than $5,000? No Go to Question 38.Ye sYou may have to pay 2024 provisional tax. Refer to the guide, then print the details below. Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 37A. 37A Print your 2024 provisional tax payable in Box 37B. 37B 38Is this return for a part-year? No Go to Question 39.Ye sRefer to the guide and tick the situation below that applies to you. 38A You left New Zealand permanently (for more than 325 days) You were declared bankrupt This return is for a deceased person to the date of their death Your balance date changed during the year. Fromto Print the start and end dates the return is for in the spaces provided 38B38C Day Month Year Day Month Year 39If you have ever lived in New Zealand, print the date you left New Zealand Day Month Year and how long you plan to be away. Notice of assessment and declaration See the guide for further information. 40Please read and sign the following: The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2023 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. There are penalties for not completing a tax return or for filing a false return. See the guide for further details. Signature Date / / Please make a copy of this return for your own records. 41 What to do next • Remember - your return is due on 7 July 2023 unless you have an extension of time. • R emember - if you have tax to pay, you need to pay it by 7 February 2024 to avoid any penalties (if you have a tax agent see the guide for further details.). You can pay earlier if you want to. If you want to pay now, you can make a payment electronically. For more information about making payments go to ird.govt.nz/pay • P ost your return to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045, New Zealand. Privacy - to find out what may happen to the information you provide in this form, see the guide for further details. OFFICE USE ONLY 42 Correspondence indicatorAccounts Included?Ye sNo March 2023