Income tax return Income Tax Act 2007 • Tax Administration Act 1994 Non-resident individual taxpayers IR3NR 2019 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019 See page 5 of the guide. 1 If your IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 1 2 If your correct name is not shown above, print it in full in Box 2. 2 MrMrsMissMs Please put first names above and surname below 3 If your correct postal address is not shown above, print the full address in Box 3. Don't print your tax agent's address here. See page 5 of the guide. 3 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town or city below 4 If your full overseas address is not shown below, print it in Box 4. 4 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, city and country below 5 If your correct date of birth is not shown below, print it in Box 5. 5 Day Month Year 6 If your correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in Box 6. 6 Country code Prefix Phone number 7 If your correct New Zealand bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 7. 7 Bank Branch Account number Suffix 8 Did you receive New Zealand Superannuation? 8 No Ye s Go to Question 9. See page 5 in the guide. • You can file your return online at www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: IR3NR 2019). • The 2019 IR3NR guide is available on our website. To view a copy go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: IR3NRG 2019). • Please see page 4 in the IR3NR guide to see if you need to complete this return. Non-resident passive income 9Did you have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to you? Include any interest from partnerships and trusts. Keep your interest statements or certificates. No Go to Question 10.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 7 of the guide. Don't include any interest subject to approved issuer levy. See page 8 in the guide. If you have income from a PIE see page 17 in the guide. Name of payerRWTGross interest To t a l RW TTotal gross interest (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 9A9B Work out the NRWT on your total interest from the rates given on our website www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: NRWT rates). Print your answer in Box 9C. 9C 10Did you have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to you? Include any dividends from partnerships and trusts. Keep your dividend statements. Do not include fully imputed dividends where you have a 10% or greater direct voting interest - see page 9 in the guide. No Go to Question 11.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 9 in the guide. If you have income from a PIE see page 17 in the guide. Name of companyDividend withholding taxGross dividend Total dividend creditsTotal gross dividends 10A10B Work out the NRWT on your total dividends from the rates given on our website www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: NRWT rates). Print your answer in Box 10C. 10C 11Did you have any New Zealand royalties paid or credited to you? Include any royalties from partnerships and trusts. Keep your royalty statements. No Go to Question 12.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 10 in the guide. Total tax Total gross royalties 11A11B Work out the NRWT on your total royalties from the rates given on our website www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: NRWT rates). Print your answer in Box 11C. 11C 12 Total tax credits and total NRWT Total tax credits Add Boxes 9A, 10A and 11A. Print the total in Box 12A. Copy this amount to Box 28E on page 5. 12A To t a l N RW T Add Boxes 9C, 10C and 11C. Print the total in Box 12C. Copy this amount to Box 28C on page 5. 12C Other income 13Did you receive New Zealand income with tax deducted? Show interest, dividends and royalties on page 2. Don't include them here. No Go to Question 14.Ye sCopy the details from your Summary of Income (SOI) to the boxes below. See page 11 in the guide. Total tax deductionsTotal gross income 13A13B 14Did you receive any taxable distributions from a Māori authority? Keep your distribution statement. No Go to Question 15.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 12 in the guide. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distributions 14A14B 15Did you receive any New Zealand partnership income? Show interest, dividends and royalties on page 2. Don't include them here. No Go to Question 16.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 12 in the guide. Name of partnership IRD numberType of incomePartnership tax creditsPartnership income Name of partnership IRD numberType of incomePartnership tax creditsPartnership income Add all partnership tax credits and print the total in Box 15A. Add all partnership income and print the total in Box 15B. Total partnership tax creditsTotal partnership income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 15A15B 16Did you receive any New Zealand estate or trust income? Show interest, dividends and royalties on page 2. Don't include them here. No Go to Question 17.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 13 in the guide. Name of estate or trust IRD numberType of incomeEstate or trust tax creditsEstate or trust income Name of estate or trust IRD numberType of incomeEstate or trust tax creditsEstate or trust income Add all estate or trust tax credits and print the total in Box 16A. Add all estate or trust income and print the total in Box 16B. Total estate or trust tax creditsTotal estate or trust income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 16A16B 17Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? (Exclude any income/losses received that you've included at Questions 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 19, 20 and 21.) No Go to Question 18.Ye sPrint the details below. See page 14 in the guide. Total LTC tax credits 17A Total active LTC income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 17B Non-allowable deduction this year 17C Prior years' non-allowable deduction claimed this year 17D Adjusted LTC income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Either add Boxes 17B and 17C or subtract Box 17D from Box 17B. Print your answer in Box 17E. 17E Other income 18 Total tax credits and subtotal of other income. Add Boxes 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A and 17A. Print the total in Box 18A. Copy this total to Box 28F on page 5. Add Boxes 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B and 17E. Print the total in Box 18B. Total tax creditsOther income (subtotal, if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 18A18B 19Did you receive any New Zealand rents? No Go to Question 20.Ye sPrint your net rents below. See page 14 in the guide. Net rents (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 19 20Did you receive income from self-employment in New Zealand? No Go to Question 21.Ye sPrint your net self-employed income below. See page 15 in the guide. Net self-employed income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 20 21Did you receive any other income, (including PIE income and income from any taxable property sales/disposals - see page 16 and 17 in the guide) from New Zealand? No Go to Question 22.Ye sPrint the details and total below. See page 16 in the guide. Please put name of payer above and type of income belowAny other income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) 21 Name of payerResidential land withholding tax (RLWT) credit 21A See page 17 in the guide 22 Total other income Total other income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Add Boxes 18B, 19, 20 and 21. Print the total in Box 22. 22 23Are you claiming other expenses against your income? Note: If you've claimed expenses somewhere else in the return, do not show them here. No Go to Question 24.Ye sPrint the details and total below. See page 17 in the guide. If you paid someone to complete your return, print that person's name in the panel below.Total other expenses 23 24 Income after expenses Income after expenses (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Subtract Box 23 from Box 22. Print your answer in Box 24. 24 25Are you claiming net losses brought forward? No Go to Question 26.Ye sPrint the loss amounts below. See page 18 in the guide. Amount brought forwardAmount claimed this year 25A - 25B - 26 Your taxable income Taxable income (if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box) Subtract Box 25B from Box 24. Print your answer in Box 26. Copy this total to Box 28A. If this amount is a loss, print 0.00 in Box 28A 26 Tax credits 27Did you work in New Zealand at any time from 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019? 27 No Go to Question 28.Ye sYou may be entitled to a tax credit. Please answer the questions below so we can work out the amount of your tax credit. Print the amount of income earned. Print the number of weeks and days you worked in New Zealand to earn this income. weeks days Print the dates you arrived in and left New Zealand below. Period from to Day Month Year Day Month Year We will work out any tax credits you are entitled to and show them on your notice of assessment. Tax calculation 28 Calculate your tax here Copy your taxable income from Box 26 to Box 28A. 28A To work out the tax on your other income use the "Tax on annual income calculator" on our website or page 19 in the guide. Print your answer in Box 28B. 28B Copy your total NRWT from Box 12C to Box 28C. 28C Add Box 28B and Box 28C and print your answer in Box 28D. 28D Copy your total tax credits from Box 12A to Box 28E. 28E Copy your total tax credits from Box 18A to Box 28F. 28F Copy any residential land withholding tax credit from Box 21A to Box 28FA. 28FA Add Boxes 28E, 28F and 28FA and print the total in Box 28G. 28G Subtract Box 28G from Box 28D and print your answer in Box 28H. 28H If Box 28G is larger than Box 28D the difference is a credit. If Box 28D is larger than Box 28G the difference is a debit. (Tick one) Credit Debit This is your residual income tax. Print any 2019 provisional tax paid in Box 28I. 28I If Box 28H is a credit, add Box 28H and Box 28I. Print your answer in Box 28J. If Box 28H is a debit, subtract Box 28I from Box 28H. Print your answer in Box 28J. 28J If Box 28I is larger than Box 28J the difference is your refund. (Tick one) Refund Tax to pay Refunds and/or transfers 29 Getting a refund - how do you want it paid? Copy your refund from Box 28J to Box 29A. 29A Print any overpayment of 2020 provisional tax you would like refunded in Box 29B. 29B Add Box 29A and Box 29B and print your answer in Box 29C. 29C Do you want the refund transferred: to your 2020 provisional tax? Print the amount in Box 29D. 29D to someone else's income tax account? Are you "associated"? See page 22 in the guide. 29E Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving your refundTheir IRD number 29F Amount Year ended 31 March 29G March 2019 If you want your: • ref und transferred to another period or tax type • ove rpaid 2020 provisional tax transferred to pay your 2019 residual income tax debt staple a note to the top of the front page of this return. Subtract Boxes 29D and 29G from Box 29C. Print your answer in Box 29H. This is your balance, which is the amount we will refund. 29H The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your New Zealand bank account. Please check the bank account number is preprinted at Question 7. If your New Zealand bank account isn't preprinted please include it at Question 7. 2020 provisional tax 30Is the amount in 28H more than $2,500? No Go to Question 31.Ye sYou may have to pay 2020 provisional tax. See page 24 in the guide, then print the details below. Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 30A. 30A Print your 2020 provisional tax payable in Box 30B. 30B 31Is this return for a part-year? No Go to Question 32.Ye sSee pages 4 and 26 in the guide and tick the situation below that applies to you. 31A You left New Zealand permanently (for more than 325 days) You were declared bankrupt This return is for a deceased person to the date of their death Your balance date changed during the year. Fromto Print the start and end dates the return is for in the spaces provided 31B31C Day Month Year Day Month Year 32If you have ever lived in New Zealand, print the date you left New Zealand Day Month Year and how long you plan to be away. Notice of assessment and declaration Please see page 27 in the guide. 33Please read and sign the following: The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2019 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. There are penalties for not filing a tax return or for filing a false return. See page 27 in the guide. Signature Date / / Please make a copy of this return for your own records. 34 What to do next • Remember - your return is due on 7 July 2019 unless you have an extension of time. • Remember - if you have tax to pay, you need to pay it by 7 February 2020 to avoid any penalties (if you have a tax agent see page 27 in the guide). You can pay earlier if you want to. If you want to pay now, you can make a payment electornically. For more information about making payments go to www.ird.govt.nz/pay • Pos t your return to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045, New Zealand. Keep a copy for your records. Privacy - to find out what may happen to the information you provide in this form, see page 30 in the guide. OFFICE USE ONLY 35 Correspondence indicatorAccounts Included?Ye sNo