Rental income IR3R March 2024 • Complete all questions on pages 1 and 2. • Read our booklet Rental income – IR264 to help you fill in this form. • Attach this form to your income tax return and keep a copy for your records. Year ended 31 March Your nameIRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Address of property rented Period the property was available for renting months Income – read Note 2 over the page. 1. Total rents 1 2. Other income (specify) 2A2 3. Gain or loss on disposal (enter any loss in brackets) 3 4. Total income 4 Expenses – read Note 3 over the page. 5. Rates 5 6. Insurance 6 7A. Total interest on residential property 7A 7B. Interest expense claimed 7B 7C. Reason for interest expense claimed – read Note 4 over the page. A Māori exempt company or not a residential land company New build exemption Certain schedule 15 exclusions or property not in NZ Development or land business exemption Loans drawn down prior to 27 March 2021 Emergency, transitional, social or council housing Approved build-to-rent exclusion 8. Agent’s collection fees 8 9 Repairs and maintenance – read Note 5 over the page. 10 Other (specify) Depreciation – print the details below. 11. Buildings – read Note 6 over the page. 11 12. Assets – read Note 7 over the page. 1213 14. Total expenses (do not include amount from box 7A in your total expenses) 14 15. Net rents (total rents less expenses) – subtract Box 14 from Box 4 and print in Box 15. Copy this amount to your tax return, if the property is NOT residential property. For residential property, use the Residential property deductions worksheets – IR1226 to help you complete your return. Read note 8 over the page. 15 The information on this form is based on current tax laws at the time of printing. Note 1 General Fill in a separate IR3R for each property rented out. Each IR3R covers the year to your balance date. Note 2 Income Enter the total rents received in Box 1. Enter any other income related to the rental property, such as insurance receipts or rates refunds in Box 2. If you sell or dispose of any of your assets you may be required to account for the loss or gain in Box 3. Add up Boxes 1, 2 and 3 to calculate your total income. If Box 3 is a loss, subtract it from the sum of Boxes 1 and 2. Enter the total income in Box 4. Note 3 Expenses Claim ongoing expenses such as rates, insurance, interest and depreciation in proportion to the number of months the property was available for renting out, for example if the property was available for 10 months, you can claim 10 / 12 of these expenses. Expense for a holiday home or bach used both privately and to earn income may be subject to the mixed-use asset rules. See the Rental income - IR264 booklet for more information. Note 4 Interest From 1 October 2021, the interest limitation rules have limited the ability to claim interest as a deduction for residential property in New Zealand, unless an exclusion or exemption applies. For more information see ird.govt.nz/property-interest-rules or Rental income – IR264. Enter the total interest incurred for residential property in Box 7A. Do not include this amount in total expenses at Box 14. Enter interest expenses claimed in Box 7B. Include this amount in total expenses at Box 14. If you have claimed an interest expense in Box 7B, at Box 7C tick the reason(s) for the interest expense claimed. Note 5 Repairs, maintenance and other expenses Please fully explain any claims for repairs, maintenance and other expenses. You may claim repairs and maintenance but not additions or improvements to property or plant. Improvements to property or plant can be depreciated. If there is not enough space, please attach a separate note. Note 6 Depreciation on buildings From the 2011-2012 income year, depreciation on buildings reduced to 0% for buildings with an economic life of more than 50 years. For more information refer to Depreciation – a guide for businesses - IR260 Note 7 Depreciation on assets You may depreciate each item individually or pool some or all of the assets to calculate depreciation. Assets which can be pooled are those which: - are not used privately, and - cost $5,000 or less, or - have been depreciated so their adjusted tax value is $5,000 or less. Pool depreciation is calculated on the average pool value at a single rate using the DV method. The rate you must use for the pool is the lowest rate for an asset in the pool. Once you have included an asset in a pool you can segregate it only if you use the asset for private use. If you switch from the DV to the SL method for assets not pooled, calculate depreciation on the opening adjusted tax value instead of the original cost. To find the correct rate of depreciation for an asset, please see our depreciation rate finder at ird.govt.nz/tools-calculators Note 8 Residential rental properties From the 2019-2020 income year, the residential property deduction rules limited the amount of deductions you can claim if your residential rental property makes a loss in an income year. You can use the Residential property deductions worksheets - IR1226 to help you complete your return. Note 9 Record keeping Keep your receipts and invoices with your records in case we request them. You must keep all your records for seven years. Note 10 More information Our booklets Rental income - IR264, Depreciation - IR260 and Depreciation rates - IR265 may help you. You can get these booklets and this IR3R form at ird.govt.nz/ forms-guides or by calling 0800 257 773. If you need more help call us on 0800 377 774. Depreciation of buildings – read Note 6. 16. Date purchased 16 17. Construction materials and building description 17 Day Month Year Cost of buildings (excluding cost of land)Rate Depreciation claimed Closing adjusted tax value Straight line method (SL) 1819 % 2021 Opening adjusted tax valueRate Depreciation claimed Closing adjusted tax value Diminishing value method (DV) 2223 % 2425 26 Depreciation of assets – read Note 7. Opening adjusted tax value Method SL/DV Closing adjusted tax valueAssetDate purchasedCostRateDepreciation claimed % % % % % Total