Income tax return Companies Income Tax Act 2007, Tax Administration Act 1994, Accident Compensation Act 2001 IR4 2023 1 April 2022 to 31 March 2023 You can complete your return in myIR If your company’s name, IRD number and postal address are shown correctly above, go to Question 5. 1.If the company’s IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. (8 digit numbers start in the second Box ) 1 2.If the correct company name is not shown above, see the guide for further details. 3.If the company’s trading name has changed or is not shown below, print it in Box 3. 3 4.I f the correct postal address is not shown above, print the full address in Box 4. Do not print your tax preparer’s address here. See the guide for further details. 4 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, Box lobby or RD and town, city or region below 5.If the correct street address is not shown below, print the full address in Box 5. 5 Please put street address above and suburb or RD and town, city or region below 6.Print your business industry classification (BIC) code in Box 6. See the guide for further details. 6 7. If the correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in Box 7. 7 Prefix Phone number 8.If the company’s correct bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 8. 8 Bank Branch Account number Suffix •• If your suffix has only 2 numbers, enter them in the first 2 squares of the suffix Box. •• For information about direct crediting see the guide. 9.Is the company a non-resident for tax purposes? 9 NoGo to Question 10.Ye sGo to Question 11. 10.Does this return include the annual imputation return? See the guide for further details. 10 NoGo to Question 11.Ye sGo to Question 10A. 10A.Are there any monetary entries on page 7 of this return? 10A NoYe s 11.Has the company ceased?NoGo to Question 12.Ye sSee the guide. Income 12.Did the company receive any income from schedular payments? No Go to Question 13.Ye sPrint the total of any schedular income below. See the guide for further details. Total tax deductedTotal gross income 12A $ 12B $ 13.Did the company have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to it? No Go to Question 14.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Total RWT and/or NRWTTotal gross interest - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 13A $ 13B $ 14.Did the company receive any New Zealand dividends? No Go to Question 15.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Total dividend imputation credits 14 $ Total dividend RWT creditsTotal gross dividends 14A $ 14B $ 15.Did the company receive any taxable distributions from a Māori authority? No Go to Question 16.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distributions 15A $ 15B $ 16.Did the company receive any income from a partnership, estate or trust? No Go to Question 17.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Total partnership, estate or trust tax credits Total partnership, estate or trust income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 16A $ 16B $ 17.Total tax credits Add Boxes 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A and 16A. Print the total in Box 17A. 17A $ Do not include overseas tax paid here. 18.Did the company receive any income from overseas? No Go to Question 19.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 18A $ 18B $ 19.Did the company receive any income or incur any expenses from residential property? No Go to Question 20.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using. (tick 1) PortfolioIndividualCombination Gross residential rental incomeNet bright-line profit (excluding losses) 19A19B Other residential income Total combined residential income Add Boxes 19A, 19B and 19C. Print the total in Box 19D. 19C19D Residential rental deductionsExcess residential rental deductions brought forward 19E19F Residential rental deductions claimed this yearNet residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 19G19H Excess residential rental deductions carried forward 19I 20.Did the company incur any interest from residential property? No Go to Question 21.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Total interest on residential propertyInterest expense claimed 20A $ 20B $ Reason for interest expense claimed 20C A Māori exempt company or not a residential land company New build exemption Certain schedule 15 exclusions or property not in NZ Development or land business exemption Loans drawn down prior to 27 March 2021 Emergency, transitional, social or council housing Approved build-to-rent exclusion 21.Did the company receive income from business or other rental activities? (Do not include any income already shown at Questions 12 to 19.) No Go to Question 22.Ye sPrint the net profit in Box 21B. See the guide for further details. Net profit or loss from business or other rental - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 21B $ 22.Did the company receive any income from taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in the return? (Do not include any bright-line loss.) No Go to Question 23.Ye sPrint details below. See the guide for further details. Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) creditProfit/loss from sale of property - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 22A $ 22B $ 23.Did the company pay insurance premiums to any overseas insurer not carrying out business in New Zealand? No Go to Question 24.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Total gross premium paidTotal taxable premium (10% of the difference between Boxes 23 and 23A) 23 $ 23B $ Total gross premium paid to Switzerland 23A $ Copy the amount in Box 23B to Box 31. 24.Did the company receive any other income? Total other income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box No Go to Question 25. Ye s Attach a note showing the name of the payers and types of income. Print the total in Box 24B. See the guide for further details. 24B $ 25. Total income or net loss before donations Add Boxes 12B, 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, 18B, 19H, 21B, 22B and 24B. Print your answer in Box 25. Total income before donations - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 25 $ 26.Did the company make any donations to donee organisations? No Go to Question 27. Ye s Print the amount here. See the guide for further details. Donations made 26B $ – 27. Total income or net loss Subtract Box 26B from Box 25 and print your answer in Box 27. Total income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 27 $ 28.Can the company claim net losses brought forward? No Go to Question 29. Ye s Print details here. See the guide for further details. Amount brought forward 28A $ – Amount claimed this year 28B $ – Is the company carrying forward losses under the business continuity test? 28C Ye s No 29. Total income after net losses brought forward If you ticked “Yes” at Question 28 see the guide. If you ticked “No”, copy the amount in Box 27 to Box 29. Total income after net losses - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 29 $ 30.Did the company have net losses and/or subvention payments to or from other companies? No Go to Question 31. Ye s Print the details here. See the guide for further details. If the company received net losses or made a subvention payment, put a minus sign in the last Box. Net losses 30 $ Subvention payments 30A $ 31. Taxable income Offset any amounts in Boxes 30 and 30A against the amount in Box 29. Print your answer in Box 31. Taxable income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 31 $ Tax calculation 32. Calculate the tax payable Copy the total from Box 31 to Box 32A. This is your taxable income. 32A 00 $ Total tax payable. Work out the tax on taxable income at 28 cents in the dollar. Print your answer in Box 32B. 32B $ Overseas tax paid. Copy the amount from Box 18A to Box 32C. 32C $ Subtract Box 32C from Box 32B. If Box 32C is larger than Box 32B, print “0.00” in Box 32D. 32D $ Calculate the foreign investor tax credit. Print your answer in Box 32E. See the guide for further details. 32E $ Subtract Box 32E from Box 32D. Print your answer in Box 32F. 32F $ Copy the total imputation credits, if any, from Box 14 to Box 32G. 32G $ Subtract Box 32G from Box 32F. Print your answer in Box 32H. If Box 32G is larger than Box 32F, print “0.00” in Box 32H and see the guide for further details. 32H $ Copy the total tax credits from Box 17A to Box 32I. 32I $ Copy any RLWT credit from Box 22A to Box 32IA. 32IA $ Subtract Box 32I and Box 32IA from Box 32H. Print your answer in Box 32J. This is the residual income tax. 32J $ If the total of Box 32I and 32IA is larger than Box 32H, the difference is a credit. If Box 32H is larger than the total of Box 32I and Box 32IA, the difference is a debit. (Tick 1)CreditDebit Print any 2023 provisional tax paid in Box 32K. 32K $ If Box 32J is a credit, add Box 32J and Box 32K. Print your answer in Box 32L. This is the refund. 32L $ If Box 32J is a debit, subtract Box 32K from Box 32J. This is the tax to pay. If Box 32K is larger than Box 32J, the difference is the refund.(Tick 1)Refund Tax to pay Refunds and/or transfers 33. If the company is getting a refund, how do you want it paid? Copy the amount from Box 32L to Box 33. 33 $ Please transfer the refund to: 2024 provisional tax. Print the amount in Box 33A. 33A $ Someone else’s income tax account. Are you “associated”? See the guide for further details. 33B Ye s No Their IRD number Name of taxpayer receiving refund 33C Year ended 31 March Amount 33D $ Other - if you want your refund transferred to another period or tax type, for example GST, staple a note to the front page of this return explaining the transfer you want. Subtract Boxes 33A and 33D from Box 33. Print your answer in Box 33E. This is the balance to be refunded. 33E $ The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your company’s bank account. Please check the correct bank account number is preprinted at Question 8. If your bank account number is not preprinted, please include it at Question 8. 2024 Provisional tax 34.Initial provisional tax liability. Is this the first year the company started to derive assessable income from a taxable activity? See the guide for further details. No Go to Question 35. 34 Ye s Print the start date of the taxable activity in Box 34. Day Month Ye a r 35. 2024 provisional tax. See the guide for further details. •• Print the option used (S or E or R) in Box 35A. 35A •• Print the company’s 2024 provisional tax payable in Box 35B if you’re using S or E. 35B 00 $ Disclosures 36. Have payments been made to non-residents? For example, dividends, interest, management fees, know-how payments, royalties or contract payments for services by non-resident contractors. 36 No Go to Question 37. Yes Go to Question 36A. 36A. Was NRWT and/or non-resident contractors withholding tax deducted from all payments? 36A No Yes 37. If the company calculates CFC or FIF income under Question 18 or is required to make a BEPS disclosure, see the guide for further details. Tick “Yes “ if additional disclosure is required. 37 No Yes 38. Did the company repurchase, redeem or cancel its shares during the income year? 38 No Go to Question 39. Ye s Print the total value of shares repurchased, redeemed or cancelled in Box 38A. See the guide for further details. 38A $ 39. Did the company receive any foreign-sourced dividends during the year? 39 No Go to Question 40. Ye s See the guide for further details. 40. Is the company controlled or owned by non-residents? 40 No Go to Question 41. Ye s See the guide for further details. 41. Print the total lowest economic interests of shareholders during the income year here. See the guide for further details. 41 % Shareholder details Please staple additional IR4S forms here 42. Print the details for all shareholders, directors and relatives of shareholders who received remuneration (with no PAYE deducted), shareholder AIM tax credits, or loans from the company. Please show the shareholder’s, director’s or relative’s IRD number for amounts in Boxes 42B to 42E, and the associated company’s IRD number for Boxes 42F and 42G separately. For group companies which shared loss offsets and subvention payments, print these amounts in Boxes 42F and 42G. See the guide for further details. Remuneration is liable for ACC levies. If you need more space use an IR4S available from ird.govt.nz/forms-guides 42A I RD number 42B R emuneration with no PAYE deducted 42C S hareholder AIM tax credits 42D Value of loans from the company $$$ 42E Current account balance (Tick 1) CR DR 42F L oss offsets (put a minus sign in the last box to show losses claimed) 42G S ubvention payments (put a minus sign in the last box to show subvention payments made) $ $$ 42A I RD number 42B R emuneration with no PAYE deducted 42C S hareholder AIM tax credits 42D Value of loans from the company $$$ 42E Current account balance (Tick 1) CR DR 42F L oss offsets (put a minus sign in the last box to show losses claimed) 42G S ubvention payments (put a minus sign in the last box to show subvention payments made) $ $$ 42A I RD number 42B R emuneration with no PAYE deducted 42C S hareholder AIM tax credits 42D Value of loans from the company $$$ 42E Current account balance (Tick 1) CR DR 42F L oss offsets (put a minus sign in the last box to show losses claimed) 42G S ubvention payments (put a minus sign in the last box to show subvention payments made) $ $$ 42A I RD number 42B R emuneration with no PAYE deducted 42C S hareholder AIM tax credits 42D Value of loans from the company $$$ 42E Current account balance (Tick 1) CR DR 42F L oss offsets (put a minus sign in the last box to show losses claimed) 42G S ubvention payments (put a minus sign in the last box to show subvention payments made) $ $$ Annual imputation return Complete for the tax year 1 April 2022 to 31 March 2023, regardless of your balance date. 43.Print the opening balance at 1 April 2022 in Box 43. This is the same as the closing balance at 31 March 2022. See the guide for further details. 43 $ (Tick 1) Credit Debit 44.Credits - see the guide for further details. Payments Income tax paid for 1989 and subsequent years: 44A $ RWT on interest received 44B $ Imputation Imputation credits attached to dividends received. 44C $ If you’re a public unit trust or group investment fund and maintain a supplementary available subscribed capital account (SASCA), see the guide for further details. Other (please specify) 44D $ Add Boxes 44A, 44B, 44C and 44D. Print the total in Box 44E. This is the total credits. 44E $ 45.Debits - see the guide for further details. Refunds I ncome tax refunded for 1989 and subsequent years 45A $ Imputation Imputation credits attached to dividends paid. 45B $ Other - include change of shareholding adjustment (please specify). 45C $ Add Boxes 45A, 45B and 45C. Print the total in Box 45D. This is the total debits. 45D $ 46. Closing balance at 31 March 2023 If Box 43 is a credit, add Box 43 and Box 44E and subtract Box 45D. 46 $ If Box 45D is less than the total of Box 43 and Box 44E, Box 46 is a credit. If Box 43 is a debit, add Box 43 and Box 45D and subtract Box 44E. If Box 44E is less than the total of Box 43 and Box 44D, Box 46 is a debit. (Tick 1) Credit Debit Adjustments to reduce further income tax payable. See the guide for further details. 46A $ Further income tax payable. Subtract Box 46A from Box 46. Print your answer in Box 46B. 46B $ 47. Imputation penalty tax - see the guide for further details. 47 $ This is the total payable and is due by 20 June 2023. 47A $ Notice of assessment and declaration 48. Please read and sign the following. The information that I have provided in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2023. The information prepared meets the relevant statutory financial reporting requirements and is also a correct statement of shareholder-employee remuneration. / / Signature Date There are penalties for not putting in a tax return or putting in a false return. Please make a copy of this return for your own records. Privacy: To find out what may happen to the information you provide on this form, see the guide. Accident Compensation Act 2001: To understand how the information provided on this form will be used for ACC purposes, see the guide. Send the completed return to us at: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045. OFFICE USE O N LY 49 Income taxCorrespondence indicatorAccounts included?Ye sNo 49A ImputationCorrespondence indicator March 2023