A CTR account is a memorandum account used to track conduit relief until it is distributed. Because relief is given on behalf of non-resident shareholders, it is necessary to ensure this relief is passed on to those shareholders. Conduit tax relief reduces the tax payable by a New Zealand resident company in proportion to its non-resident shareholders. It only applies to income derived as: – attributed foreign income from controlled foreign companies (CFCs) – foreign investment fund (FIF) income calculated under the accounting profits and branch equivalent methods, and – dividend withholding payment liabilities on foreign-sourced dividends. For help filling in this form, please read the notes on the back. For more information, phone us on 0800 443 773. Name of company required to complete this form Show the conduit tax relief account entries in the order that they arose. The entries and relevant dates are explained over the page. DateSource and description Amount Tick one Opening balance Conduit tax relief account return Complete this return only if the dividend withholding payment company has elected to be a conduit tax relief (CTR) company. Show the credit and debit entries arising during the imputation year (for the period 1 April to 31 March regardless of your accounting year). Attach this form to the company’s income tax return. Day Month Year DebitCredit DebitCredit DebitCredit DebitCredit DebitCredit DebitCredit DebitCredit Closing balance IR 406 January 2008 For the period 1 Aprilto 31 March DebitCredit DebitCredit DebitCredit DebitCredit DebitCredit DebitCredit IRD number(8 digit numbers start in the second box.) Notes This return must be completed by a dividend withholding payment company if it has elected to be a conduit tax relief (CTR) company. Amount This is the amount of credit and debit CTR account entries. If the previous balance is a credit, deduct a subsequent debit entry or add a subsequent credit entry. If the previous balance is a debit, add a subsequent debit entry or deduct a subsequent credit entry. Opening balance This must be the same as the closing balance of the CTR account at the end of the preceding imputation year. If this is the first imputation year the company is a CTR company, the opening balance is nil. Closing balance This is the difference between the aggregate amounts of credits and debits existing in the CTR account. Source and description (Use these to describe the debit and credit entries over the page.) CreditsDate of entry Income tax conduit rebateLast day of the imputation year to the extent of the amount calculated under section OD 5 of the Income Tax Act 2007, or date return filed Dividend withholding payment reduction forDate dividend withholding payment is due to be paid to a dividend receivedInland Revenue Conduit tax relief credit attached to a dividendDate dividend is paid derived Subsequent correction credit to the extent it isDate the relevant debit arose not part of an arrangement to obtain a tax advantage A credit transferred from the company’sDate immediately before the end of the imputation year dividend withholding payment account DebitsDate of entry Conduit tax relief credit attached to aDate dividend is paid dividend paid by the company Conduit tax relief adjustment Date income tax return filed Allocation deficit debit End of the imputation year in which the debit arises Tax advantage arrangement debitEnd of the imputation year in which the arrangement commenced Conduit tax relief credit balance if there is a When the 34% change threshold is first reached loss of resident shareholder continuity of 34% or more Chain break debit Date group relationship ceased Termination debit if the company ceases toLast day of operation before the company ceases to be a conduit be a conduit tax relief companytax relief company Credit transferred from the company’s dividendDate immediately before the end of the imputation year withholding payment account Credit transferred to the conduit tax reliefDate of transfer account of a consolidated group More information For more information about conduit tax relief, read our Tax Information Bulletin (TIB) Vol 10, No 4. You can get it from our website at www.ird.govt.nz