Fringe benefit tax return guide IR425 April 2023 ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password Request these from the myIR login screen and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you. How to get our forms and guides You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides The information in this guide is based on current tax laws at the time of printing. 1 Contents Introduction 2 Using this guide 2 Completing manual FBT calculations 2 Completing FBT calculations online 3 Options to consider 4 Quarterly filers - fringe benefit options 4 Annual and income year filers 5 Completing your fourth quarter or yearly return 6 Quarterly returns using the single FBT rate 6 Annual and income year filers using the 63.93% FBT rate 6 Using the alternate rate calculations 6 Attributed income 7 Attributed and non-attributed benefits 9 Attributing fringe benefits 9 Non-attributed benefits 10 Shareholder-employees 14 Completing the alternate rate calculation 17 Using the short-form alternate rate calculation 17 Using the full alternate rate calculation 19 Completing the remuneration adjustment 34 worksheet Further information 38 Due dates 38 When you stop employing permanently 38 Completion of final FBT return where you've ceased to employ staff and provide fringe benefits 39 Due dates for final return 40 Where to send FBT returns 40 How to make payments 41 Late payment 41 Services you may need 42 0800 self-service numbers 42 Privacy 42 If you have a complaint about our service 43 Terms we use 44 FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 2 Introduction Using this guide This guide will help you complete your FBT returns: • Fringe benefit tax quarterly return - IR420 for the period 1 January to 31 March, or • annual or income year returns Fringe benefit shareholder/employee income year tax return - IR421 and Fringe benefit ordinary employee annual tax return - IR422 You should also use this guide if you’ve ceased employing and you’re completing your final Fringe benefit tax (FBT) return. This guide explains the options for calculating FBT as well as how to treat attributed income and benefits provided to employees and shareholder-employees. We've included step-by-step instructions and examples to assist you. You can find examples of completed calculation sheets and FBT returns in our Fringe benefit tax guide - IR409 You can also complete alternate rate calculations and file your FBT returns online at ird.govt.nz/myIR Completing manual FBT calculations If you're completing manual calculations using the calculation sheets enclosed with your return, this guide steps you through each question on the worksheets and provides examples to assist you. You should also use this guide when you've ceased employing and you're completing your final FBT return. See page 38 for more information. 3 Completing FBT calculations online To complete your taxable value and alternate rate calculations online, go to ird.govt.nz/tools-calculators You can complete the taxable value calculations online using the following onscreen calculators: • Fringe benefit tax on motor vehicles • Fringe benefit tax on goods and services • Fringe benefit tax on low-interest loans, or • Fringe benefit tax on contributions to funds, insurance and superannuation schemes. You can complete the alternate rate calculations using either: • the Fringe benefit tax alternate rate calculator. This calculates FBT for one employee at a time, or • the Fringe benefit tax alternate rate calculation sheet. This calculates FBT for up to 10 employees at once. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 4 Options to consider Quarterly filers - fringe benefit options If you filed Fringe benefit tax quarterly - IR420 returns and paid FBT at the single rate of 63.93% in all of the last 3 quarters (periods ended 30 June, 30 September and 31 December), you have 3 choices in the fourth quarter (period ended 31 March). These are: • paying FBT at the 63.93% single rate. Record the benefits and complete your return as you've done in the 3 previous quarters. If you choose this option you must use this rate for all benefits provided during the year, • using the full alternate rate calculation, • using the short-form alternate rate calculation, or • using the pooled alternate rate option. If you paid FBT at the alternate rate of 49.25% in any of the first 3 quarters, you must use one of the alternate rate calculations in the fourth quarter. The following factors may help you when deciding which option best suits your business's circumstances: • If your employees receive fringe benefits and earn: - over $180,000 annually, you should consider using either the single rate or the short-form alternate rate calculation, or - under $180,000 annually, you should consider using the full alternate rate calculation. If your employees earn under $160,000 and each receive up to $13,400 in attributed benefits annually, you may also want to consider the pooled alternate rate calculation as an alternative. • The amount of non-attributed benefits provided. Under the alternate rate options, non-attributed benefits are taxed at 49.25% (or 63.93% in the case of major shareholder-employees). • The alternate rate process may require more extensive record keeping and calculations. 5 You can only use one option. You cannot use a combination of the single FBT rate and the alternate rate calculation options. Note Annual and income year filers If you complete an IR421 income year return, or an IR422 annual return, you can either pay FBT at the 63.93% rate or apply 1 of the alternate rate calculation options to the benefits you provided during the year. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 6 Completing your fourth quarter or yearly return Quarterly returns using the single FBT rate If you've chosen the single rate of 63.93%, complete this return as you normally would and indicate which option you've chosen. Please note, when you choose this option you're not required to attribute benefits to the individual employees receiving the benefits. Annual and income year filers using the 63.93% FBT rate If you've chosen the rate of 63.93%, show this option in Box 4 of your return. Using the alternate rate calculations To complete the alternate rate calculation process, you’ll need quarters 1 to 3 FBT returns (for quarterly filers only). You will also need your completed: • FBT taxable value calculation sheets for quarterly filers (quarters 1 to 4) IR427 • IR428 for income year filers, or • IR429 for annual filers. These show the amount of taxable value for motor vehicles, free subsidised or discounted goods and services, low interest loans and contributions to funds, insurance and superannuation schemes. You can complete these calculations online. If you're using the full alternate rate calculation, you'll also need cash remuneration details for each employee where the fringe benefits they've received have been attributed to them. Benefits will need to be identified as attributed or non-attributed benefits on your calculation sheets - see "Attributed and non-attributed benefits" on page 9. Note 7 Attributed income The definition of cash remuneration for FBT purposes includes any amount of income attributed under the attribution rule. The attribution rule applies where a person providing services puts an entity (trust or company) between themselves and the person who receives those services (the recipient). The person providing the services and the trust or company must be associated persons. The company or trust receives the payment for the services performed by the service provider. The attribution rule ensures the net income (income after expenses) of the entity is treated as the gross income of the service provider. The rule applies only in limited circumstances. For FBT purposes, when applying the alternate rate calculations to attributed benefits received from this entity, the cash remuneration includes the amount of any attributed income. Sandy is employed by GHI Ltd and receives an annual salary of $120,000 as well as annual attributed benefits of $10,000. Sandy has formed a company that now receives the income for the services she provides to GHI Ltd. Sandy draws an income of $60,000 from her company. For the purposes of FBT, Sandy's company shows cash remuneration of $120,000 and attributed benefits of $10,000 on its alternate rate calculation sheet. Example FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 8 If you elect the alternate rate calculation option when determining the rate to apply to an employee who has received attributed income under the attribution rules, there are 3 possible scenarios: • If all the remuneration details relating to that employee are known, you must use 1 of the alternate rate calculations - see page 17. • If some of the remuneration details are not available at the time you complete the return, you can use the rate of 49.25% to calculate the FBT payable on the attributed benefits provided to that employee. When you complete the following year's fourth quarter or annual FBT return, align the FBT payable with the actual remuneration received by the employee using the full alternate rate calculation. • If some of the remuneration details are not available at the time you complete your return, you can use the rate of 63.93% to calculate FBT payable on the attributed benefits provided. No further calculations are required the following year when using this option. The options for attributed income do not apply to income year filers (shareholder-employees) as the due date for this return is aligned with the end-of-year tax date of the employer, so all income information would be known by this date. Income year filers can elect the single rate option or one of the alternate rate calculation options. 9 Attributed and non-attributed benefits Attributing fringe benefits If you choose to apply the alternate rate calculations you'll have to attribute the following fringe benefits to the individual employee receiving them. The fringe benefit categories are as follows: • motor vehicles (other than pooled vehicles) • subsidised transport, if the annual taxable value is $1,000 or more per employee - an employer has the option to treat subsidised transport benefits as non-attributed if all employees have the same or similar entitlement to that benefit • low-interest loans (other than low-interest loans provided by life insurance companies) • employer contributions to any life insurance, pension insurance or personal accident or sickness insurance policy, funeral trust or insurance fund of a friendly society, if the annual taxable value of all contributions is $1,000 or more per employee • employer contributions to any superannuation scheme, where ESCT (employer's superannuation contribution tax) does not apply, if the annual taxable value of all contributions is $1,000 or more per employee • employer contributions to a sickness, accident, or death fund, if the annual taxable value of all contributions is $1,000 or more per employee, and • benefits of any other kind (such as gifts, prizes and subsidised or discounted goods and services), if the annual taxable value of all those benefits is $2,000 or more per employee. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 10 You can choose to attribute benefits when the total value of that benefit, within a particular category, for an employee is below the stated threshold. However, if you choose to do this for one employee within a particular category, you must attribute all benefits in that category to all employees receiving them. Non-attributed benefits The rate of 49.25% applies to fringe benefits not attributed to an individual employee that are pooled or shared fringe benefits (such as motor vehicles where no one employee has principal use of that vehicle). The 63.93% rate applies if a major shareholder-employee, or an associated person of the major shareholder-employee (where the fringe benefit is not received as an employee), is one of the recipients of the non-attributed benefit. A major shareholder-employee is a person who owns or controls or has the right to acquire 10% or more of the ordinary shares, voting rights or control of a close company and is also an employee of that company. It may be necessary to create 2 pools and allocate non- attributed benefits to each pool. This will depend on whether a recipient of the benefit is a major shareholder- employee or an associated person of the major shareholder-employee. 11 The following examples show how to apply the rules when attributing or non-attributing benefits. Benefit categoryThreshold Scenario 1 Employer GHI Ltd chooses to attribute only those benefits that exceed the category thresholds Motor vehicles-Employee A Employee B Employee C $5,000 (A)\* - - \*Principal usage Low-interest loans-Employee A Employee B Employee C - - - Subsidised transport$1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C - - - Employer contributions to employee's sickness, accident, or death fund $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C $1,800 (A)\*\* $500 (N) $500 (N) \*\* Greater than the threshold of $1,000 Employer contributions to specified insurance funds or friendly societies $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C - - - Employer contributions to any superannuation scheme (where ESCT does not apply) $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C - - - Any other benefit of any kind (such as gifts, prizes and discounted goods and services) $2,000Employee A Employee B Employee C $1,000 (N) $550 (N) $700 (N) No benefit is greater than the threshold Key (A)-attributed benefit (N)-non-attributed benefit FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 12 Benefit categoryThreshold Scenario 2 Employer MNO Ltd chooses to attribute all benefits Motor vehicles-Employee A Employee B Employee C $4,000 (A)\* - $6,300 (A)\* \*Principal usage Low-interest loans-Employee A Employee B Employee C - - - Subsidised transport $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C - - - Employer contributions to employee's sickness, accident, or death fund $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C - - - Employer contributions to specified insurance funds or friendly societies $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C $750 (A) $750 (A) $750 (A) Employer contributions to any superannuation scheme (where ESCT does not apply) $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C - - - Any other benefit of any kind (such as gifts, prizes, and discounted goods and services) $2,000Employee A Employee B Employee C $200 (A) $1,550 (A) $2,500 (A) Key (A)-attributed benefit (N)-non-attributed benefit 13 Benefit categoryThreshold Scenario 3 Employer XYZ Ltd chooses to attribute all benefits except for those of any other kind Motor vehicles-Employee A Employee B Employee C - $4,500 (A)\* $8,600 (A)\* \*Principal usage Low-interest loans-Employee A Employee B Employee C $3,000 (A) - $5,000 (A) Subsidised transport $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C - - - Employer contributions to employee's sickness, accident, or death fund $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C $1,500 (A) $600 (A) $950 (A) Employer contributions to specified insurance funds or friendly societies $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C - - - Employer contributions to any superannuation scheme (where ESCT does not apply) $1,000Employee A Employee B Employee C $1,100 (A) $2,000 (A) $850 (A) Any other benefit of any kind (such as gifts, prizes, and discounted goods and services) $2,000Employee A Employee B Employee C $2,500 (A) $150 (N)\*\* $120 (N)\*\* \*\*The employer has chosen not to attribute benefits under the threshold Key (A)-attributed benefit (N)-non-attributed benefit FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 14 Shareholder-employees A shareholder-employee is a shareholder and an employee of a company with no more than 25 shareholders. Any benefit they receive as an employee is a fringe benefit and FBT is payable unless you elect the benefit to be treated as a dividend. If you employ shareholder-employees you may not have all the cash remuneration details for these employees to calculate the fringe benefit-inclusive cash remuneration. For example, the shareholder-employee's salary and wages, where PAYE has not been deducted, may not be available as this information is aligned with the income tax return filing process. The following options are available, depending on whether you elect 63.93% or the alternate rate calculations: • If you elect the flat rate of 63.93%, you pay 63.93% on all benefits provided during the year, including those provided to shareholder-employees. • If you elect the alternate rate when determining the rate to apply to a shareholder-employee, there are 3 possible scenarios. - If all the remuneration details relating to a shareholder-employee are known, you must use one of the alternate rate calculations - see page 17. - If some of the remuneration details are not available at the time you complete the return, you can use the rate of 49.25% to calculate the FBT payable on the attributed benefits provided to that shareholder- employee. When you complete the following year's fourth quarter or annual FBT return, you align the FBT payable from this year with the actual remuneration received by the shareholder-employee using the full alternate rate calculations. - If some of the remuneration details are not available at the time you complete your return, you can use the rate of 63.93% to calculate FBT payable on the attributed benefits provided. No further calculations are required the following year when using this option. 15 Shareholder-employees' remuneration or attributed income unknown If, at the time of completing your quarterly or annual return (for the period ended 31 March), you do not know all the remuneration of your shareholder-employees or those receiving attributed income, you can apply either the 49.25% or 63.93% FBT rate to the value of the attributed benefits. If you use the 49.25% rate you'll be required to complete the alternate rate calculations for next year's return (period ended 31 March). If you use 63.93% there are no further calculations to complete next year. To calculate FBT payable for shareholder-employees or persons receiving attributed income, where the remuneration details are unknown, the fringe benefit- inclusive cash remuneration will be the annual amount of the attributed fringe benefit provided. The 49.25% or 63.93% FBT rate will then be applied to this amount. A major shareholder-employee has the following remuneration details at the time of completing the return. Dividends\* $ 6,000 Fringe benefits $ 5,000 Salary and wages (no PAYE deducted) unknown The fringe benefit-inclusive cash remuneration for this employee is only $5,000. Dividends of $6,000 will be included as part of the cash remuneration for the following year. The employer has chosen to use the 49.25% rate this year and complete the alternate rate calculations next year. The FBT payable this year is $2,143 ($5,000 × 0.4925). \* Dividends are only included as cash remuneration where the recipient is a major shareholder-employee. Example FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 16 If you use the 49.25% FBT rate, it's important to keep the following information for the future years calculation of FBT to pay for each shareholder-employee and person receiving attributed income: • total attributed benefits provided for the year • the amount of FBT payable for the year on the taxable value of those attributed benefits provided. 17 Completing the alternate rate calculation The following forms will help you complete the alternate rate calculation: • FBT alternate rate calculation sheet - quarterly returns - IR417 • FBT alternate rate calculation sheet - income year return - IR418 • FBT alternate rate calculation sheet - annual return - IR419. The alternate rate calculators available at ird.govt.nz/tools-calculators will calculate your FBT and give you a schedule which you can print and keep with your FBT records. If you use our onscreen calculator you will not need to complete the alternate rate calculation sheet. Note Using the short-form alternate rate calculation Under this option you classify benefits as either attributed or non-attributed. All attributed benefits are subject to the flat rate of 63.93%. All non-attributed benefits are subject to the flat rate of 49.25%, or 63.93% where one or more recipients is a major shareholder- employee. Two pools for non-attributed benefits may be necessary in this situation. This option would appeal to employers who predominantly provide attributed benefits to employees who earn more than $180,000 gross equivalent. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 18 Using the short-form alternate rate option, complete the alternate rate calculation sheet (IR417, IR418 or IR419) as follows Column 1 Write "attributed" and "non-attributed" on separate lines. Column 9 Write the total amount (whole dollars only) of attributed or non-attributed benefits. You may find this easier to do if you first transfer the totals from your FBT taxable value calculation sheets. If you're a quarterly filer show the values used in each quarter of the FBT taxable value calculation sheets in the respective boxes on the alternate rate calculation sheet. These are quarter 1 Box 5, quarter 2 Box 6, quarter 3 Box 7 and quarter 4 Box 8. Add them together and write the total value in Box 9. Column 10 Write the rate you're using to calculate FBT payable (attributed 63.93%, non-attributed 49.25% and non- attributed major shareholder 63.93%). Column 11 Multiply column 9 by column 10 and enter the total. Annual and income year filers - add up column 11 and transfer this amount to Box 5 of your FBT return. Quarterly filers - complete Boxes A, B and C. Transfer the amount from Box C to Box 6 of your return. Where full remuneration or attributed income details were unknown at the time of completing last year's annual or fourth quarter return and you used the 49.25% rate, transfer this amount to the remuneration adjustment sheet. See page 34. Using the pooled alternate rate calculation Under this option you classify benefits as either attributed or non-attributed. Attributed benefits are subject to a flat rate of either 49.25% or 63.93%, depending on the 19 employee’s pay and the value of benefits attributed to them. Benefits attributed to employees who earn within the “safe harbour” thresholds of up to $160,000 in gross equivalent pay and up to $13,400 each in attributed benefits for the year are subject to the 49.25% flat rate. Benefits attributed to employees earning above either of the safe harbour thresholds are subject to the 63.93% rate. However, if you know that an employee earning above the safe harbour thresholds has received less than $129,681 in net cash pay plus attributed benefits (all-inclusive pay) for the year then you may apply the 49.25% rate to benefits attributed to that employee if you wish to. In the situation when attributed benefits are taxed at the 49.25% rate for some employees and at the 63.93% rate for others, two pools for attributed benefits may be necessary. All non-attributed benefits are subject to the flat rate of 49.25%, or 63.93% where one or more recipients is a major shareholder-employee. Two pools for non- attributed benefits may be necessary in this situation. This option may appeal to employers who predominantly provide attributed benefits to employees who earn within the safe harbour thresholds (that is, up to $160,000 in gross equivalent pay and up to $13,400 each in attributed benefits for the year). Using the short-form alternate rate option, complete the alternate rate calculation sheet (IR417, IR418 or IR419) as follows Column 1 Write “Attributed benefits for 49.25% pool” and “Attributed benefits for 63.93% pool” on a separate line. If there are no employees in the 63.93% pool, then you do not need to use a line for recording benefits attributed to that pool. If the benefits provided include any pooled vehicles or non-attributed benefits, write this down as a separate heading after all the employees who received attributed benefits in column 1. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 20 Use a separate line for non-attributed benefits provided to major shareholder-employees. If you provide benefits to shareholder-employees make sure you’ve ticked the circle in this column. Column 9 Write the total amount (whole dollars only) of attributed or non-attributed benefits. You may find this easier to do if you first transfer the totals from your FBT taxable value calculation sheets. If you’re a quarterly filer show the values used in each quarter of the FBT taxable value calculation sheets in the respective boxes on the alternate rate calculation sheet. These are quarter 1 Box 5, quarter 2 Box 6, quarter 3 Box 7 and quarter 4 Box 8. Add them together and write the total value in Box 9. Column 10 Write the rate you’re using to calculate FBT payable (attributed 49.25% for employees within safe harbour and 63.93% for employees outside the safe harbour, non- attributed 49.25% and non-attributed major shareholder 63.93%). Column 11 Multiply column 9 by column 10 and enter the total. Annual and income year filers - add up column 11 and transfer this amount to Box 5 of your FBT return. Quarterly filers - complete Boxes A, B and C. Transfer the amount from Box C to Box 6 of your return. Where full remuneration or attributed income details were unknown at the time of completing last year’s annual or fourth quarter return and you used the 49.25% rate, transfer this amount to the remuneration adjustment sheet. 21 Using the full alternate rate calculation If you use this option, you'll need to do a separate calculation for each employee who has received attributed benefits. When completing the alternate rate calculation for the year, all attributed benefits are subject to the individual employee's personal tax rate. All non- attributed benefits are subject to the rate of 49.25% or 63.93% in the case of non-attributed benefits provided, where one or more recipients is a major shareholder- employee. Two pools for non-attributed benefits may be necessary in this situation. This option would appeal to employers who predominantly provide benefits to employees who earn less than $180,000 gross equivalent. Using the full alternate rate option - (IR417, IR418 or IR419) complete the alternate rate calculation sheet as follows Column 1 - Employee's name or non-attributed benefits Write the names of the employees who received fringe benefits attributed to them for the year. Enter each employee's name once. You'll find this information on the FBT taxable value calculation sheet. If your employee is a shareholder-employee, tick the circle next to their name. If you have not identified the benefits to be attributed, this will be your first step in completing the alternate rate calculations. If there were any pooled vehicles or non-attributed benefits, write "pooled vehicles" and "non-attributed" on separate lines below the list of employee's names. Use a separate line for non-attributed benefits to major shareholder-employees. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 22 Columns 2 to 4 are not required for non-attributed benefits and benefits provided to shareholder- employees and persons receiving attributed income, where their income is unknown, because the rates used are flat rates. Note Column 2 - Employee's income (cash remuneration) Write the total cash remuneration paid to each employee using your salary records for the year ended 31 March, using whole dollars beside the name of the employee. See page 44 for a definition of cash remuneration. If an employee only worked part of the year the cash remuneration is the amount you've paid them during that year. Column 3 - Tax on employee's income (tax on employee’s cash remuneration) For each employee, calculate the amount of tax on the cash remuneration in column 2. Write the total in column 3. This is not the amount of PAYE deducted from your employee's income. See the examples on the following pages. The amount of tax you record in column 3 is to the second place after the decimal point. Do not round this amount up or down. Note 23 For each employee you'll need to ask yourself the following questions and complete the appropriate step. Is my employee's cash remuneration: • $14,000 or less? If “yes” go to A below • from $14,001 to $48,000? If “yes” go to B on page 23 • from $48,001 to $70,000? If “yes” go to C on page 24 • from $70,001 to $180,000? If “yes” go to D on page 25 • Over $180,000? If “yes” go to E on page 25. A - Employee's cash remuneration is $14,000 or less If your employee's annual cash remuneration is $14,000 or less, follow these instructions to calculate the amount of tax: • Multiply your employee's cash remuneration, whole dollars, by the tax rate of 0.105 (10.5%). • Transfer this amount to column 3 of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet. Employee A receives $8,750 for the year. The tax on this amount is: Cash remuneration $8,750.00 Multiplied by tax rate 0.105 Total tax on $8,750 $918.75 Example B - Employee's cash remuneration is from $14,001 to $48,000 If your employee's annual cash remuneration falls in this range, follow these instructions to calculate the amount of tax: • Deduct $14,000 (remuneration threshold) from your employee's cash remuneration. This gives you the balance of the cash remuneration. • Multiply the balance by the tax rate of 0.175 (17.5%). • Add the cumulative tax total on $14,000 ($1,470.00). • Transfer the total tax calculated to column 3 of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 24 Employee B receives $21,500 for the year. The tax on this amount is: Cash remuneration $21,500.00 Less remuneration threshold $14,000.00 Balance of cash remuneration $7,500.00 Multiplied by tax rate 0.175 Ta x on balance $1,312.50 Add tax on remuneration threshold $1,470.00 Total tax on $21,500 $2,782.50 Example C - Employee's cash remuneration is from $48,001 to $70,000 If your employee's annual cash remuneration falls in this range, follow these instructions to calculate the amount of tax: • Deduct $48,000 (remuneration threshold) from your employee's cash remuneration. This gives you the balance of the cash remuneration. • Multiply the balance by the tax rate of 0.30 (30%). • Add the cumulative tax total on $48,000 ($7,420.00). • Transfer the total tax calculated to column 3 of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet. Employee C receives $54,275 for the year. The tax on this amount is: Cash remuneration $54,275.00 Less remuneration threshold $48,000.00 Balance of cash remuneration $6,275.00 Multiplied by tax rate 0.30 Ta x on balance $1,882.50 Add tax on remuneration threshold $7,420.00 Total tax on $54,275 $9,302.50 Example 25 D - Employee’s cash remuneration is from $70,001 to $180,000 If your employee’s annual cash remuneration falls in this range, follow these instructions to calculate the amount of tax: • Deduct $70,000 (remuneration threshold) from your employee’s cash remuneration. This gives you the balance of the cash remuneration. • Multiply the balance by the tax rate of 0.33 (33%). • Add the cumulative tax total on $70,000 ($14,020.00). • Transfer the total tax calculated to column 3 of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet. Employee D receives $79,375 for the year. The tax on this amount is: Cash remuneration $79,375.00 Less remuneration threshold $70,000.00 Balance of cash remuneration $9,375.00 Multiplied by tax rate 0.33 Ta x on balance $3,093.75 Add tax on remuneration threshold $14,020.00 Total tax on $79,375 $17,113.75 Example E - Employee’s cash remuneration is over $180,000 If your employee’s annual cash remuneration is over $180,000, follow these instructions to calculate the amount of tax: • Deduct $180,000 (remuneration threshold) from your employee’s cash remuneration. This gives you the balance of the cash remuneration. • Multiply the balance by the tax rate of 0.39 (39%). • Add the cumulative tax total on $180,000 ($50,320.00). • Transfer the total tax calculated to column 3 of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 26 Employee E receives $185,500 for the year. The tax on this amount is: Cash remuneration $185,500.00 Less remuneration threshold $180,000.00 Balance of cash remuneration $5,500.00 Multiplied by tax rate 0.39 Tax on balance $2,145 Add tax on remuneration threshold $50,320.00 Total tax on $185,500 $52,465.00 Example Column 4 - Net income For each benefit attributed to an employee, subtract the amount in column 3 (tax on employee’s income (tax on employee’s cash remuneration)) from the amount in column 2 (employee’s income (cash remuneration)). This is the employee’s net income (net cash remuneration) and is completed for each employee. Write this total in column 4. Columns 5, 6, 7 and 8 - Total benefits provided to an employee, or non-attributed benefits Complete this step for each employee, shareholder- employee and person receiving attributed income, where the benefit has been attributed, and for non-attributed benefits. Quarterly filers Transfer the information from the FBT taxable value calculation sheets. For each quarter: • total the taxable value of the benefits attributed to each employee, or the taxable value of the non- attributed benefits, and • write the quarterly totals next to each employee's name or in the "non-attributed" row: - Quarter 1 (1 April to 30 June) - write the total in column 5 - Quarter 2 (1 July to 30 September) - write the total in column 6 27 - Quarter 3 (1 October to 31 December) - write the total in column 7 - Quarter 4 (1 January to 31 March) - write the total in column 8. To check all the figures have been correctly transferred, add up the column for each quarter (columns 5, 6, 7 and 8). This total should be the same as the taxable value shown on Box 3 of the IR420. Annual and income year filers For annual and income year filers, the taxable value of the fringe benefits attributed to the individual employees is written in the following columns: • Column 5 - write the total for motor vehicles (A) • Column 6 - write the total for other fringe benefits (B) • Column 7 - write the total for low-interest loans (C) • Column 8 - write the total for insurance and superannuation (D). Write the total amount next to the employee's name, or non-attributed benefit in each of the columns. To check all the figures have been correctly transferred, add up the column for each benefit type (columns 5, 6, 7 and 8). The combined total should be the same as the taxable value shown on Box 3 of the IR421 or IR422 FBT return. You do not have to attribute certain benefits if they fall under the threshold for their category - see page 9. Column 9 - Fringe benefit-inclusive cash remuneration (FBICR) Add columns 5 to 8 together (whole dollars only), then add the dollar value from column 4 to this figure and write your answer in column 9. This is the FBICR. This total is the annual net income (net cash remuneration) from column 4 and the attributed benefits provided to each employee (columns 5 to 8). For shareholder-employees or persons receiving attributed income, where all their remuneration is unknown at the time of completing this return, the FBICR for this year FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 28 is the annual total of attributed benefits provided to the individual shareholder-employee or person receiving attributed income - see the example on page 15. For non-attributed benefits these are the annual total benefits not attributed to an individual employee. Column 10 - Tax on fringe benefit-inclusive cash remuneration (FBICR) for attributed benefits For each employee, calculate the amount of tax on the FBICR in column 9. Write the total in column 10 - see the examples on the following pages. The amount you record is to the second place after the decimal point. Do not round this amount up or down. Note This step does not have to be completed for non- attributed benefits, or shareholder-employees and persons receiving attributed income, where their remuneration is unknown at the time of completing this return. In this column write the rate of FBT being applied to these benefits - either 49.25% or 63.93%. Complete the appropriate step for each employee. Is your employee’s FBICR: • $12,530 or less? If “yes” go to A below • from $12,531 to $40,580? If “yes” go to B on page 29 • from $40,581 to $55,980? If “yes” go to C on page 29 • from $55,981 to $129,680? If “yes” go to D on page 30 • Over $129,680? If “yes” go to E on page 31. A - Employee's FBICR is $12,530 or less If your employee's annual FBICR is $12,530 or less, follow these instructions to calculate the amount of tax: • Multiply your employee's FBICR by the tax rate of 0.1173 (11.73%). • Transfer this amount to column 10 of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet. 29 Employee A receives total benefits and income of $7,750 for the year. The tax on this amount is: FBICR $7,750.00 Multiplied by tax rate 0.1173 Total tax on $7,750 $909.07 Example B - Employee's FBICR is from $12,531 to $40,580 If your employee's annual FBICR falls in this range, follow these instructions to calculate the amount of tax: • Deduct $12,530 (remuneration threshold) from your employee's FBICR. This gives you the balance of the cash remuneration. • Multiply the balance by the tax rate of 0.2121 (21.21%). • Add the cumulative tax total on $12,530 ($1,469.00). • Transfer the total tax calculated to column 10 of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet. Employee B receives $13,875 for the year. The tax on this amount is: FBICR $13,875.00 Less remuneration threshold $12,530.00 Balance $1,345.00 Multiplied by tax rate 0.2121 Ta x on balance $285.27 Add tax on remuneration threshold $1,469.00 Total tax on $13,875 $1,754.27 Example C - Employee's FBICR is from $40,581 to $55,980 If your employee's annual FBICR falls in this range, follow these instructions to calculate the amount of tax: • Deduct $40,580 (remuneration threshold) from your employee's FBICR. This gives you the balance of the cash remuneration. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 30 • Multiply the balance by the tax rate of 0.4286 (42.86%). • Add the cumulative tax total on $40,580 ($7,419.00). • Transfer the total tax calculated to column 10 of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet. Employee C receives $45,275 for the year. The tax on this amount is: FBICR $45,275.00 Less remuneration threshold $40,580.00 Balance $4,695.00 Multiplied by tax rate 0.4286 Ta x on balance $2,012.27 Add tax on remuneration threshold $7,419.00 Total tax on $45,275 $9,431.27 Example D - Employee’s FBICR is from $55,981 to $129,680 If your employee’s annual FBICR falls in this range, follow these instructions to calculate the amount of tax. • Deduct $55,980 (remuneration threshold) from your employee's FBICR. This gives you the balance of the cash remuneration. • Multiply the balance by the tax rate of 0.4925 (49.25%). • Add the cumulative tax total on $55,980 ($14,019.00). • Transfer the total tax calculated to column 10 of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet. 31 Employee D receives $65,500 for the year. The tax on this amount is: FBICR $65,500.00 Less remuneration threshold $55,980.00 Balance $9,520.00 Multiplied by tax rate 0.4925 Ta x on balance $4,688.60 Add tax on remuneration threshold $14,019.00 Total tax on $65,500 $18,707.60 Example E - Employee’s FBICR is over $129,680 If your employee’s annual FBICR is over $129,680, follow these instructions to calculate the amount of tax. • Deduct $129,680 (remuneration threshold) from your employee’s FBICR. This gives you the balance of the cash remuneration. • Multiply the balance by the tax rate of 0.6393 (63.93%). • Add the cumulative tax total on $129,680 ($50,316.00). • Transfer the total tax calculated to column 10 of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet Employee E receives $136,500 for the year. The tax on this amount is: FBICR $136,500.00 Less remuneration threshold $129,680.00 Balance $6,820.00 Multiplied by tax rate 0.6393 Tax on balance $4,360.02 Add tax on remuneration threshold $50,316.00 Total tax on $136,500 $54,676.02 Example FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 32 Column 11 - FBT payable for the year Column 11 is the annual amount of FBT payable for attributed and non-attributed benefits. Attributed benefits To calculate the amount of FBT payable in a year for each employee's attributed benefits, take the total from column 10 (tax on FBICR) and subtract the total in column 3 (tax on employee's income). Shareholder-employees or persons receiving attributed income - remuneration unknown If the 49.25% rate is used, multiply your total in column 9 by 49.25% and write your total in column 11. If 63.93% is used, multiply your total in column 9 by 63.93% and write your total in column 11. See page 15 for more information about unknown remuneration. Non-attributed benefits Calculate the FBT payable for the year by using the 49.25% rate on the combined total of all non-attributed benefits provided during the year. Use the 63.93% rate on the total non-attributed benefits received by a major shareholder-employee. See page 10 for more information about non-attributed benefits. Multiply your total in column 9 by either 49.25% or 63.93%, and write the rate you've used in column 10 and the amount in column 11. Box A - Total FBT to pay Add up column 11 and write the total in Box A. If you file income year returns, Box A is your FBT payable. Transfer this amount to Box 5 of your IR421 return. If you file annual returns, Box A is your FBT payable. Transfer this amount to Box 5 of your IR422 return, or where full remuneration or attributed income details for shareholder-employees were unknown at the time of completing last year's return and you used the 49.25% rate, transfer this amount to the remuneration adjustment worksheet - see page 32. If you're a quarterly filer, Box A is your FBT payable for the year. Continue to Box B. 33 Box B - FBT assessed in quarters 1 to 3 (quarterly filers only) To work out the amount of FBT to pay in this quarter you'll need to total the amount of FBT assessed (excluding any interest or late payment penalties) in the last 3 quarters (ending 30 June, 30 September and 31 December). You'll find these totals in Box 6 of your Fringe benefit tax quarterly return - IR420 Quarter 1, Box 6 Quarter 2, Box 6 Quarter 3, Box 6 If your return has been reassessed by Inland Revenue, use the amount of FBT to pay (GST-exclusive) from the reassessment, not the original return. Note Total assessed in the 3 quarters Copy this total to Box B on your alternate rate calculation sheet. Box C - Total FBT to pay or refund due (quarterly filers only) Box A (FBT payable for the year) less Box B (FBT assessed) will give you the amount of FBT you'll have to pay or be refunded in this quarter. Write this total in Box C. Transfer this amount to Box 6 of your IR420 return. Where full remuneration or attributed income details for shareholder-employees were unknown at the time of completing last year's fourth quarter return and you used the 49.25% rate, transfer this amount to the remuneration adjustment sheet. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 34 Completing the remuneration adjustment worksheet This worksheet will help you to calculate any adjustment required, where full remuneration or attributed income details for shareholder-employees (or those receiving attributed income) were unknown at the time of completing last year's fourth quarter or annual return. The remuneration adjustment worksheet is available on ird.govt.nz/tools-calculators You'll also find an example in the Fringe benefit tax guide - IR409 If you elected to use the 49.25% rate in your fourth quarter or annual return for the period ended 31 March for shareholder-employees, where all remuneration or attributed income details were unknown, you must make an adjustment using the full alternate rate calculation. You'll need the following information for each of the shareholder-employees: • total attributed benefits provided last year • last year's income • the amount of FBT paid in last year's return. Column 1 - Shareholder-employee's name Write the names of the shareholder-employees whose full remuneration details were unknown last year and you elected the 49.25% rate. Column 2 - Last year's income Show the total cash remuneration paid to each shareholder-employee for the year ended 31 March. Enter this information using whole dollars in column 2, beside the name of the shareholder-employee. 35 Column 3 - Tax on income In column 3, calculate the amount of tax on the cash remuneration paid to the shareholder-employee in column 2. For each shareholder-employee you'll have to identify which income range they are in and decide which tax rate has to apply. Refer to page 23 to help you calculate the tax. Column 4 - Last year's net income Subtract the amount in column 3 (tax on income) from the amount in column 2 (last year's cash remuneration). This is the shareholder-employee's net cash remuneration. Write this total in column 4. Column 5 - Attributed benefits provided last year Show the total amount of attributed benefits provided to the individual shareholder-employee last year. Column 6 - Fringe benefit-inclusive cash remuneration (FBICR) Add columns 4 and 5 together and write your answer in column 6. This is the FBICR. This total is last year's annual net income (cash remuneration) and attributed benefits provided to each shareholder-employee. Column 7 - Tax on fringe benefit-inclusive cash remuneration For each shareholder-employee, calculate the amount of tax on the total in column 6. Refer to page 27 to help you calculate the tax. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 36 Column 8 - FBT payable last year Column 8 is the FBT payable for last year. To calculate the amount of FBT payable for each shareholder-employee, take the total from column 7 (tax on FBICR) and subtract the total in column 3 (tax on cash remuneration). Column 9 - FBT paid for shareholder-employees in last year's return Show the amount for each shareholder-employee from column 11 of last year's alternate rate calculation sheet. This was the amount payable from the information known at the time of completing last year's return. Column 10 - Adjustment required Subtract column 9 from column 8 (where column 9 is larger than column 8, the result is a credit). Show the difference in column 10 (show credits in brackets). Box D - Total of all adjustments Add up column 10, remembering to subtract figures shown in brackets (credits). Where all amounts are in brackets or the total amount in brackets is greater than the debits, the total will be a credit. Box E - Total from your alternate rate calculation sheet Transfer the amount from Box C (quarterly filers) of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet - quarterly returns - IR417 or Box A (annual or income year filers) of your FBT alternate rate calculation sheet - annual return - IR419 to Box E. Remember to tick FBT to pay or FBT refund. 37 Box F - FBT to pay or refund If Box D is a debit If Box E is a refund, subtract from Box D. If Box E is larger than Box D, the result is an FBT refund. If Box D is larger than Box E, the result is FBT to pay. Write the result in Box F. If Box E is FBT to pay, add Box D. The result is FBT to pay. Write the result in Box F. If Box D is a credit If Box E is FBT to pay, subtract from Box D. If Box E is larger than Box D the result is FBT to pay. If Box D is larger than Box E, the result is an FBT refund. Write the result in Box F. If Box E is an FBT refund, add Box D. The result is an FBT refund. Write the result in Box F. Copy the amount in Box F to Box 6 (IR420 for quarterly returns) or Box 5 (IR421 or IR422 for annual returns) of your FBT return. Remember to tick FBT to pay or FBT refund on your return. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 38 Further information Due dates Last quarterly return and annual filers The due date for this return and any payment is 31 May. If the due date falls on a non-business day the payment will be due on the following working day. Income year filers This return and any payment are aligned with your balance date and are due at the same time your end of year income tax is payable. When you stop employing permanently Let us know if you stop employing permanently, even if your business is still operating. If you're still providing fringe benefits to former employees you must continue to pay FBT on these benefits. Note 39 Completion of final FBT return where you've ceased to employ staff and provide fringe benefits If you've ceased employing staff and do not intend to employ any more staff in the current tax year, you should complete sections A, C and D of your final return for the quarter you ceased to employ (quarterly filers only). You may choose to pay FBT at the flat rate of 63.93% rather than using one of the alternate rate calculations. However, if you choose this option you must apply the 63.93% rate to all fringe benefits provided from the beginning of the tax year to the date you ceased to employ staff, taking into account FBT already paid during the year. Please note, if you continue to provide fringe benefits to former employees, the above does not apply. It's a good idea to note "final return" next to the circles at the top of the IR420 return. Where you're asked to indicate whether the return is for quarter 4 there's no need to tick either circle. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 40 Due dates for final return If you're filing your final FBT return in quarters 1, 2 or 3, the due date shown on the return will be the standard quarterly due date (20th of the month following the quarter). The actual due date for filing a final return in quarters 1, 2 or 3 is extended to the end of 2 months immediately following the end of the quarter in which employment stopped. Return periodFinal return and payment due date Due date on return Quarter 1 1 April to 30 June31 August20 July Quarter 2 1 July to 30 September30 November20 October Quarter 3 1 October to 31 December28 February20 January In some situations, where the alternate rate calculation option is elected outside the fourth quarter, we may contact you to confirm this is your final FBT return. Note Where to send FBT returns Post your return to: Inland Revenue PO Box 39090 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045 41 How to make payments You can make payments by: • direct debit in myIR • credit or debit card at ird.govt.nz/pay • internet banking - most New Zealand banks have a pay tax option. When making a payment, include: • your IRD number • the account type you are paying • the period the payment relates to. Find all the details of our payment options at ird.govt.nz/pay Late payment If you do not pay a bill on time, you may have to pay penalties and interest. Contact us if you are not able to pay on time. We’ll look at your payment options, which may include an instalment arrangement. Find out more at ird.govt.nz/penalties FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 42 Services you may need 0800 self-service numbers Voice ID-enrolled customers have shorter calls and better after-hours access. Enrol for voice ID 0800 257 843 Reset your myIR password 0800 227 770 Check your account balances 0800 257 777 Order forms and guides 0800 257 773 Our self-service lines are open 7 days a week. They offer a range of automated options, especially if you’re enrolled with voice ID. Find out more at ird.govt.nz/contact-us Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your tax and entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you do not. We may also exchange information about you with: • some government agencies • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them, and • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). You can ask for the personal information we hold about you. We’ll give the information to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Find our full privacy policy at ird.govt.nz/privacy 43 If you have a complaint about our service We’re committed to providing you with a quality service. If there’s a problem, we’d like to know about it and have the chance to fix it. If you disagree with how we’ve assessed your tax, you may need to follow a formal disputes process. Find out more about making a complaint, and the disputes process, at ird.govt.nz/disputes FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 44 Terms we use Associated person For FBT purposes an associated person is someone associated with the employer or the employee: • by within 2 degrees of blood relationship or one person is within 2 degrees of blood relationship to the other person's spouse, civil union partner, or de facto partner • by marriage, civil union or de facto relationship • by business partnership, or • by shareholding interest. The association rules are complex, therefore it's important you seek professional advice if you think there's any possibility of an association applying to you. Fringe benefits provided to an associate of an employee are to be taxed as though they were given to the employee, rather than the associate. Note Attributed benefit A fringe benefit that an employee has the principal use or enjoyment of during the year. See pages 9 to 13 for rules and thresholds. Cash remuneration The employee’s gross salary or wages, bonuses, overtime and other taxable income from all sources associated with the employer (including its subsidiaries) during the year, before tax is calculated and deducted. For a major shareholder-employee, cash remuneration also includes any interest or dividends received from the employer, or a related employer who pays cash remuneration. 45 Close company A company that has 5 or fewer natural person shareholders. Company A formal and legal entity in its own right, separate from its shareholders (or owners). It is formed when a group of people exchanges money and/or property for shares in an enterprise registered under the Companies Act 1993. Fringe benefit-inclusive cash remuneration (FBICR) The taxable value of attributed fringe benefits plus the cash remuneration. If you're using the alternate rate calculation process, calculate FBICR for each employee who has fringe benefits attributed to them. Major shareholder-employee A person who owns, controls or has the right to acquire 10% or more of the ordinary shares, voting rights or control of a close company, and is also an employee of that company. Non-attributed benefit Non-attributed benefits are pooled or shared fringe benefits not attributed to an individual employee. Non-resident employee If remuneration is paid to a non-resident employee, the calculation of the amount of tax payable on the remuneration includes any tax credit as if the employee was a resident for FBT purposes. Shareholder-employee A shareholder and employee of a company that has no more than 25 shareholders. Any benefit a shareholder- employee receives as an employee is a fringe benefit and FBT is payable. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX RETURN GUIDE 46 Subsidised transport The subsidised transport exception that allows employers to pool benefits at the rate of 49.25% (if all employees have the same or similar entitlement to the benefit) includes employers who are close companies.