Please keep the calculation sheets for your own records. Employer’s details Name IRD number Period ended Motor vehicles FBT taxable value calculation sheet – income year IR428 April 2023 1 Employee’s name or “pooled” — if pooled vehicles 2 Make, model, year of manufacture and registration number 3 1 Original cost price (whether owned or leased) 4 1 Tax book value (owned or leased) 5 No of days available for private use 6 † Value of fringe benefit 7 Recipient’s contributions 8 Taxable value (6 minus 7) $$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$ $$$$$$ Total taxable value Copy this amount to Box A below. $$ A (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Day Month Year Total motor vehicle taxable value from Box A above A $$ Total other fringe benefits taxable value from Box B on page 2 B $$ Total low-interest loans taxable value from Box C on page 3 C $$ Total insurance and superannuation taxable value from Box D on page 4 D $$ Total taxable value Add the amounts in Boxes A to D, print your answer in Box E. Copy this amount to Box 3 on your return. E $$ 1 Note Special rules apply for calculating the motor vehicle cost price value - see FBT guide - IR409 for more details. You can calculate the fringe benefit value of motor vehicles based on either the vehicle’s tax value or its cost price. Once you've made your choice between the cost price and tax book value options, you must continue to use your chosen option until either: •• the vehicle is sold •• the vehicle ceases to be leased, or •• a period of five years has elapsed. Cost price (Box 3) × days (column 5) × 20%\*Tax book value (Box 4) × days (column 5) × 36%\*\* 365365 \* If vehicle cost excludes GST: 23% for income years ending after 01/10/2010 \*\* If vehicle book value excludes GST: 41.4% for income years ending after 01/10/2010 † The minimum value of $8,333 must be used to calculate the taxable value once the vehicle’s tax book value has depreciated to less than this amount. Free (gifts and prizes), subsidised, or discounted goods and services Attributed benefits The need to attribute benefits only applies if you have elected to use the alternate rate calculation process. Attribute benefits to the individual employee who receives the benefit if the annual taxable value, within this category, of all benefits to that employee is $2,000 or more. 1 Employee’s name or “non-attributed” —if non-attributed benefits 2 Description of benefit 3 Value of fringe benefit 4 Recipient’s contributions 5 To t a l b e n e fi t (3 minus 4) 6 Exemption (if claimed) 7 Taxable value (5 minus 6) $$ $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$$$ Exemption: There is a $1,200 exemption per employee per income year, provided no employee’s total benefit exceeds $1,200 and the value of all employees’ total benefits in the income year does not exceed $22,500. If the value of benefits provided for any employee exceeds $1,200, or the total in Box 1 exceeds $22,500, you cannot claim an exemption and FBT is payable on the total value of the benefits provided. 1 $$ To t a l taxable value 2 $$ Subsidised transport Attributed benefits The need to attribute benefits only applies if you have elected to use the alternate rate calculation process. Attribute benefits to the individual employee who receives the benefit if the annual taxable value, within this category, of all benefits to that employee is $1,000 or more. † 1 Employee’s name or “non-attributed” —if non-attributed benefits 2 Description of benefit 3 Value of fringe benefit 4 Recipient’s contributions 5 Taxable value (3 minus 4) $$$$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$$$ $$$$$$ Value of fringe benefit If provided by the employer: • 25% of maximum fare the employer charges to the public. If provided by a third party under arrangement with the employer, the greater of: • 25% of maximum fare the employer charges to the public • 25% of maximum fare charged to the public if the third person and employer are part of a group of companies • cost to the employer. Total taxable value of subsidised transport 3 $$ Total taxable value. Add boxes 2 and 3. Print your answer here. Copy this amount to Box B on page 1. B $$ \* Value of fringe benefit is: •• goods – the cost to the employer, or if manufactured, the lowest market value (GST-inclusive) † Special rules also apply – see the FBT Guide - IR409 for more details. You can get this from ird.govt.nz •• services – the cost to the employer, or if supplied, the normal market value (GST-inclusive). or by calling INFOexpress on 0800 257 773. Low-interest loans June quarter (or part of) 1 Employee’s name 2 Year loan was granted 3 Is rate reviewable? Ye s N o 4 Rate of interest % 5 Prescribed or non-concessionary rate % 6 Interest at prescribed or non-concessionary rate 7 Actual interest charged 8 Taxable value (6 minus 7) 9 Loan balance at end of period $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$ Total taxable value for first quarter 1 $$ September quarter (or part of) $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$ Total taxable value for second quarter 2 $$ December quarter (or part of) $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$ Total taxable value for third quarter 3 $$ March quarter (or part of) $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$ Total taxable value for fourth quarter 4 $$ June quarter (for following year for April or May balance date) $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$ $$$$$$$$ Total taxable value for fifth quarter 5 $$ Total taxable value add Boxes 1 to 5. Print your answer in Box C. Copy this amount to Box C on page 1. C $$ Contributions to funds, insurance and superannuation schemes • Complete this panel if you make contributions for your employees to: Category 1 – any sick, accident and death fund approved by Inland Revenue Category 2 – any life insurance, pension insurance, personal accident or sickness insurance policy, or insurance fund of a friendly society Category 3 – any superannuation scheme where ESCT (employer superannuation contribution tax) does not apply Category 4 – Funeral trusts Attributed benefits The need to attribute benefits only applies if you have elected to use the alternate rate calculation process. Attribute benefits to the individual employee who receives the benefit for each of the four categories above, if the annual taxable value, within each category, of all contributions to that employee is $1,000 or more. 1 Employee’s name or “non-attributed” —if non-attributed benefits 2 Name and description of fund 3 Taxable value Category 1: $$ $$ $$ $$ $$ Category 2: $$ $$ $$ $$ $$ Category 3: $$ $$ $$ $$ $$ Category 4: $$ $$ $$ $$ $$ Total taxable value. Copy this amount to Box D on page 1 D $$