1 Declaration of an amalgamation IR432 July 2024 DLN • You may also use this form if you are a building society. • This form must be completed by a representative of the company/building society resulting from the amalgamation. • Please attach a copy of the certificate of amalgamation. • Read the notes on pages 3 and 4 before completing this form. 1.Name of the resulting company 2.IRD number If the company is a newly incorporated company, apply online for an IRD number at ird.govt.nz (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 3.Postal address Street address or PO Box Town or cityPostcode 4.Date of amalgamation Day Month Year 5.Balance date of resulting company Day Month 6.If the resulting company is not registered for GST, as an employer or as a payer for resident or non-resident withholding tax, please answer these questions: Do you expect the company’s annual turnover to be over $60,000? NoYes - complete the GST registration online via myIR. Will the company employ staff? NoYes - complete the Employer registration online via myIR. Do you wish to register the company as a payer for resident withholding tax on interest? No Yes - complete the Resident withholding tax-interest payer registration online via myIR. Will the company pay interest, dividends or royalties to non-residents? No Yes - complete the Non-resident withholding tax-payer registration online via myIR. 7.Will the resulting company account separately for different branches or locations? NoYes - we will contact you for additional details. 8.Print the name and IRD number of each of the amalgamating companies that no longer exist from the date of amalgamation. If there is not enough space to list all the companies, please use a separate sheet of paper and staple it to this form. Company’s name Company’s IRD number Company’s name Company’s IRD number Company’s name Company’s IRD number Company’s name Company’s IRD number 2 Company’s name Company’s IRD number Company’s name Company’s IRD number Company’s name Company’s IRD number Company’s name Company’s IRD number Company’s name C ompany’s IRD number Company’s name C ompany’s IRD number Company’s name Company’s IRD number Company’s name C ompany’s IRD number Send this form to Inland Revenue PO Box 39010 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045 9. Declaration Contact name D esignation or title D aytime telephone number Email address I d eclare that the information given in this form is true and correct. ( ) / / Signature Date 3 Notes These notes explain what the tax obligations are immediately after an amalgamation of two or more companies. If, however, you want information about the legal requirements and procedures involved in an amalgamation, contact the Companies Office. The company resulting from an amalgamation may be one of the amalgamating companies or it may be a new company. Information for the resulting company can be found on this page. For information for amalgamating companies that cease to exist after the amalgamation, see page 4. The resulting company must fill in this Declaration of an amalgamation – IR432 form. If you have any questions about amalgamations and your tax obligations, please see our contact details on page 4. The resulting company What you must do Complete the IR432 to tell us about the amalgamation within 63 working days of delivering the amalgamation documents to the Registrar of Companies. If the resulting company is a newly incorporated company, apply online for an IRD number. Income tax The resulting company’s income tax return will: – in the case of a new company, cover the period from the date of amalgamation to 31 March (or an approved alternative balance date), or – be for the 12 months to the company’s balance date, when one of the amalgamating companies becomes the resulting company. The resulting company may use an amalgamating company’s losses that can be carried forward in the final return, provided the commonality and continuity of shareholding tests are met and the amalgamation is a qualifying one. If more than one amalgamating company has losses, these must be offset in the order they arose. If they arose in the same income year, you may elect the order of offset. If you wish to make an election, send us the details when you file the company’s return. A pro rata basis will be used if no election is made. Qualifying company election tax (QCET) If a non-qualifying company amalgamates with a qualifying company and the qualifying company is the company that continues in existence after the election, QCET is payable on the retained earnings of the non-qualifying company. The retained earnings can then be distributed tax-free. Net losses of the non-qualifying company cannot be carried forward to the amalgamated company. Provisional tax Calculate provisional tax instalments payable after the date of amalgamation based on the total of the previous years’ residual income tax of all the amalgamating companies. Goods and services tax (GST) If the resulting company was not registered for GST before amalgamation, it may be required to register or may do so voluntarily. If the combined taxable supplies of the resulting company and the amalgamating companies were over $60,000 in the previous 12 months, the resulting company may have to register for GST. Registration can be completed online via myIR. For more information on registration see our fact sheet GST - quick reference – IR324. If the resulting company was registered for GST before the amalgamation, it may be required to change its accounting basis and/or the taxable period it used before the amalgamation. If a company exceeds certain thresholds, it cannot use the payments basis and its taxable period options are limited. For more information see our GST guide - IR375. The threshold applies to the combined taxable supplies of all the amalgamating companies. If the resulting company is registered for GST immediately after amalgamation, any transfer of goods and services from an amalgamating company is not a taxable supply and therefore not subject to GST. Employer obligations If the resulting company is employing for the first time, it must register as an employer. Registration can be completed online via myIR or by completing the Employer registration – IR334 form. For more information see our Employer’s guide – IR335. If the resulting company now employs staff who were employed by the amalgamating companies, you must: – g et each employee to complete a Tax code declaration – IR330 – li st the employees on the resulting company’s first Employer monthly schedule – IR348 and enter the commencement date for all employees. If the combined gross annual PAYE deductions of the amalgamating companies for the previous year were $500,000 or more, the resulting company becomes a “large” employer and must pay the deductions twice a month. Fringe benefit tax (FBT) If the company registering as an employer does not provide or intend to provide fringe benefits, show us via the online registration process or at Question 12 on the Employer registration – IR334 form. If the company is liable for FBT, when calculating FBT for the first quarter after amalgamation, it must apportion the $300 exemption according to the number of days in the quarter that the resulting company existed. For more information about FBT, see our Fringe benefit tax guide – IR409. If the amalgamating companies’ combined gross tax deductions were $1,000,000 or less for the previous year (exclusive of ACC earners’ levy), the resulting company may file FBT returns yearly via myIR. If the company files yearly, the annual exemption of $1,200 for each employee or $22,500 maximum for all employees must be apportioned according to the number of days that the new resulting company existed. Resident and non-resident withholding tax (RWT and NRWT) The resulting company may have to register for RWT and/or NRWT. If you need information, read Resident withholding tax on interest (RWT) payer’s guide – IR283 and NRWT - payer’s guide – IR291. If the company is already registered, you may have to alter the registration details. For example, before amalgamation it may have accounted for RWT six-monthly, but after amalgamation it may be required to account monthly. After the amalgamation, the company may be eligible for an exemption from RWT. You can apply for a RWT exemption via myIR or by completing the IR451 form. The details of the RWT-exempt status are held on a publicly accessible register. If the company already has a RWT exemption, but the basis on which this was issued no longer applies because of the amalgamation, you must advise the us within five working days of the amalgamation. 4 The amalgamating companies The following information applies to those companies that do not continue but become part of the resulting company. These companies cease to exist from the date of amalgamation so all their tax affairs must be finalised and, where appropriate, reconciled as at the date of amalgamation. The resulting company is responsible for this. Income tax File an income tax return for the period from the beginning of the income year to the date of amalgamation. The due date for the return and tax payment remains the same. If the company’s final return results in a loss, it can be used by the resulting company subject to the commonality and continuity of shareholding tests. The company must file an imputation credit account return for the same period as the income tax return. If applicable, it must also provide a dividend withholding payment report digitally for the same period. These returns are due within two months of the date of amalgamation. Imputation credit account debit balances will be transferred to the resulting company. If the company maintains a shareholder continuity of at least 66%, any credit balances can generally be transferred to the resulting company. Goods and services tax (GST) If the amalgamating company is registered for GST, it must file a final GST return for the taxable period ending on the date of amalgamation. Normal due dates apply for this return and any payment. If the amalgamating company and the resulting company are both registered for GST, the transfer of goods and services is not a taxable supply and not subject to GST. If the amalgamating company is registered for GST but the resulting company will not be, goods and services are treated as though supplied by the amalgamating company. Goods and services acquired by the amalgamating company on or after 1 October 1986 are to be valued at market value. Employer obligations If the amalgamating company was an employer, it must: – complete an Employer monthly schedule - IR348 to the date of amalgamation, showing a finish date for each employee – c omplete a final FBT return using the multi-rate option. Send the return and payment to us by the last day of the second month immediately after the quarter the amalgamation took place. If any employee has child support payments deducted from their wages, the amalgamating company must contact Child Support via a message in myIR or on 0800 221 221 to arrange for these to continue. You will need to provide the IRD number of the resulting company. Resident and non-resident withholding tax (RWT and NRWT) If the amalgamating company holds RWT exempt status advise us within five working days of the amalgamation. Tax arrears If the amalgamating company has tax arrears, the resulting company becomes liable for the debt. We will issue statements of account for the outstanding tax in the name of the resulting company. ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR – manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools – use our calculators, worksheets and tools. You can check your tax code, find filing and payment dates and calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides – download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password Request these from the myIR login screen and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you. How to get forms and guides You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Services you may need Need to speak to us? Have your IRD number ready and call us on one of these numbers. General tax, tax credits and refunds 0800 775 247 Employer enquiries 0800 377 772 General business tax 0800 377 774 Overdue returns and payments 0800 227 771 Find out more at ird.govt.nz/contact-us 0800 self-service number Our 0800 self-service number, 0800 257 777, is open 7 days a week. Make sure you have your IRD number ready when you call. For access to your account-specific information, you’ll need to be enrolled with voice ID or have a PIN. When you call, confirm what you want from the options given. If you need to talk with us, we’ll re-direct your call to someone who can help you.