IR437 September 2019 Revocation of qualifying company election Name of company IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Contact person’s nameContact number Section 1 – Directors’ revocation Section HA 31 Income Tax Act 2007 (qualifying companies) This revocation is effective from onwards (see note 2). Day Month Year Director’s name Signature Date Director’s name Signature Date Director’s name Signature Date Director’s name Signature Date Director’s name Signature Date Director’s name Signature Date Director’s name Signature Date Section 2 – Shareholders’ revocation Section HA 31 Income Tax Act 2007 (qualifying companies) This revocation is effective from onwards (see note 2). Day Month Year Shareholder’s name Signature Date IRD number For company, trustee and majority shareholders only (see note 3) Signatory’s name Capacity or office Shareholder’s name Signature Date IRD number For company, trustee and majority shareholders only (see note 3) Signatory’s name Capacity or office Shareholder’s name Signature Date IRD number For company, trustee and majority shareholders only (see note 3) Signatory’s name Capacity or office Shareholder’s name Signature Date IRD number For company, trustee and majority shareholders only (see note 3) Signatory’s name Capacity or office Shareholder’s name Signature Date IRD number For company, trustee and majority shareholders only (see note 3) Signatory’s name Capacity or office Shareholder’s name Signature Date IRD number For company, trustee and majority shareholders only (see note 3) Signatory’s name Capacity or office Shareholder’s name Signature Date IRD number For company, trustee and majority shareholders only (see note 3) Signatory’s name Capacity or office Section 3 – Advice to company of shareholders’ revocation of qualifying company election I/we advise that the company election made previously is revoked, effective from Day Month Year Shareholder’s name Signature Date Shareholder’s name Signature Date Shareholder’s name Signature Date Shareholder’s name Signature Date Shareholder’s name Signature Date Shareholder’s name Signature Date Shareholder’s name Signature Date Notes 1. Revoking an election for a qualifying company An election may be revoked by a resolution of the board of directors of the company and/or any shareholders who previously elected. Where the directors are revoking the election for a qualifying company, complete section 1 of this form and send it to us at the postal address that applies to you, shown at the bottom of this form. Where a shareholder is revoking the election, complete sections 2 and 3 of this form. Send section 2 to us at the postal address that applies to you, shown at the bottom of this form. Send section 3 to the company. 2. Effective date of revocation Both directors’ and shareholders’ revocations take effect from the beginning of the income year in which we receive them, or on the first day of a later income year (if specified). 3. Shareholders’ revocation for a qualifying company Where the shareholder is a trustee, the election may be revoked by a: – trustee, and/or – beneficiary with legal capacity who previously elected, or – volunteer, where a natural person elected. Where the shareholder is a trustee enter the: – shareholder’s name as “Trustee in ...” – capacity as “Trustee”, and – signature, IRD number and name. Where the shareholder is a company enter the: – company name and IRD number – capacity or office of the person signing on behalf of the company (for example, company secretary) – signature. Where the shareholder is revoking a majority shareholder election, enter the: – name of the minority shareholder(s) as the shareholder – name of the majority shareholder(s) below the signature, and – capacity as “majority shareholder”. More information If you need more information please read our guide Qualifying companies - IR435. You can get copies of all our forms and guides by going to ird.govt.nz and entering the shoulder number in the search box. You can also order copies by calling 0800 257 773. www.ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. Log in or register for myIR – manage your tax and entitlements online. Demonstrations – learn about our services by watching short videos. Get it done online – complete forms and returns, make payments, give us feedback. Work it out – use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. Forms and guides – download our forms and guides. Forgotten your myIR user ID or password? Request a reminder of your user ID or reset your password online. You’ll need to know your IRD number and have access to the email address we hold for you.