IR 441 (November 2002) 18/3/04 10:02 AM Page 1 Contact person for enquiries Name of FIF Name IRD number Phone number Postal address 1. Details of person required to file this disclosure schedule 2. Details of foreign investment fund (FIF) State the nature of your FIF interest, for example, units or shares Balance date Use this worksheet to calculate your FIF income or loss using the comparative value method for your current income year. 3. Calculation To convert foreign currency amounts to New Zealand dollars, tick one of the options to show which exchange rate you used. What was your holding in the FIF at the end of your current income year (for example, how many units or shares you held)? What was your holding in the FIF at the end of your previous income year? Print details of the exchange rate you used Note: For market value items in the calculations below, use exchange rates on the applicable dates of valuation. What is the basis for your market valuation in the calculations below (for example, stock exchange market value)? What currency was this valuation made in (for example, Hong Kong dollars, French francs)? Interest in a foreign investment fund disclosure schedule (comparative value method) This form must be completed by a New Zealand resident person with an interest in a foreign investment fund (FIF) who elects to calculate FIF income or loss using the comparative value method. An interest in an FIF may include shares in a foreign company, units in a foreign unit trust or an entitlement to benefit from a foreign superannuation scheme or a foreign life insurance policy. The FIF rules may not apply if your foreign interest is held in a company or unit trust resident in Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, Norway, the United Kingdom or the United States. The FIF rules do not apply if you are a natural person and the total cost of your FIF interests did not exceed NZ$50,000 at all times during the income year. Cost for the purposes of this exemption includes cost whenever incurred (prior income years). You can only use the comparative value method if you have sufficient information to determine the market value of your FIF interest at the end of your previous and current income years. For more information, phone us on 0800 443 773. Complete a separate IR 441 form for each FIF in which you held an interest. Attach each IR 441 to your income tax return. If you hold interests in 10 or more FIFs, you may use an IR 442 form rather than the separate IR 441 forms. For information on exchange rates, please refer to the April and October issues of our Tax Information Bulletin (TIB) or our website at www.ird.govt.nz/otherservices/currency Please note: There is an exemption from disclosure for natural persons who have interests in an overseas private superannuation scheme or insurance annuity policy. Read our booklet Overseas private pensions (IR 257) to see if you qualify. Part A – Disclosure schedule Part B – Worksheet ( ) Average for the 15th day of each complete month Actual transaction date Source of rate Day Month Year Conversion rate Country or territory of residence DayMonthYear Income Tax Act 1994 IR 441 November 2002 For the period 1 Aprilto 31 March IR 441 (November 2002) 18/3/04 10:02 AM Page 2 Privacy Act 1993. Inland Revenue may give information about you to other government agencies or their contracted agents who are entitled to it under legislation. For more details phone us on 0800 443 773. Name Designation Declaration I declare that the information given in this disclosure schedule and its attachments is true and correct. 4. Treatment of FIF income or loss FIF losses offset: – against other FIF income derived in the current income year calculated using any calculation method except the branch equivalent method, or – by a wholly owned group member with FIFs using any calculation method except the branch equivalent method if you are a company. FIF income offset by FIF losses incurred: – in the current income year or earlier years for FIFs using any calculation method except the branch equivalent method, or – by a wholly owned group member with FIFs using any calculation method except the branch equivalent method if you are a company. Enter the total FIF income from Box 3 I. If the amount is a loss, show it in brackets. For the purposes of this offset rule, the amount of FIF income derived in previous income years is reduced by any previous FIF loss offsets made under this rule. If Box 4F is positive, this is your FIF income to be included in your current tax return. If Box 4F is negative, this is your FIF loss to carry forward to your next year’s FIF calculations. FIF income or loss calculation If Box 4A is positive, subtract Box 4B from Box 4A and print your answer in Box 4F. If Box 4A is negative, add Boxes 4C, 4D and 4E to Box 4A and print your answer in Box 4F. FIF losses arising from: – a business dealing in such interests, or – an FIF interest you acquired for the purpose of deriving a gain on disposal, and you elect to offset the loss against your other income. Print the market value of your FIF interest at the end of your current income year. Print “nil” if you did not hold the interest at the end of your current income year. Print the total gains you derived from your FIF interest during your current income year, for example, sale proceeds or distributions inclusive of any withholding tax allowable as a credit in New Zealand. Add Boxes 3A and 3B. Print the total in Box 3C. Print the market value of your FIF interest at the end of your previous income year. Print “nil” if you did not hold the interest at the end of your previous income year. Print the total cost of acquiring your FIF interest during your current income year. Do not include interest payable on money borrowed to acquire your FIF interest or other holding costs. Add Boxes 3D and 3E. Print the total in Box 3F. Subtract Box 3F from Box 3C. Print the total in Box 3G. Add Boxes 3G and 3H. Print the total in Box 3 I. If this total is positive, this is your FIF income. If this total is negative, this is your FIF loss. If the amount is a loss show it in brackets. Print the section CG 22 Income Tax Act 1994 FIF income from your FIF interest in Box 3H. Note: Section CG 22 FIF income is the amount by which total gains (which would otherwise have been dividends or other income in the absence of the FIF rules) derived from the FIF in the current and earlier income years exceed total FIF income (excluding section CG 22 FIF income derived in the current income year) less total FIF losses. You are only required to complete Box 3H for an FIF interest you held on 2 July 1992, which you continued to hold on 1 April 1993 and on your 1994 disclosure schedule you used the market value for that interest applying on 31 March 1993. Calculation of FIF income or loss for an interest held at any time during your current income year FIF losses offset against other current income to the extent of FIF income derived in prior income years, using any calculation method except the branch equivalent method. Complete the relevant panels below. Total loss IRD number (if group company) Name of FIF Loss Total income IRD number (if group company) Name of FIF Income Date Signature 3A 3B 3C 3D 3E 3F 3G 3H 3 I 4A 4B 4C 4D 4E 4F