Interest in a foreign investmentfund disclosure schedule(branch equivalent method) This form must be completed by a New Zealand resident person with an interest in a foreign investment fund (FIF)who elects to calculate FIF income or loss using the branch equivalent method. An interest in an FIF may include shares in a foreign company, units in a foreign unit trust or an entitlement to benefit from a foreign superannuation scheme or a foreign life insurance policy.The FIF rules may not apply if your foreign interest is held in a company or unit trust resident in Australia, Canada, Germany,Japan, Norway, the United Kingdom or the United States.The FIF rules do not apply if you are a natural person and the total cost of your FIF interests did not exceed NZ$50,000 atall times during the income year. Cost for the purposes of this exemption includes cost whenever incurred (current and priorincome years).You can only use the branch equivalent method if the FIF is a company and you have sufficient information to calculate yourFIF income or loss according to New Zealand taxation legislation.F or more information, phone us on 0800 443 773 . Complete a separate form for each FIF in which you held an interest. Attach each IR 440 to your income tax return.F or information on exchange rates, please refer to the April and October issues of our Tax Information Bulletin (TIB) or our website at www.ird.govt.nz/otherservices/currency 1. Details of person required to file this disclosure schedule2. Details of foreign investment fund (FIF) Part A – Disclosure schedule Name ( ) Day Month Year Contact person for enquiries IRD number Phone number Name of FIFPrincipal business activity Balance date State the nature of your FIF interest,for example, units or sharesCountry or territory of residencePostal address Town or city Street address or PO Box number Part C – Disclosure Privacy Act 1993 . Inland Revenue may give information about you to other government agencies or their contracted agents who are entitled to it under legislation. For more details phone us on 0800 443 773 . Date Signature Designation I declare that the information given in this disclosure schedule and its attachments is true and correct. Did you maintain a branch equivalent tax account (BETA) during the year? No Ye s Complete and attach to your income tax return a single IR 308 form (if you are a New Zealand resident person otherthan a company) or an IR 408 form (if you are a company) showing the aggregate BETA entries for all relevant foreigncompanies. Name Declaration 4 Did you offset an underlying foreign tax credit (UFTC) against your foreign dividend withholding payment liability for dividend s received during your current income year from this FIF? No Ye s Did you or a person paying foreign tax in respect of which a foreign tax credit arose (including a UFTC) or a person associatedwith either of you receive a refund or repayment of the foreign tax or other related benefit during your current income year? No Ye s Total offset IRD number (if group company) Name of FIF or CFC Offset amount Please specify below. Add Boxes N and O. Print the total in Box P.The amount in Box P must equal the positive amount in Box M. Offset against New Zealand income tax payable on FIF income (calculated under the branch equivalent method) or attributed foreign income derived in the current income year from an FIF or CFC resident in the same country or territoryas this FIF. Similar offsets are available between members of a wholly owned group of companies. Excess tax credit to carry forward from this FIF interest. Income Tax Act 1994 IR 440 November 2002 For the period 1 April to 31 March N O P Note: If the FIF’s financial statements were prepared in a foreign currency, convert the amended net profit or loss before tax at Box A below to New Zealand dollars. To do this use the average exchange rate for the 15th day of each completemonth falling in the FIF’s accounting period. 4. Calculation Calculation of FIF income or loss for an interest held at any time during the accounting period of the FIF thatended in your current income year 3. Income interest Use this worksheet to calculate your FIF income or loss using the branch equivalent method for the accounting period of the FIFthat ended in your current income year. If you elected to calculate your control and income interests on a daily measurement basis(IR 467 form), print the date you made this election. Did your income interest remain the same on each quarterly measurement day (or day where you elected to use the dailymeasurement basis) for the accounting period of the FIF in each of the categories listed below? Yes Print the highest control interest percentage of the categories listed below. 5. Treatment of attributed foreign income or loss FIF losses offset against:– FIF income (calculated under the branch equivalent method) or attributed foreign income derived in the current incomeyear from a CFC or FIF resident in the same country or territory as this FIF, or – if you are a company, similar offsets between members of a wholly owned group of companies. FIF income offset against:– FIF losses (calculated under the branch equivalent method) or attributed foreign income losses incurred in the current orearlier income years, from a controlled foreign company (CFC) or FIF resident in the same country or territory as this FIF, or – if you are a company, similar offsets between members of a wholly owned group of companies. If Box H is positive, this is your FIF income to be included in your current tax return for this FIF interest.If Box H is negative, this is your FIF loss to carry forward to your next year’s FIF calculations. Complete the relevant panels below Note: Include interests you actually held and those held by nominees. Do not include interests held by associated persons. No Print your income interest percentage on each quarterly measurement day in each of the categories listed below. If you used the daily measurement basis, attach a separatesheet of paper showing all changes in your income interest percentage in each of thecategories listed below. Print the currency in which the financial statements were prepared. Print the income interest percentage you held for the accounting period in Box C.Multiply Box B by Box C. Print the total in Box D. If this total is positive, this is your FIF income.If this total is negative, this is your FIF loss. If the amount is a loss, show it in brackets. Enter the total FIF income from Box D. If the amount is a loss show it in brackets. Total Boxes above. If Box E is positive, subtract Box F from Box E.If Box E is negative, add it to Box G. Print the result in Box H. Part B – Worksheet Day Month Year % Highest of abovecategories Measurement day Voting rightsEntitlement to profits Net assets on distribution Subscribed capital Day Month Year Day Month Year Day Month Year Day Month Year Print the weighted average figure (based on the number of days in each period above)for the category with the highest weighted income interest. % Convert to New Zealand dollars. Conversion rate Total loss IRD number (if group company) Name of FIF Loss IRD number (if group company) Name of FIF Income Adjustments to conform to New Zealand tax legislation. Print the net profit or loss before tax of the FIF for the accounting period that ended in your currentincome year. Attach a copy of the FIF’s financial statements to this form. Print your amended net profit or loss before tax in Box A. 6. Tax credit Source of rate( I or J) (1)Amount of foreigntax (3)Foreign tax in NZ$Divide (1) by (2) (4)Income interestpercentage (5)Your foreign tax creditMultiply (3) by (4) (2)Conversion rate Conversion date 2 3 Print the country and currency in which the income tax waspaid or payable. Attach evidence of the income tax paid orpayable if in excess of NZ$10,000 (or equivalent). If Box M is zero or negative, transfer Box K to your income tax return. If Box M is positive, transfer Box L to your income ta x return and tick the option/s over the page to show how you wish to treat the positive amount in Box M. In most circumstances the foreign company income must be calculated using the same currency as the previous year (thisalso applies to certain financial arrangements). Subtract Box L from Box K. Print the total in Box M. Calculate the New Zealand income tax payable on your FIF income (Box H above) at youraverage rate of tax. Print the total in Box L. Print the total of your foreign tax credits from column (5) above in Box K. Country Currency Convert to New Zealand dollars. Show the exchange rate used. NZ % Total income Average for the 15th day of each complete monthActual transaction date NZ AddDeduct ABCD E F G HK L M I J Note: If the FIF’s financial statements were prepared in a foreign currency, convert the amended net profit or loss before tax at Box A below to New Zealand dollars. To do this use the average exchange rate for the 15th day of each completemonth falling in the FIF’s accounting period. 4. Calculation Calculation of FIF income or loss for an interest held at any time during the accounting period of the FIF thatended in your current income year 3. Income interest Use this worksheet to calculate your FIF income or loss using the branch equivalent method for the accounting period of the FIFthat ended in your current income year. If you elected to calculate your control and income interests on a daily measurement basis(IR 467 form), print the date you made this election. Did your income interest remain the same on each quarterly measurement day (or day where you elected to use the dailymeasurement basis) for the accounting period of the FIF in each of the categories listed below? Yes Print the highest control interest percentage of the categories listed below. 5. Treatment of attributed foreign income or loss FIF losses offset against:– FIF income (calculated under the branch equivalent method) or attributed foreign income derived in the current incomeyear from a CFC or FIF resident in the same country or territory as this FIF, or – if you are a company, similar offsets between members of a wholly owned group of companies. FIF income offset against:– FIF losses (calculated under the branch equivalent method) or attributed foreign income losses incurred in the current orearlier income years, from a controlled foreign company (CFC) or FIF resident in the same country or territory as this FIF, or – if you are a company, similar offsets between members of a wholly owned group of companies. If Box H is positive, this is your FIF income to be included in your current tax return for this FIF interest.If Box H is negative, this is your FIF loss to carry forward to your next year’s FIF calculations. Complete the relevant panels below Note: Include interests you actually held and those held by nominees. Do not include interests held by associated persons. No Print your income interest percentage on each quarterly measurement day in each of the categories listed below. If you used the daily measurement basis, attach a separatesheet of paper showing all changes in your income interest percentage in each of thecategories listed below. Print the currency in which the financial statements were prepared. Print the income interest percentage you held for the accounting period in Box C.Multiply Box B by Box C. Print the total in Box D. If this total is positive, this is your FIF income.If this total is negative, this is your FIF loss. If the amount is a loss, show it in brackets. Enter the total FIF income from Box D. If the amount is a loss show it in brackets. Total Boxes above. If Box E is positive, subtract Box F from Box E.If Box E is negative, add it to Box G. Print the result in Box H. Part B – Worksheet Day Month Year % Highest of abovecategories Measurement day Voting rightsEntitlement to profits Net assets on distribution Subscribed capital Day Month Year Day Month Year Day Month Year Day Month Year Print the weighted average figure (based on the number of days in each period above)for the category with the highest weighted income interest. % Convert to New Zealand dollars. Conversion rate Total loss IRD number (if group company) Name of FIF Loss IRD number (if group company) Name of FIF Income Adjustments to conform to New Zealand tax legislation. Print the net profit or loss before tax of the FIF for the accounting period that ended in your currentincome year. Attach a copy of the FIF’s financial statements to this form. Print your amended net profit or loss before tax in Box A. 6. Tax credit Source of rate( I or J) (1)Amount of foreigntax (3)Foreign tax in NZ$Divide (1) by (2) (4)Income interestpercentage (5)Your foreign tax creditMultiply (3) by (4) (2)Conversion rate Conversion date 2 3 Print the country and currency in which the income tax waspaid or payable. Attach evidence of the income tax paid orpayable if in excess of NZ$10,000 (or equivalent). If Box M is zero or negative, transfer Box K to your income tax return. If Box M is positive, transfer Box L to your income ta x return and tick the option/s over the page to show how you wish to treat the positive amount in Box M. In most circumstances the foreign company income must be calculated using the same currency as the previous year (thisalso applies to certain financial arrangements). Subtract Box L from Box K. Print the total in Box M. Calculate the New Zealand income tax payable on your FIF income (Box H above) at youraverage rate of tax. Print the total in Box L. Print the total of your foreign tax credits from column (5) above in Box K. Country Currency Convert to New Zealand dollars. Show the exchange rate used. NZ % Total income Average for the 15th day of each complete monthActual transaction date NZ AddDeduct ABCD E F G HK L M I J Interest in a foreign investmentfund disclosure schedule(branch equivalent method) This form must be completed by a New Zealand resident person with an interest in a foreign investment fund (FIF)who elects to calculate FIF income or loss using the branch equivalent method. An interest in an FIF may include shares in a foreign company, units in a foreign unit trust or an entitlement to benefit from a foreign superannuation scheme or a foreign life insurance policy.The FIF rules may not apply if your foreign interest is held in a company or unit trust resident in Australia, Canada, Germany,Japan, Norway, the United Kingdom or the United States.The FIF rules do not apply if you are a natural person and the total cost of your FIF interests did not exceed NZ$50,000 atall times during the income year. Cost for the purposes of this exemption includes cost whenever incurred (current and priorincome years).You can only use the branch equivalent method if the FIF is a company and you have sufficient information to calculate yourFIF income or loss according to New Zealand taxation legislation.F or more information, phone us on 0800 443 773 . Complete a separate form for each FIF in which you held an interest. Attach each IR 440 to your income tax return.F or information on exchange rates, please refer to the April and October issues of our Tax Information Bulletin (TIB) or our website at www.ird.govt.nz/otherservices/currency 1. Details of person required to file this disclosure schedule2. Details of foreign investment fund (FIF) Part A – Disclosure schedule Name ( ) Day Month Year Contact person for enquiries IRD number Phone number Name of FIFPrincipal business activity Balance date State the nature of your FIF interest,for example, units or sharesCountry or territory of residencePostal address Town or city Street address or PO Box number Part C – Disclosure Privacy Act 1993 . Inland Revenue may give information about you to other government agencies or their contracted agents who are entitled to it under legislation. For more details phone us on 0800 443 773 . Date Signature Designation I declare that the information given in this disclosure schedule and its attachments is true and correct. Did you maintain a branch equivalent tax account (BETA) during the year? No Ye s Complete and attach to your income tax return a single IR 308 form (if you are a New Zealand resident person otherthan a company) or an IR 408 form (if you are a company) showing the aggregate BETA entries for all relevant foreigncompanies. Name Declaration 4 Did you offset an underlying foreign tax credit (UFTC) against your foreign dividend withholding payment liability for dividend s received during your current income year from this FIF? No Ye s Did you or a person paying foreign tax in respect of which a foreign tax credit arose (including a UFTC) or a person associatedwith either of you receive a refund or repayment of the foreign tax or other related benefit during your current income year? No Ye s Total offset IRD number (if group company) Name of FIF or CFC Offset amount Please specify below. Add Boxes N and O. Print the total in Box P.The amount in Box P must equal the positive amount in Box M. Offset against New Zealand income tax payable on FIF income (calculated under the branch equivalent method) or attributed foreign income derived in the current income year from an FIF or CFC resident in the same country or territoryas this FIF. Similar offsets are available between members of a wholly owned group of companies. Excess tax credit to carry forward from this FIF interest. Income Tax Act 1994 IR 440 November 2002 For the period 1 April to 31 March N O P