Income tax return Registered superannuation funds Income Tax Act 2007 Tax Administration Act 1994 IR44 2020 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020 The 2020 IR44 guide is available only on our website. To view a copy go to ird.govt.nz If the fund's name, IRD number and postal address are shown correctly above, go to Question 4. 1. If the fund's IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. 1 (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 2. If the fund's correct name is not shown above, see page 5 of the guide. 3. If your correct postal address is not shown above, print the full address in Box 3. Don't print the fund's tax agent's address here. See page 5 of the guide. 3 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town or city below 4. If the fund's correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in full in Box 4. 5. If the fund's balance date is not shown below, print it in Box 5. Inland Revenue consent must be obtained for a balance date other than 31 March. See page 5 of the guide. 5 Day Month Year 6. If the fund's Financial Markets Authority number is not shown below, print it in Box 6. 6 7. Did the fund stop operating during the year? No Go to Question 8. Ye s See page 5 of the guide. Show the date the fund stopped operating below. 7 Day Month Year 8. Do the assets of this fund include New Zealand life insurance policies, or have any assets of the fund been transferred to other superannuation funds? No Go to Question 11. Ye s Go to Question 9. 8 9. Do these New Zealand policies or transfers make up the total assets of the fund? No Go to Question 10. Ye s See page 5 of the guide. 9 10. Is an election required to transfer deductions to another superannuation fund? See page 5 of the guide. No Go to Question 11. Ye s Go to Question 11 and write the details in Box 11F. 10 4 Prefix Phone number Income 11.What is the fund's income? See pages 6 to 7 of the guide before completing this section. Income Print the fund's income (excluding any income from Box 11A and before any adjustments referred to in Question 11 of the guide) in Box 11. 11 If it's a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. If nil income, show "0.00". Profit/loss from sale of property If the fund received any income from taxable property sales/disposals print the income in Box 11A. If it's a loss put a minus sign in the last box. Do not include any bright-line loss. 11A Deductions transferred from other schemes under section DV 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007. NameIRD numberAmount Total deductions Print the total deduction amounts transferred from other schemes in Box 11B. 11B Print the deductions for profits or losses treated as capital on disposal of pre-1 April 1988 investments in Box 11C. 11C Print the deductions for profits or losses treated as revenue on disposal of pre-1 April 1988 investments in Box 11D. 11D Add Boxes 11B, 11C and 11D. Print the total in Box 11E. 11E Subtract Box 11E from the sum of Box 11 and Box 11A. Print the difference in Box 11F. 11F Deductions transferred to another scheme Only fill in the details below if you answered "Ye s" at Box 10. Providing this information and signing the declaration at Question 22 meets the election requirements of section DV 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Print below the details of the scheme and the amounts to be transferred. See page 5 of the guide to find out what expenses can be transferred. NameIRD numberAmount Print the total deduction amounts to transfer to another scheme in Box 11G. 11G Print additions for profits or losses treated as capital on disposal of pre-1 April 1988 investments in Box 11H. 11H Print additions for profits or losses treated as revenue on disposal of pre-1 April 1988 investments in Box 11I. 11I Add Boxes 11F, 11G, 11H and 11I. Print the total in Box 11J. 11J Print any net losses brought forward from previous years in Box 11K. 11K Subtract Box 11K from Box 11J. Print the difference in Box 11L. If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. This is the fund's taxable income. 11L Calculate the tax payable at the relevant rate - see the tax payable table on page 7 of the guide. Print your answer in Box 11M. If 11L is a loss, print "0.00" in Box 11M. Copy this amount to Box 18A. 11M Trustee details and disclosures 12.Print the full names of the trustees Trustee's nameTrustee's IRD number Print the names and IRD numbers of any additional trustees on a separate sheet and attach it to the top of this page. 13.If the fund calculates CFC or FIF income under Question 11, please read page 8 of the guide. Tick "yes" if additional disclosure is required. 13 NoGo to Question 14.Ye sGo to Question 14. If the fund is an investor fund you don't have to complete Questions 14 to 21. 14.Have any of the fund's investments been disposed of during the year? 14 NoGo to Question 18. Ye s See page 8 of the guide. Print the amount of the gain or loss in Box 14A. If it's a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. 14A 15.In calculating the final taxable income amount, have you treated any gains or losses from investments on capital account or otherwise as not taxable? 15 NoGo to Question 16. Ye s Print the reasons in the space provided. 16.Have any of the investments acquired before 1 April 1988 been disposed of during the income year? 16 NoGo to Question 17. Ye s Ensure that any necessary adjustments are entered in Boxes 11C, 11D, 11H and 11I. 17.Have any of the investments at Question 14 been treated as trading stock under section EB 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007? 17 NoYe s Go to Question 18. Tax calculation 18.Calculate the tax payable below. Copy the tax from Box 11M on page 2 to Box 18A. 18A Print the fund's overseas tax credits in Box 18B. See page 8 of the guide to work out the amount claimable. 18B Subtract Box 18B from Box 18A. Print your answer in Box 18C. If Box 18B is larger than Box 18A print "0.00". 18C Print the fund's imputation credits in Box 18D. 18D March 2020 OFFICE USE ONLY Correspondence indicator Accounts included Yes No 23 Subtract Box 18D from Box 18C. Print your answer in Box 18E. If Box 18D is larger than Box 18C, print "0.00". 18E Print any RWT and any other tax credits not included above in Box 18F. 18F Print any Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) credit. See page 9 of the guide. 18FA Subtract Box 18F and 18FA from Box 18E and print the difference in Box 18G. This is the residual income tax. 18G If the total Boxes 18F and 18FA are larger than Box 18E, the difference is a credit. If the total Box 18E is larger than Boxes 18F and 18FA, the difference is a debit. (Tick one)Credit Debit Print any 2020 provisional tax paid in Box 18H. If Box 18G is a credit, add Box 18G and Box 18H. This is your refund. If Box 18G is a debit, subtract Box 18H from Box 18G. This is your tax to pay. If Box 18H is larger than Box 18G, the difference is your refund. Print this in Box 18I. Tax to pay is due by 7 February 2021 (if you have a tax agent see page 12 of the guide). 18H 18I (Tick one)RefundTax to pay 19. If the fund is getting a refund how do you want it paid? Copy the refund from Box 18I to Box 19. 19 Print any overpayment of 2021 provisional tax you would like refunded or transferred in Box 19A. Please see page 9 of the guide. 19A Add Box 19 and Box 19A. Print the answer in Box 19B. 19B Do you want the refund transferred: • to 2021 provisional tax? Print the amount in Box 19C. • to someone else's income tax account? 19C Are you an "associated taxpayer"? See page 10 in the guide Their IRD number Name of taxpayer receiving refund 19D Year ended 31 MarchAmount 19E Subtract Box 19C and Box 19E from Box 19B. Print the answer in Box 19F. This is the balance to be refunded. 19F Please pay the balance to the fund's bank or other deposit account. The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your fund's or other deposit bank account. Please include the fund's bank account details at Question 19G. If the suffix has only two numbers, enter them in the first two squares of the suffix box. Name of account Bank Branch Account number Suffix 19G 20. Initial provisional tax liability. Is this the first year the fund started to derive income from a taxable activity? If it is, see page 10 of the guide. No Go to Question 21. Day Month Year Ye s Print the start date in Box 20. 20 21. See page 11 of the guide to work out the fund's 2021 provisional tax. • Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 21. 21 • Print the 2021 provisional tax payable here if you are using S or E. 21A 00 Notice of assessment and declarationSee page 13 of the guide. 22. Please read and sign the following. The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2020, as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. Signature Date / / Please make a copy of this return for your own records. Privacy Inland Revenue may give information about you to other government agencies who are entitled to it under legislation. See page 14 of the guide.