3\. Treatment of FIF income or loss 3D FIF losses transferred to: –other FIFs using the accounting profits or deemed rate of return calculation methods –a wholly owned group member, for FIFs using any calculation method except the branch equivalent method. FIF income offset by losses transferred from: –this year, for FIFs using the accounting profits or deemed rate of return calculation methods –previous years, for FIFs using any calculation method except the branch equivalent method –a wholly owned group member, for FIFs using any calculation method except the branch equivalent method. Enter the total FIF income or loss from Table A and any attachments. If the amount is a loss, show it in brackets. 3A For the purposes of this offset rule, the amount of FIF income derived in previous income years is reduced by any previous FIF loss offsets made under this rule. If Box 3F is positive, this is your FIF income to be included in your current tax return. If Box 3F is negative, this is your FIF loss to carry forward to your next year’s FIF calculations. 3F FIF income or loss calculation If 3A is positive, subtract 3B from 3A and print your answer in 3F. If 3A is negative, add 3C, 3D and 3E to 3A and print your answer in 3F. FIF losses arising from: –a business dealing in such interests, or –an FIF interest you acquired for the purpose of deriving a gain on disposal, and you elect to offset the loss against your other current income. 3E FIF losses offset against other current income to the extent of FIF income derived in prior income years, using any calculation method except the branch equivalent method. Complete the relevant panels below 2. Foreign company details Complete Table A on the back of this form or attach a separate sheet in the same format, to the top of this page. Contact person for enquiries Name 1. Details of person required to file this disclosure schedule Multiple interests in foreign investment fund disclosure schedule (comparative value method) This form is for disclosing 10 or more interests in foreign investment funds (FIFs) for which you elect to calculate FIF income or loss using the comparative value method. Attach this completed form to your income tax return. You may complete this form if you held interests in 10 or more FIFs for which you elect to use the comparative value method instead of completing multiple IR 441 forms. An interest in an FIF may include shares in a foreign company, units in a foreign unit trust or an entitlement to benefit from a foreign superannuation scheme or a foreign life insurance policy. The FIF rules may not apply if your foreign interest is held in a company or unit trust resident in Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, Norway, the United Kingdom or the United States. You can only use the comparative value method if you have sufficient information to determine the market value of your FIF interest at the end of your previous and current income years. For more information, phone us on 0800 443 773. Disclosure schedule IRD number Phone number ( ) Total amount of offset IRD number (if group company) Name of FIF whose losses are utilised Amount of offset 3B Total amount of offset IRD number (if group company) Name of FIF whose losses are utilised Amount of offset 3C Income Tax Act 1994 IR 442 November 2002 For the period 1 Aprilto 31 March Table A – Foreign investment fund (FIF) details Notes FIF income or loss = (closing market value + sales and distributions) – (opening market value + purchases). Refer to the formula in section CG 18 of the Income Tax Act 1994. Convert sale, distribution and purchase amounts to New Zealand dollars using the exchange rate on the day of the transaction or the average for the 15th day of each complete month. For more information on exchange rates, please refer to the April and October issues of our Tax Information Bulletin (TIB) or our website at www.ird.govt.nz/otherservices/currency Convert market value amounts to New Zealand dollars using the exchange rates applicable on the dates of valuation. If you held your interest on 2 July 1992 and continued to hold that interest on 1 April 1993, a section CG 22 Income Tax Act 1994 adjustment may be required to calculate your FIF income. Privacy Act 1993. Inland Revenue may give information about you to other government agencies or their contracted agents who are entitled to it under legislation. For more details, phone us on 0800 443 773. Name Designation Declaration I declare that the information given in this disclosure schedule and its attachments is true and correct. Date Signature Name of FIFCountry of residenceFIF income (loss) Total FIF income or (loss)