Income tax return Registered superannuation funds Income Tax Act 2007 Tax Administration Act 1994 IR44 2024 1 April 2023 to 31 March 2024 The 2024 IR44 guide is available only on our website. To view a copy go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides If the fund's name, IRD number and postal address are shown correctly above, go to Question 4. 1. If the fund's IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. 1 (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 2. If the fund's correct name is not shown above, see the guide for further details. 3. If your correct postal address is not shown above, print the full address in Box 3. Do not print the fund's tax preparer's address here. See the guide for further details. 3 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town or city below 4. If the fund's correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in full in Box 4. 5. If the fund's balance date is not shown below, print it in Box 5. Inland Revenue consent must be obtained for a balance date other than 31 March. See the guide for further details. 5 Day Month Year 6. If the fund's Financial Markets Authority number is not shown below, print it in Box 6. 6 7. Did the fund stop operating during the year? No Go to Question 8. Ye s See the guide for further details. Show the date the fund stopped operating below. 7 Day Month Year 8. Do the assets of this fund include New Zealand life insurance policies, or have any assets of the fund been transferred to other superannuation funds? No Go to Question 11. Ye s Go to Question 9. 8 9. Do these New Zealand policies or transfers make up the total assets of the fund? No Go to Question 10. Ye s See the guide for further details. 9 10. Is an election required to transfer deductions to another superannuation fund? See the guide for further details. No Go to Question 11. Ye s Go to Question 11 and write the details in Box 11S. 10 4 Prefix Phone number Income 11.What is the fund's income? See the guide for further details before completing this section. Income Print the fund's income (excluding any income from Boxes 11A to 11M, and before any adjustments referred to in Question 11 of the guide) in Box 11. 11 If it's a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. If nil income, show "0.00". If the fund received any income or incurred any expenses from residential property select which method you are using and print the totals in Boxes 11A to 11I. Portfolio IndividualCombination(tick 1) Gross residential rental income 11A Net bright-line profit (excluding losses) 11B Other residential income 11C Total combined residential income Add Boxes 11A, 11B and 11C. Print the total in Box 11D. 11D Residential rental deductions 11E Excess residential rental deductions brought forward 11F Residential rental deductions claimed this year 11G Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 11H Excess residential rental deductions carried forward 11I If the fund incurred any interest from residential property show the details in Boxes 11J to 11L. Total interest on residential property 11J Interest expense claimed 11K Reason for interest expense claimed 11L A Māori exempt company or not a residential land company New build exemption Certain schedule 15 exclusions or property not in NZ Development or land business exemption Loans drawn down prior to 27 March 2021 Emergency, transitional, social or council housing Approved build-to-rent exclusion If the fund received any income from taxable property sales/disposals print the income in Box 11M. If it's a loss put a minus sign in the last box. Do not include any bright-line loss. Profit/loss from sale of property 11M Deductions transferred from other schemes under section DV 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007. NameIRD numberAmount Total deductions Print the total deduction amounts transferred from other schemes in Box 11N. 11N Print the deductions for profits or losses treated as capital on disposal of pre-1 April 1988 investments in Box 11O. 11O Print the deductions for profits or losses treated as revenue on disposal of pre-1 April 1988 investments in Box 11P. 11P Add Boxes 11N, 11O and 11P. Print the total in Box 11Q. 11Q Subtract Box 11Q from the sum of Boxes 11, 11H and 11M. Print the difference in Box 11R. 11R Deductions transferred to another scheme Only fill in the details below if you answered "Ye s" at Box 10. Providing this information and signing the declaration at Question 22 meets the election requirements of section DV 2 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Print below the details of the scheme and the amounts to be transferred. See the guide to find out what expenses can be transferred. NameIRD numberAmount Print the total deduction amounts to transfer to another scheme in Box 11S. 11S Print additions for profits or losses treated as capital on disposal of pre-1 April 1988 investments in Box 11T. 11T Print additions for profits or losses treated as revenue on disposal of pre-1 April 1988 investments in Box 11U. 11U Add Boxes 11R, 11S, 11T and 11U. Print the total in Box 11V. 11V Print any net losses brought forward from previous years in Box 11W. 11W – Subtract Box 11W from Box 11V. Print the amount in Box 11X. If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. This is the fund's taxable income. 11X Calculate the tax payable at the relevant rate - see the guide for further details. Print your answer in Box 11Y. If 11X is a loss, print "0.00" in Box 11Y. Copy this amount to Box 18A. 11Y Trustee details and disclosures 12.Print the full names of the trustees Trustee's nameTrustee's IRD number Print the names and IRD numbers of any additional trustees on a separate sheet and attach it to the top of this page. 13.If the fund calculates CFC or FIF income under Question 11, see the guide for further details. Tick "yes" if additional disclosure is required. 13 NoYe s Go to Question 14. If the fund is an investor fund you do not have to complete Questions 14 to 21. 14.Have any of the fund's investments been disposed of during the year? 14 NoGo to Question 18. Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the amount of the gain or loss in Box 14A. If it's a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. 14A 15.In calculating the final taxable income amount, have you treated any gains or losses from investments on capital account or otherwise as not taxable? 15 NoGo to Question 16. Ye s Print the reasons in the space provided. 16.Have any of the investments acquired before 1 April 1988 been disposed of during the income year? 16 NoGo to Question 17. Ye s Ensure that any necessary adjustments are entered in Boxes 11O, 11P, 11T and 11U. 17.Have any of the investments at Question 14 been treated as trading stock under section EB 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007? 17 NoYe s Go to Question 18. Tax calculation 18.Calculate the tax payable below. Copy the tax from Box 11Y on page 3 to Box 18A. 18A Print the fund's overseas tax credits in Box 18B. See the guide to work out the amount claimable. 18B Subtract Box 18B from Box 18A. Print your answer in Box 18C. If Box 18B is larger than Box 18A print "0.00". 18C Print the fund's imputation credits in Box 18D. 18D Subtract Box 18D from Box 18C. Print your answer in Box 18E. If Box 18D is larger than Box 18C, print "0.00". 18E Print any RWT and any other tax credits not included above in Box 18F. 18F Print any Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) credit. See the guide for further details. 18FA Subtract Box 18F and 18FA from Box 18E and print the difference in Box 18G. This is the residual income tax. 18G If the total of Box 18F and 18FA is larger than Box 18E, the difference is a credit. If Box 18E is larger than the total of Box 18F and 18FA, the difference is a debit. (Tick 1)Credit Debit Print any 2024 provisional tax paid in Box 18H. If Box 18G is a credit, add Box 18G and Box 18H. This is your refund. If Box 18G is a debit, subtract Box 18H from Box 18G. This is your tax to pay. If Box 18H is larger than Box 18G, the difference is your refund. Print this in Box 18I. Tax to pay is due by 7 February 2025 (if you have a tax agent see the guide for further details). 18H 18I (Tick 1)RefundTax to pay March 2024 OFFICE USE ONLY Correspondence indicator Accounts included Yes No 23 19.If the fund is getting a refund how do you want it paid? Copy the refund from Box 18I to Box 19. 19 Do you want the refund transferred: • t o 2025 provisional tax? Print the amount in Box 19A. • t o someone else's income tax account? 19A Are you an "associated taxpayer"? See the guide for further details. Name of taxpayer receiving refund Their IRD number 19B Year ended 31 MarchAmount 19C Subtract Box 19A and Box 19C from Box 19. Print the answer in Box 19D. This is the balance to be refunded. 19D Please pay the balance to the fund's bank or other deposit account. The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your fund's or other deposit bank account. Please include the fund's bank account details at Question 19E. If the suffix has only 2 numbers, enter them in the first 2 squares of the suffix box. Name of accountBank Branch Account number Suffix 19E 20. Initial provisional tax liability. Is this the first year the fund started to derive income from a taxable activity? If it is, see the guide for further details. No G o to Question 21. Day Month Year Ye s Pr int the start date in Box 20. 20 21.See the guide to work out the fund's 2025 provisional tax. • Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 21. 21 • Print the 2025 provisional tax payable here if you are using S or E. 21A 00 Notice of assessment and declarationSee the guide for further details. 22. Please read and sign the following. The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2024, as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. Signature Date / / Please make a copy of this return for your own records. Privacy Inland Revenue may give information about you to other government agencies who are entitled to it under legislation. See the guide for further details.