Resident withholding tax on interest (IPS) registration Please answer all the questions and sign the declaration. Read the notes on page 2 to help you complete this form. Your IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Print your full name or the name of the estate, trust, partnership, or registered name of your company MrMrsMissMsNon-individual (Tick one) If your trade name is different from the name shown above, print it here Your contact numbers ( )( ) BusinessEvening Your email address Print the street address of your place of business (do not use a box number) Street address Suburb or RDTown or city If you are a sole trader, is this your home address? Ye sNo Print your usual postal address if it is different from the street address Street address or PO Box number Suburb, RD or box lobbyTown or city Do not show your tax agent’s address here. Tax agents maintain a client list with us. If this applies, please ask them to give us the address for your RWT mail. Bank Account Details Bank Branch Account number Suffix Name on bank account Credit union or building society Reference number Proof of bank account If you are a non-resident/offshore entity, attach proof of an active bank account with the name and number, such as a bank statement. If you are a New Zealand resident entity you do not need to provide evidence. Are you paying more than $5,000 interest a year? (if you tick No to this question, you do not need to register). Ye sNo Do you pay the resident withholding income as part of a taxable activity? (such as a trade, profession or business, or an activity carried out by a non-profit body or local authority) Ye sNo Are you a non-resident carrying on a taxable activity in New Zealand through a fixed establishment? Ye sNo Have we issued you a certificate of exemption from RWT? Ye sNo IR450 July 2022 Registration start date Day Month Year What’s the nature of your business? Full name of a contact person Contact telephone number ( ) How much resident withholding tax on interest will you deduct each month? $500 or more each month – we will register you on a monthly basis Under $500 each month or RWT deductions will vary – you will need to file once the deductions exceed $500 Declaration I declare this information is true and correct Signature Date / / You can send a message through myIR with the completed form attached, or post to the following address: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045 myIR is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, Log in or register at ird.govt.nz/myIR Notes You or your organisation must register as an RWT on Interest (IPS) payer if you pay more than $5,000 a year in interest, and: • • you pay the interest as part of a taxable activity (such as a trade, profession or business, or an activity carried out by a non-profit body or local authority) • • Inland Revenue has issued you a certificate of exemption from RWT, or • • you are a non-resident but carrying on a taxable activity in New Zealand through a fixed establishment. Any taxpayer who holds a certificate of exemption and whose gross income is (or is estimated to be) more than $2 million for any year must also register as a payer if they pay out any resident passive income. Such a taxpayer must register within 3 months of the end of that accounting year. Payment dates How often you have to send in your RWT deductions depends on the amount of RWT you deduct. • • Monthly payments If you deduct RWT of $500 or more each month, you must pay the tax deducted to Inland Revenue by the 20th of the month after the month in which it was deducted. • • Six-monthly payments If you deduct RWT of less than $500 each month: - 1 April to 30 September - due for payment on 20 October - 1 October to 31 March - due for payment on 20 April. Note: If the RWT deductions you’ve made accumulate to $500 since your previous payment to Inland Revenue, you must send them in by the 20th of the month after the month they reach $500. More information For more information about paying interest and deducting RWT read our booklet RWT on interest - payer’s guide - IR283. You can get a copy from our website at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides or order one by phoning INFOexpress on 0800 257 773. Please have your IRD number handy when you call. Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your tax and entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may also exchange information about you with some government agencies and other countries. Find our full privacy policy at ird.govt.nz/privacy