Child Supportird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 1 Child Support IR470 When to use this form Use this form when you have grounds to apply for an administrative review of a child support formula assessment. There is a four-year time limit on reassessing past child support years. This means you cannot apply for an administrative review of a child support year that ended more than four years ago. Read the guide Helping you to understand child support reviews – IR175 before completing this application. You can complete an administrative review application at ird.govt.nz/myIR 1 Your name MrMrsMissMs To help us, show the name you use for child support. First name(s) Surname 2 Grounds for applying The grounds for my application are: ground number ground number ground number See pages 11-19 of our guide Helping you to understand child support reviews - IR175 for more information on the grounds. Describe your circumstances or how your situation fits the ground(s) you’ve indicated. If you need to use extra paper please include your name and IRD number and attach the extra pages to this form. 3 Request for review I believe there are circumstances that are not taken into account by the formula assessment. I am applying under section 96B of the Child Support Act 1991 for an administrative review of the assessment for these year(s). Year ending 31 MarchYear ending 31 MarchYear ending 31 March November 2021 Application for an administrative review Child Supportird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 2 4 I’m applying for the following child or children: First name(s)Surname(s)Date of birth Day Month Year 5 Your IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 6 Your address Street address or PO Box Suburb, town or cityPostcode Country 7 Your contact details ( )( )( ) DayEveningMobile Email 8 Your requirements for the hearing (tick as appropriate) Will you be present at the hearing in Takapuna, Manukau, Hamilton, Wellington or Christchurch?Ye sNo If "no", would you prefer your part of the hearing to be done by phone or on the information you have provided in writing? PhoneWriting Support at the hearing You can have a support person or representative at the hearing. See page 30 of our guide Helping you to understand child support reviews - IR175 for more information and to see if your support person or representative meet the rules to be at the hearing. Do you want to bring a support person to the hearing?Ye sNo Do you want to have a representative attend the hearing?Ye sNo If “yes” to either, please give their name and occupation Support person’s name First name(s) Surname Support person’s occupation Support person’s phone numbers ( )( )( ) DayEveningMobile 9 Information about the other party or parties to the formula assessment for the child or children Name of other partyMrMrsMissMs (Tick one) First name(s) Surname Address Street address or PO Box Suburb, town or cityPostcode Country Child Supportird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 3 Contact details ( )( )( ) DayEveningMobile Email Name of other party (if any)MrMrsMissMs (Tick one) First name(s) Surname Postal address Street address or PO Box Suburb, town or cityPostcode Country Contact details ( )( )( ) DayEveningMobile Email 10 Declaration I understand that: • This review is not limited to the grounds in this application and the result may be different to the change requested. (See page 22 of our guide Helping you to understand child support reviews - IR175). • All par ties to the child support assessment will be invited to take part in the review. To the best of my knowledge the information given is true and correct. Please send this completed form to: Child Support, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045 Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your tax and entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you do not. We may also exchange information about you with: • some government agencies • another countr y, if we have an information supply agreement with them, and • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). You can ask for the personal information we hold about you. We’ll give the information to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Find our full privacy policy at ird.govt.nz/privacy