IR473 February 2018 Election to form an imputation group This form contains imputation group elections and the election of the nominated company Please complete all the relevant questions on the form. If you need help, read the notes on the back. Company elections To be completed by all companies forming the imputation group. If there are more than three companies forming the group, complete another election notice and attach it to this one. Is this an election to form a trans-Tasman imputation group (contains one or more Australian companies)?Ye sNo We elect that the undersigned companies shall become an imputation group to be known as: Name of imputation group with application from Day Month Year and agree that the companies: - are eligible to form an imputation group under section FN 4 of the Income Tax Act 2007. - shall be jointly and severally liable for the imputation group's further income tax, civil penalties and interest. Company or consolidated group Name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Current ICA balance (tick one) Credit Debit Signatory's name Signature Date / / Designation or title Company or consolidated group Name IRD number Current ICA balance (tick one) Credit Debit Signatory's name Signature Date / / Designation or title Company or consolidated group Name IRD number Current ICA balance (tick one) Credit Debit Signatory's name Signature Date / / Designation or title Consolidated group election Nominated company name On behalf of the consolidated group named below, I authorise that all members of the: Consolidated group name IRD number are eligible, and have agreed to be part of this imputation group. Signatory's name Signature Date / / Designation or title Telephone number Election of nominated company I elect on behalf of the imputation group that: Company name IRD number shall be the nominated company of the imputation group and will act as agent of the group and its members. Signatory's name Signature Date / / Designation or title Telephone number Notes IRD number of the imputation group We will give the imputation group an IRD number when we process this election form. Criteria for forming an imputation group All companies forming the imputation group must be wholly-owned. Each company must be also eligible to be part of an imputation group, i.e meets all the following criteria: - resident in New Zealand or Australia, and - maintains an imputation credit account - is not a qualifying company unless all members are qualifying companies - is not a mining company, unless all members are mining companies - is not a member of a consolidated group, unless all members of the consolidated group meet all of the above criteria and also elect to be members of the imputation group - members of more than one consolidated group may only be part of an imputation group if the existing credits in the consolidated imputation accounts have the same shareholder continuity profile - there must be no arrangement to defeat the intent and application of the imputation rules All Australian companies electing to be part of an imputation group must also complete a Trans-Tasman imputation election (IR488) form. This is available from our website www.ird.govt.nz Elections from consolidated groups The nominated company of an electing consolidated group should complete the "Consolidated group election" section on this page. Details also need to be provided on page 1 of this form. Application date of elections An election applies from the start of the imputation year in which we receive it. The imputation year covers the period 1 April to 31 March regardless of companies' balance dates. Nominated company One member of the imputation group must be the nominated company. Where the group has both Australian and New Zealand members, the nominated company must be a New Zealand resident and responsible for the resident imputation subgroup filing requirement. Privacy Act 1993 Meeting your tax obligations involves giving accurate information to Inland Revenue. We ask you for information so we can assess your liabilities and entitlements under the Acts we administer. You must, by law, give us this information. Penalties may apply if you do not. We may exchange information about you with the Ministry of Social Development, Ministry of Justice, Department of Labour, Ministry of Education, New Zealand Customs Service, Accident Compensation Corporation or their contracted agencies. Information may be provided to overseas countries with which New Zealand has an information supply agreement. Inland Revenue also has an agreement to supply information to Statistics New Zealand for statistical purposes only. You may ask to see the personal information we hold about you by calling us on 0800 377 774. Unless we have a lawful reason for withholding the information, we will show it to you and correct any errors. Postal address: Inland Revenue PO Box 39010 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045