KIWISAVER – PARTIAL WITHDRAWAL FOR FOREIGN SUPERANNUATION TAX LIABILITY KiwiSaver member calculation sheet IR496 August 2018 This calculation sheet will help you calculate how much you can withdraw from your KiwiSaver account. An amount can be withdrawn to cover your income tax liability and any student loan obligation due on the foreign superannuation lump sum. In order to withdraw, you must have filed an IR3 Income tax return declaring your foreign superannuation income. You must also make this application within 2 years of the month your return is assessed. You will need information from your IR3 return or assessment notice issued by Inland Revenue to help you complete this calculation sheet. Please note that you can’t withdraw from your KiwiSaver account if you are returning this income under the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules. If your tax payment is not made on time, you may be liable for late payment penalties and use-of-money interest. Note: The withdrawal option is only available for foreign superannuation transfers into a KiwiSaver scheme. 1 Enter the tax year the lump sum amount was returned Ye a r 2 Enter the date the assessment was issued for the tax year Day Month Year To calculate the tax payable on the lump sum superannuation complete steps 3 to 8. 3 Total taxable income for the year A 4 Total taxable foreign superannuation amount included in your IR3 return B 5 Deduct B from A. This is your amount of taxable income excluding your lump sum superannuation C 6 Enter tax on taxable income (Tax on A) D 7 Calculate the tax payable (on amount C) E To calculate the tax payable on taxable income, go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: annual calculator) 8 Deduct E from D to find tax payable on your taxable lump sum superannuation amount This is the maximum tax amount you can apply to withdraw from your KiwiSaver account to pay your income tax liability. To calculate your student loan repayment obligation complete steps 9 to 14. 9 Total taxable income from your IR3 return for the year (A from above) A 10 Student loan threshold for the year. To find out the student loan repayment threshold, go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: repayment threshold) F 11 Deduct F from A G 12 Enter the amount of foreign superannuation lump sum included in your IR3 return (B from above) B 13 Enter the lesser of G and B H 14 Multiply H by 12% This is the maximum student loan repayment obligation you can apply to withdraw from your KiwiSaver account. PTO Examples Example 1 Annual salary $80,000, transferred $100,000 into KiwiSaver. Taxable income is $95,000 ($80,000 + ($100,000 ÷ 15%)). The tax on $95,000 is $22,270 from the Notice of assessment. 3 Total taxable income for the year A 4 Total taxable foreign superannuation amount included in your IR3 return B 5 Deduct B from A. This is your amount of taxable income excluding your lump sum superannuation C 6 Enter tax on taxable income (Tax on A) D 7 Calculate the tax payable (on amount C) E To calculate the tax payable on taxable income, go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: annual calculator) 8 Deduct E from D to find tax payable on your taxable lump sum superannuation amount This is the maximum tax amount you can apply to withdraw from your KiwiSaver account to pay your income tax liability. Example 2 Self-employed business has net loss of $21,000. $100,000 was transferred into KiwiSaver and used 15% rate. Taxable income is a loss of $6,000 ($21,000 − $15,000). No withdrawal can be made as there is no tax to pay. Example 3 Rental income loss $21,000. Transferred $170,000 into KiwiSaver and used 15% rate. Taxable income is $4,500 ($25,500 − $21,000). The tax on $4,500 is $472.50 from the return acknowledgement from IRD. 3 Total taxable income for the year A 4 Total taxable foreign superannuation amount included in your IR3 return B 5 Deduct B from A. This is your amount of taxable income excluding your lump sum superannuation C 6 Enter tax on taxable income (Tax on A) D 7 Calculate the tax payable (on amount C) E To calculate the tax payable on taxable income, go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: annual calculator) 8 Deduct E from D to find tax payable on your taxable lump sum superannuation amount This is the maximum tax amount you can apply to withdraw from your KiwiSaver account to pay your income tax liability. 95,000 00 15,000 00 80,000 00 22,270 00 17,320 00 4,950 00 4,500 00 25,500 00 -21,000 00 (loss) 472 50 NIL (tax on loss) 472 50