IR586 October 2023 Automatic payment authority •• Not to act as an assignment or an agreement •• Give completed form to your bank Your account details Name of your bank BranchTown or city Name of account Important - tick oneThis is a new automatic payment As fromthis automatic payment for $ Day Month Year Bank account number Bank Branch Account number Suffix On behalf of (name if other than payer) Description of payment to appear on your bank statement (eg tax bill) FrequencyFirst payment dateLast payment date OR until further notice (please tick) Day Month Year Day Month Year (Tick one)WeeklyFortnightlyFour-weeklyMonthlyOther period Amount Fixed amount $ Amount in words Variable amount (tick one)Variable first amountVariable last amount Complete if applicable $ Amount in words Inland Revenue details Credit to: WestpacNZ Government branch 004900037011002 Bank Branch Account number Suffix REVENINLANDTUEDEP Please enter your payment details here to ensure your payment is credited to the correct account. IRD number Tax type Day Month Tax year (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Specify the period end date you want this payment to be made for Use ARR as your tax type if you are paying tax under arrangement. You do not need to complete the period end date if you use ARR, KSS or NCP (Period end dates are required for KSE and KSR). If you are not paying tax under arrangement, please choose one tax type from the list below. AIL – Approved issuer levy AIP – Account information provider CPR – Receiving carer CRS – Common reporting standard DED – Total deductions due on employer deductions DWT – Dividend withholding tax EMP – Employer deductions – includes CSE, KSE, KSR, PAY, SLE, SSC EQU – Income equalisation account ERA – Environmental restoration account FAM – Working for families FBT – Fringe benefit tax FTR – New Zealand foreign trusts GMD – Gaming machine duty GSD – Goods sold in satisfaction of a debt GST – Goods and services tax GAP – GST and provisional tax payments IED – Intermediaries paying employee deductions INC – Income tax and provisional tax IPS – Resident withholding tax (RWT) on interest KSS – KiwiSaver contributions from self employed people and contractors, and voluntary contributions by employees LGL – Legal costs NCP – Liable parent NRT – Non-resident withholding tax PIE – Portfolio investment entity PPL – Paid parental leave RDI – Research and Development Incentive REB – Donations tax credits RLT – Residential land withholding tax RSP – Resurgence Support Payment RUL – Rulings and determinations RWT – Resident withholding tax SBC – Small Business Cash Loan SLS – Student loan UCM – Unclaimed money Conditions 1. The bank will use reasonable care and skill to give effect to the directions given to it in this authority. 2. Where the directions given in this authority have been given by me/us for the purpose of a business, the bank accepts those directions without any responsibility or liability for any refusal or omission to make all or any of the payments or for late payment or for any omission to follow such directions. 3. The bank accepts no responsibility or liability for the accuracy of the information contained in the payment information fields on this authority. 4. I/We undertake to advise the bank immediately of any information about payments shown on bank statements which is incorrect. 5. This authority is subject to any arrangement now or hereafter subsisting between myself/ourselves and the bank in relation to my/our account. 6. The bank may, in its absolute discretion, conclusively determine the order or priority of payment by it of any monies pursuant to this or any other authority or cheque which I/we may now or hereafter give to the bank or draw on my/our account. 7. The bank may, in its absolute discretion, refuse to make any one or more payments pursuant to this authority where there are insufficient funds available in my/our account. 8. This authority may be terminated or reduced by the bank or payee without notice to me/us in respect of the payments detailed over. 9. This authority will remain in force and effect in respect of all payments made in good faith notwithstanding my/our death or bankruptcy or any other revocation of this authority until notice of my/our death, bankruptcy or other revocation is received by the bank. 10. All current bank and government charges for this service in force from time to time are to be debited to my/our account. Alteration to fixed amount Please alter the fixed amount of this transfer Fixed amount $ Amount in words Date from which alteration applies Day Month Year Date Customer's signature Fixed amount $ Amount in words Date from which alteration applies Day Month Year Date Customer's signature For bank use only Date received Day Month Year Bank stamp Received by Checked by Authorisation 1.Please make this automatic payment as detailed by debiting my/our account. 2.I/We understand and accept that the bank accepts this authority only on the conditions set out over the page. Name of account (customer to complete) Signature Date Contact phone number Signature Date Contact phone number Important: Have you filled in your IRD number and your tax type? If you would like assistance to complete this form please call 0800 775 247