IR595D April 2019 Statutory declaration to support your IRD number application - individual (IR595) for a child under 16 years of age Oaths and Declarations Act 1957 Tax Administration Act 1994 Crimes Act 1961 Enter your own IRD number here. (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) When to complete this declaration • Complete the declaration over the page if you are applying to Inland Revenue for an IRD number for a child under 16 years of age, who is not yours because you are not the child’s legal parent or guardian. • This declaration formally records the link between you and the child the IRD number is for. • You can also use this declaration if you are the legal parent or guardian and unable to provide other official or formal documentation to confirm the child is in your care. Notes Read carefully before starting to fill in this declaration This form is a statutory declaration. It is an offence to give any altered, false, incomplete or misleading information or to make a false statement or declaration. Any person who does so is liable for imprisonment for up to three years. • Complete and sign this declaration in front of the person taking the declaration - see the list of authorised people below. This may be a different person to an Inland Revenue appointed verifier. There is a list of Inland Revenue appointed verifiers on the IRD number application - individual (IR595) • This declaration must be completed before taking the IRD number application to the Inland Revenue appointed verifier. People authorised to take this declaration • a Justice of the Peace • a person enrolled as a barrister and solicitor of the High Court • a registered legal executive (fellow of the NZILE) • a notary public • a registrar or deputy registrar of the High Court or a district court • the registrar or a deputy registrar of the Court of Appeal • the registrar or a deputy registrar of the Supreme Court • a member of parliament • other government officer authorised to take statutory declarations. • Complete all sections of this declaration. If a question does not apply to your situation, complete the question by writing “not applicable”. • Remember, if you are attaching copies of any documents, such as an authorisation from the legal parent(s) or guardian(s) or other authority to this declaration, you must have the original document(s) with you when you take the IRD number application - individual (IR595) to be verified by an Inland Revenue appointed verifier. • Complete a separate declaration and IRD number application for each child you are applying for. For more information If you have any questions go to www.ird.govt.nz or call us on 0800 227 774. I, Your full legal name here Current residential street address/place of abode / /( ) OccupationYour date of birthContact number solemnly and sincerely declare that: (cross out any statements that do not apply) • I have the day-to-day responsibility for the child • I have the ongoing care of the child • I have control of the child’s activities • The child is maintained as a member of my family • The child depends on me financially • I am responsible for making the decisions concerning the child • I provide emotional support for the child. / / Child’s full legal nameChild’s date of birth and Parent’s name, if knownParent’s name, if known This child is in my care because: State your relationship to the child and the reason why the child is in your care This child came into my care from/on: / / (please be as accurate as possible) Day Month Year Attach any supporting documentation eg a copy of the authorisation from the legal parent(s) or guardian(s), or other authority. If you cannot provide or do not have this, explain why and set out the steps you have taken to get this information. And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true and by virtue of the Oaths and Declarations Act 1957. Your signature Your full name Declared atthis / / Place Day Month Year Declaration taken by Signature of person taking this declaration Full name of person taking this declaration Title/position eg Justice of the Peace