1 IR 590 October 2018 Disclosure of financial position •Please answer questions to the best of your ability. Estimates are required if accurate information is not available. •Give full answers to the questions below. Continue on a separate page if necessary. This is your disclosure of financial position as at Day Month Year Your IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Your date of birth Day Month Year Your full name First name(s) Surname Your home address (please do not use a PO Box number) Street address Suburb Town or city Your phone numbers ( )( )( ) WorkHomeMobile Your email address Spouse/partner’s name Spouse/partner’s IRD number Number of dependants living with you Age(s) of children Your occupation or job Your employer’s name Your employer’s address Things you need to know Please complete and send this form to us as soon as possible. You may start making payments on your account while we consider your application. Go to www.ird.govt.nz/makepayment for payment options. Student loan debt • Restriction on future borrowing – Borrowers with an overdue student loan repayment obligation of $500 or more for 12 months or longer, will not be able to borrow through the Student Loan Scheme. This applies to all student loan applications received on or after 7 February 2013 and includes amounts under an instalment arrangement. • Late payment interest – (formerly late payment penalty) is calculated monthly and will appear on your student loan account. For instalment arrangements you’ll be charged reduced late payment interest for each month you make the required payments. Tax debt • Late payment penalties (where applicable) – these will be suppressed from the time we receive this application and during the term of the arrangement, providing we accept your request and you make the required payments. For more information go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: managing penalties) • Interest – this continues to accrue on your account during the term of the arrangement. You will have to pay the interest. Please note, you can reduce the amount of interest you will have to pay by making larger and/or earlier payments when you can. For current interest rates go to www.ird.govt.nz (keywords: credit and debit rates). Inland Revenue’s website Visit our website at www.ird.govt.nz for detailed information about tax and social policy, access to our booklets, returns, forms, newsletters, public rulings and a variety of interactive online services. We regularly add new services to our site. You can register to get updates about these by selecting “What’s new” on the homepage. 2 2.Have you attempted to obtain a loan to pay this debt?NoGo to Question 3 Ye sProvide details below 3.How do you plan to pay future tax liabilities? 4.Trusts Are you now, or have you in the past 5 years been, involved with a trust? No Go to Question 5 Ye s Provide details below of all trusts that you are, or have been, involved with in the past 5 years Trust 1Trust 2 Name of trust IRD number of trust Your involvement in the trust (select all that apply) Trustee / Settlor / BeneficiaryTrustee / Settlor / Beneficiary List any money or other assets you transferred to the trust in the last 5 years Give date of transfer Day Month Year Day Month Year Estimated value at time of transfer Detail assets of the trust Estimated current value of the trust’s assets Do you owe the trust any money? If “Yes”, please state amount Does the trust owe you money? If “Yes”, please state amount Please list the names and contact details of the trustees 1.Why didn’t you pay your tax by the due date? If this was due to you having insufficient funds explain what contributed to this. Proposal for payment Give details of how you propose paying your debt Amount you can pay nowInstalment amountHow often payments will be madePayment start date weekly (wk)/fortnightly (fn)/monthly (mn) Day Month Year How will payments be made? By automatic payment from your bank account By credit or debit card online By internet banking When we receive your application we’ll contact you to confirm the arrangement or request more information. 3 5. Other entities Provide details below of any other entities (eg, companies, partnerships) you’re involved in Name IRD number NameIRD number NameIRD number 6.Income (after tax) Enter all household income. Yo uYour spouse or partner SourceAmountFrequencyAmountFrequency Salary or wages from regular job wk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Working for Families Tax Credits wk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Work and Income benefitwk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Payments from ACCwk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Temporary, casual or part- time work wk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Self-employed income/ drawings wk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Superannuationwk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Child support or maintenance received wk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Rent/board receivedwk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Interest or dividendswk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Overseas income in NZ dollars wk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Payments from income protection insurance wk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Commission not taxed at source wk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Other incomewk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Please provide details 7.Residential and/or commercial property Do you or your spouse or partner own any residential or commercial property? No Go to Question 8 Ye sProvide details below Property 1Property 2 Property address Date of purchase Day Month Year Day Month Year Purchase price Estimated current value Name of mortgage provider Term of mortgage Years Years Date mortgage taken out Day Month Year Day Month Year Original amount of mortgage Current balance Repayment amountwk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Annual council rates 4 8.Household and personal effects Do you or your spouse or partner own any household or personal effects with a market value greater than $5,000, eg, jewellery, art work, antiques, electronics No Go to Question 9 Ye sProvide details below ItemsEstimated market value 9.Vehicles Do you or your spouse or partner own a vehicle, eg, a car, boat, caravan, motorcycle, jet ski, hobby vehicle No Go to Question 10 Ye sProvide details below Vehicle detailsVehicle 1Vehicle 2Vehicle 3Vehicle 4 Owner Year and make Model Registration number Purchase date Day Month Year Day Month Year Day Month Year Day Month Year Estimated current value Amount currently owing Date of loan Day Month Year Day Month Year Day Month Year Day Month Year Repayment amount wk/fn/mnwk/fn/mnwk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn 10.Credit and store cards Provider Minimum monthly payment Credit limitBalance 11.Bank accounts Provide all financial details relating to any bank accounts including term deposits, building society and credit union accounts Account nameBank and branchAccount numberBalanceOverdraft limit 12.Life insurance/superannuation policies, bonus bonds and KiwiSaver Do you or your spouse or partner have any life insurance or superannuation policies or KiwiSaver accounts? No Go to Question 13 Ye sProvide details below CompanyPremium/contributionSurrender value wk/fn/mn wk/fn/mn wk/fn/mn 13.Money owed to you Does anyone owe you or your spouse or partner money? No Go to Question 14 Ye sProvide details below Owed to you byAmount 5 14.Other assets Do you or your spouse or partner have any other assets not mentioned so far? No Go to Question 15 Ye sProvide details below Give details, including the value of any shares/debentures, other assets or funds held not specified elsewhere 15.Child support, maintenance, childcare and/or school fees Do you or your spouse or partner pay child support or maintenance, childcare and/or school fees? No Go to Question 16 Ye sProvide details below AmountFrequency Child support/maintenance wk/fn/mn Childcare/school fees wk/fn/mn 16 .Hire purchases (other than vehicles) ItemDate purchasedRepayment amountBalance to pay wk/fn/mn Day Month Year wk/fn/mn Day Month Year 1 7.Loans Do you or your spouse or partner have any other loans, other than a student loan, not declared elsewhere on this form? No Go to Question 18 Ye s Provide details below of all personal and business loans Loan 1Loan 2 Lender Start date Day Month Year Day Month Year Te r m Months Months Amount borrowed Current balance Repayment amountwk/fn/mnwk/fn/mn Security—give details 18.Debts owed by you not declared elsewhere on this form Do you or your spouse or partner owe any money that has not been declared elsewhere on this form, eg, Department for Courts, Department of Work and Income, utilities etc. No Go to Question 19 Ye s Provide details below of all other money owed by you. Owed toBalance outstandingMinimum repayment amount wk/fn/mn wk/fn/mn wk/fn/mn 19.Are you involved in any business activity or do you receive any income that isn’t taxed at source? NoGo to Number 20 Ye sComplete the questions over the page 6 Business taxpayers – provide details relating to all your business activities EITHER – Attach copies of: •most recent financial statements, and •all bank and credit card statements for the last 3 months OR – complete the following: Total business income (eg, sales, schedular payments, rental) Average monthly (based on 12 months to date) Business expenses Average monthly (based on 12 months to date) List only those expenses which are business related. Do not include the personal portion of the expenses, eg, mobile phone, insurance and transport costs Accident compensation premiums/levies Advertising Bad debts Communication Depreciation Entertainment Insurance Interest Legal and accounting Motor vehicle Power Rent, lease and rates Repairs and maintenance Salary and wages Travel and accommodation Other expenses (please specify) Provision for ongoing tax liabilities List all business assets (eg, machinery)Book value List all business debts (eg, overdraft, money owed to suppliers) 20. •When requested, you will be required to supply evidence of your financial position. •We may ask you to provide more information in relation to this application. If you give incorrect information, any decisions resulting from the information provided may be reversed. Declaration I declare that the information provided in this statement is accurate and complete Signature Date / / Please send this completed form to: Inland Revenue PO Box 39090 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045 Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities or your entitlements under the Acts we administer. For full details of our privacy policy go to www.ird.govt.nz (keyword: privacy).