IR596 September 2020 IRD number application – resident non-individual Use this form to apply for an IRD number for your organisation if you’re a New Zealand resident, or apply online - ird.govt.nz/business-ird-number 1. Print the full name of the organisation 2.Is this application for a branch?NoYe sPrint the IRD number of the main branch or head office and then to Question 15. You can register any branch or division separately through myIR Secure Online Services. Applications are processed in real time and in most cases you’ll receive immediate confirmation of the GST number and registration details. (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 3.Tick the organisation type from the list below CompanyPartnershipEstate or trust Close companyOrdinary partnershipComplying trust Widely held companyLimited partnershipForeign trust Unit trustSuperannuation schemeNon-complying trust CooperativeRegistered – widely heldEstate Public authorityRegistered – not widely heldClub or society Local authorityNot registeredIncorporated society or club Special companyKiwiSaverUnincorporated society or club Life insuranceForeignFriendly society Agent non-resident insurer Māori authority Building society Body corporateComplete a Māori authority election - IR483 formIndustrial and provident society 4.If the trade name is different from the name shown above, print it here 5.Print the street address of the place of business Street address Suburb or RDTown or cityPostcode 6.Print the usual postal address only if it is different from the street address. Do not use your tax agent’s address here Street address Suburb or RDTown or cityPostcode 7.Print the organisation’s contact phone number(s) BusinessAfter hours or mobile 8a.Print the organisation’s email address 8b.Consent I consent to receiving the organisations IRD number by email. I acknowledge that Inland Revenue will take all reasonable steps to reduce any risk of unauthorised access or release of confidential information but can’t guarantee emails won’t be intercepted or read while in transit. If you want the IRD number to be sent to a different email address, show the address below. 8c.Other business contact 9.Attach one of the following documents as identification. We would prefer you to send photocopies but if you do send original documents we will send them back to you Certificate of incorporation for companies Deed of trust for trusts. This must show the trust’s name, trustee’s signatures and date of deed Certificate of incorporation for incorporated societies Certificate of registration for limited partnerships a Probate, Will, or Letters of Administration for estates. OFFICE USE ONLY IRD number issued/confirmed 10.What is the organisation’s start date? Day Month Year 10b.Commencement of taxable activity (if different from above) Day Month Year 10c.What is the date of death? (For the purposes of estate applications) Day Month Year 11.Business description and code. To determine your business industry description and code go to www.businessdescription.co.nz If you are unable to identify the correct code call ACC on 0508 426 837. 12.Do you expect your annual turnover to be over $60,000?NoYe sRefer to ird.govt.nz/gst/registering-for-gst Do you intend to employ people? NoYe sComplete an Employer registration - IR334 form. Do you wish to register as a payer for resident withholding tax on interest? NoYe sComplete a RWT interest payer registration - IR450 form. Do you wish to elect to be a look-through company (LTC)? NoYe sComplete a Look-through company election - IR862 form. You can get these forms from our website ird.govt.nz 13.Companies only Will you be providing fringe benefits to shareholder-employees?NoYe s All organisations, complete this question 14.Print the name, address and personal IRD number of each shareholder (close company), director, partner (including general or limited), executive office holder (society), trustee (trust), or trustee/executor (estate). Continue on a separate sheet if necessary NameDesignation or title AddressIRD number NameDesignation or title AddressIRD number For estates provide the IRD number of the deceased. NameIRD number Nominate someone to act on your behalf You can nominate someone to act on behalf of your business or organisation to help you with your tax. You can add a nominated person in myIR. Having a nominated person does not change your responsibilities. Your business or organisation is still responsible for its tax obligations. 15.Your bank account number Bank Branch Account number Suffix Name of account 16.Print the full name of the contact person for your organisation SurnameFirst name(s) Contact phone number(s) BusinessAfter hours or mobileFax 17.Declaration Name of authorised person Designation or title I declare that the information given on this form is true and correct. Date Signature Notes Do not show your tax agent’s address. Your tax agent maintains a client list with us. Ask them to give us the address for your mail. Send the completed form to us at: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045 If URGENT please clearly state the reason for urgency ird.govt.nz/business-ird-number