Elect someone to act on your behalf Complete this form to nominate someone as your agent to act on your behalf with Inland Revenue. By nominating a person, you are appointing that person as your agent to do things such as make enquiries, complete forms, receive your statements, refunds and other correspondence and set up payment arrangements on your behalf. Having a nominated person as your agent allows Inland Revenue to talk to your agent about your tax affairs, but it doesn't change your obligations, and you remain responsible for your own tax affairs, so you need to make sure any returns or payments are made by the due date. You are also responsible for advising us if you wish to end a nominated person's authority. Nominator's details Only certain people can nominate on behalf of others. • For individuals, these are holders of Power of Attorney in relation to property, Court order or NZ Probate form (a Certificate of non-revocation of Power of Attorney is not acceptable). • For non-individuals, a nominated person must be appointed by a person or persons with the requisite authority to bind that entity. For example, a company director, all trustees of a trust or a trustee with the delegated authority from the other trustees to act on all of their behalf, an estate administrator, an executive office holder (e.g. president, chairperson, treasurer, secretary), a partner in a partnership or a general partner in a limited partnership. Nominator's name Nominator's IRD numberPhone number ( ) (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Postal address (We need this information to validate the nomination) Non-individualsComplete the next two fields if the nominating entity is a non-individual Your Name Your position Nominee's details Provide details of the person ('nominee' or 'nominated person') who will act on your behalf. Your nominee's name Your nominee's IRD number (if the nominee has one) Date of birth (if the nominee is an individual) Day Month Year Your nominee's phone number ( ) Your nominee's postal address Non-individualsComplete if the nominating entity is a non-individual Nominee's position Show which accounts your nominee will act on your behalf for and how long they will act for Start dateEnd date Day Month Year Day Month Year Tick the appropriate circles Complete dates you want your nominee to act on your behalf by completing the start date and end date boxes. If you want them to act indefinitely leave the end date blank. Working for Families Tax Credits Goods and services tax Income tax PAYE Tax credit for donation IR597 December 2020 You can end a nominated person's authority any time through myIR, or by calling us on 0800 227 774 (individuals) or 0800 377 774 (business). Student loan KiwiSaver Fringe benefit tax Child support (excluding Administrative Reviews) Tick here if you want your nominee to receive your child support statements and correspondence All (includes all tax types you are currently registered for as well as any you may registered for in the future) Other (specify) Your nominee's name (First name(s) and surname if an individual; name of legal entity if a non-individual) Your nominee's IRD number Your nominee's phone number ( ) Your nominee's postal address Show which accounts your nominee will act on your behalf for and how long they will act for Start dateEnd date Day Month Year Day Month Year • Tick the appropriate circles • complete dates you want your nominee to act on your behalf by completing the start date and end date boxes. If you want them to act indefinitely leave the end date blank. You can end a nominated person's authority any time through myIR, or by calling us on 0800 227 774 (individuals) or 0800 377 774 (business). Working for Families Tax Credits Goods and services tax Income tax PAYE Tax credit for donation Student loan KiwiSaver Fringe benefit tax Child support (excluding Administrative Reviews) Tick here if you want your nominee to receive your child support statements and correspondence All (includes all tax types you are currently registered for as well as any you may registered for in the future) Other (specify) Tick the appropriate circles Declaration I have the organisation’s authority to add a nominated person/party to act on their behalf as an agent. To the best of my knowledge, the information being submitted is true and correct. Authorisation I understand that I am authorising someone to act on my behalf as my agent. Your signature Date Day Month Year Send your completed form to Inland Revenue, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045.