1 IR595 July 2024 IRD number application - resident individual Complete this form unless you are a non-resident or an offshore person (see notes page). If you are, use the IRD number application - non-resident/offshore individual - IR742 To apply for an IRD number for you or for a child in your care 1. Use the applicant checklist on page 2, complete the form on page 3 and sign the declaration on page 4. Take the form with current supporting documents, for an “In person verification” to an Automobile Association (AA) Driver Licensing agent. 2. You must provide one original document from Category A, and one original document from Category B with your application, as well as a legible photocopy of each of your documents. Category A documents You’ll need 1 of these category A documents: •New Zealand passport\* •overseas passport with an New Zealand residence visa granted by Immigration New Zealand\* •full New Zealand birth certificate issued after 1 January 1998 •New Zealand citizenship certificate •New Zealand firearm or dealer’s licence •New Zealand certificate of identity from the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) or the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) •New Zealand refugee travel document •New Zealand emergency travel document. \* If you are providing a passport please photocopy the pages showing your photo, name and New Zealand residency class visa granted by Immigration New Zealand. Category B documents •New Zealand driver licence •overseas driver licence •New Zealand 18+ card •Kiwi Access Card – replaces the HANZ 18+ card •HANZ 18+ card – existing cards are valid until their expiry dates •New Zealand student photo ID •International Driving Permit If you’re not able to provide the required documents from category A and category B, please call us on 0800 227 774 to discuss your options. 3. If the documents you provide are in another name, you must provide an original document that confirms how your name was changed, eg, marriage certificate, deedpoll, change of name certificate, civil union certificate, and a legible photocopy of that document. 4. If you are applying for a child who is in your care and they are under 16, you must provide: For the child One of the following: •New Zealand passport •full New Zealand birth certificate issued after 1 January 1998 •New Zealand citizenship certificate •New Zealand student photo ID If you need to use an expired passport as 1 of your identification documents for your child, you will need to call 0800 377 774 to find out your options. For you •Full proof of your own identity—see 2 above. • An original document and legible photocopy which shows the relationship between you and the child, if not already shown in the category A document for the child, eg, - a New Zealand full birth certificate issued on or after 1 January 1998 for the child - court documents showing child and caregiver names, eg, adoption papers, parenting orders, guardianship orders - a Statutory declaration - IR595D—you can download this from ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Note: If you’re the parent of a new baby and you have not registered their birth yet, you can apply for your baby’s IRD number at the same time as you complete the birth registration form. You do not need to complete this form or provide verification at an authorised agent if you do this. 5. The completed application form will be kept by the person who verifies the application. They will forward the application to Inland Revenue. You will receive your IRD number within 8-10 working days of Inland Revenue receiving your application. To receive your IRD number through by email and text message please confirm this at Question 8b 2 Notes Complete each part of form marked ■ An offshore person is someone who: • is a New Zealand citizen and has been overseas for the past three years or more continuously, or • does not have a New Zealand residency visa granted by Immigration New Zealand, or • has a New Zealand residency class visa and has been overseas for the last twelve months continuously. Question 1 - children under 16 • If you’re applying on behalf of a child, the IRD number shown here must belong to the person who will be providing the relevant documents identifying their relationship to the child. • If you’re making the application on behalf of a child for Working for Families, the IRD number shown here must belong to the principal childcarer. Question 2 - applicant information • If you’re completing the application for a child, enter the child information in this section. • If you’re completing the application for yourself, enter your information in this section. • If you’re using a preferred name, which is different from your given name, you must provide a document confirming your preferred name. Question 7 - address information • Residential address Please show a physical address, not a PO Box number or private bag. If you have a rural address, write the property and/or rural road name on line 1 and the rural delivery (RD) number and town on line 2. If you want your correspondence sent overseas please show the address you want it sent to. • Postal address - complete only if it’s different from the residential address. If not a street address show one of the following: - PO Box - private bag Line 1 - PO Box number Line 1 - private bag number Line 2 - box lobby Line 2 - box lobby Don’t show your tax agent’s address here. Question 8 - Contact information By ticking the box at Question 8b you agree to receive your new IRD number by email. If you provided a mobile phone number, you will also receive a text message with your new IRD number. Inland Revenue will take all reasonable steps to reduce any risk of unauthorised access or release of confidential information. If you do not agree, your IRD number will be mailed to the postal address you provided. Question 9 - temporary tax exemption on foreign income (complete this question if you continue to receive income from overseas) You qualify for a temporary tax exemption on certain foreign income for four calendar years (up to 49 months) if you meet both these requirements: • You qualified as a tax resident in New Zealand on or after 1 April 2006. • You have not been a New Zealand tax resident at any time in the past 10 years prior to your arrival date in New Zealand. Please note: • You can only claim this exemption once. • You cannot receive Working for Families while your foreign income is tax exempt. For more information on temporary tax exemption on foreign income, go to ird.govt.nz/tte Nominated persons We cannot discuss your tax affairs with anyone except you. However, you can nominate someone else to do this for you and have access to your Inland Revenue records once you have received your IRD number. You’ll still be responsible for your own tax affairs, so you’ll need to make sure any returns are filed and tax is paid by the due date. For more information, or to nominate someone to act on your behalf, complete an Elect someone to act on your behalf - IR597 form. You can get this from ird.govt.nz/forms-guides or by calling 0800 257 773 (remember to have your IRD number with you). Applicant checklist Have you: • provided a current category A original document and photocopy/s? • provided a current category B original document and photocopy/s? • provided current photocopies of any additional documents? • provided linking documentation for child? • completed your part of the application form? • signed the application? Please tear off this portion after you’ve had identity verified in person and keep it for your records. 3 IR595 May 2022 IRD number application - resident individual Children under 16 1.■ If you are applying for a child, print your own IRD number here. (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Applicant information 2.■ Name of applicant as shown on identity documents First name(s) Surname ■ Title Mr Mrs Miss Ms Other Preferred name First name(s) (refer to notes page) Surname 3.■ Date of birth Day Month Year 4.■ Please tick to show if you are: applying for an IRD number requesting confirmation of your IRD number 5.Previous name First name(s) (maiden name, known as, change of name) Surname Address information 7.■ Residential address (not a PO Box or private bag number) Street address Suburb or RD Town or city Country Postcode ■ Current postal address (only if it’s different from your home or street address) Street address Suburb or RD Town or city Country Postcode ■ Previous address (this will help us to confirm your IRD number if one may have been issued previously) Street address Suburb or RD Town or city Country Postcode 8a.■ Contact information MobileDaytimeEvening Email 8b.For the purposes of this application, I consent to receiving my IRD number by email or text message, or both, depending on the contact information I provided. I acknowledge that Inland Revenue will take all reasonable steps to reduce any risk of unauthorised access or release of confidential information but can’t guarantee emails won’t be intercepted or read while in transit. OFFICE USE ONLY IRD number issued/confirmed •Please read the Notes section before you complete this application •Please complete this application using capital letters—don’t use abbreviations •Please complete application in blue and/or black pen. 4 Tax exemption (refer to notes page before answering) 9.■ Do you qualify for a temporary tax exemption on foreign income? Ye sNo If “Yes”, please print date of arrival in New Zealand. Day Month Year Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities or your entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you don’t. We may also exchange information about you with: •some government agencies •another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them •Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask to see the personal information we hold about you, we’ll show you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Call us on 0800 377 774 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to ird.govt.nz/privacy Declaration - please read carefully before signing I declare that the information in this form is true and correct. I authorise Inland Revenue to contact any agency that issued a document I have used in support of this application, to verify the details of that document for the purpose of this application. I have read the privacy statement above before signing this declaration. ■ Signature■ Date Day Month Year Please complete the applicant checklist on page 2. DO NOT post your application to Inland Revenue. Take this form with current supporting documents to a verifier. Verifier use only Information verified by Print nameName of organisation and branch Date Day Month Year Documents provided AdultCategory AYe sNoChildCategory AYe sNo Category B Ye sNoCategory BYe sNo Category C Ye sNoLinking documentYe sNo (IRD verifier only - if Yes, please note reason Cat.C has been accepted) UrgentYe sNo (if yes, please note the reason why urgent) Notes Identified by interview:(tick if applicable)Date interviewed Stamp Day Month Year