Income tax return Estate or trust Income Tax Act 2007, Tax Administration Act 1994 IR6 2019 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019 If the estate or trust's name, IRD number and postal address are shown correctly above, go straight to Question 4. 1.If the estate or trust's IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. 1 (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 2.Is the correct estate or trust name shown above? No See page 9 of the guide.Ye s Go to Question 3. 3.If the correct postal address is not shown above, print it in Box 3. 3 Street address or PO Box number Suburb, box lobby or RDTown or city Don’t print your tax agent’s address here. See page 9 of the guide. 4.If the correct daytime phone number is not printed below, print it in Box 4. 4 Prefix Phone number 5.Print your business industry classification (BIC) code in Box 5. See page 10 of the guide. 5 6.If the estate or trust's correct bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 6. 6 Bank Branch Account number Suffix  If the suffix has only two numbers, enter them in the first two squares of the suffix box.  For information about direct crediting see page 10 of the guide. 7.Is this the estate or trust's first return? No Go to Question 7A.Ye s Print the date of death (estate) or the start date (trust) in Box 7. 7 Day Month Year 7A.Has the estate or trust ceased? No Go to Question 7B.Ye s See page 10 of the guide. 7B.Do you have any gross income, losses brought forward to declare at Question 20, distributions to declare at Questions 21 or 22, or any disclosures to make at Question 23? No See the nil return note on page 11 of the guide, then complete and sign the declaration at the end of this return. You don’t need to answer any further questions. Ye s Go to Question 8. 8.Tick to show the type of trust. See the notes on pages 11 to 12 of the guide. 8 Complying trust Foreign trust Non-complying trust Income 9.Did the estate or trust have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to it? No Go to Question 10.Ye s See pages 14 to 16 of the guide. Print the details below. To t a l RW TTotal gross interest - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 9A $ 9B $ 10.Did the estate or trust have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to it? No Go to Question 11.Ye s See pages 16 and 17 of the guide. Print the details below. Total dividend imputation credits 10 $ Total dividend RWT creditsTotal gross dividends 10A $ 10B $ 11.Did the estate or trust receive any taxable distributions from a Māori authority? No Go to Question 12.Ye s See page 18 of the guide. Print the totals here. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distributions 11A $ 11B $ 12.Did the estate or trust receive income from a partnership, estate or trust? No Go to Question 13.Ye s See pages 19 and 20 of the guide. Print the totals here. Total partnership, estate or trust tax credits Total partnership, estate or trust income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 12A $ 12B $ 13.Did the estate or trust receive any income from overseas? No Go to Question 14.Ye s See pages 20 to 24 of the guide. Print the totals here. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 13A $ 13B $ 14.Did the estate or trust receive any look-through company (LTC) income? (Exclude any income/loss received that you've included at Questions 9, 10, 11, 12 and 16). No Go to Question 15.Ye s See pages 24 to 26 in the guide. Print the totals here. Total LTC tax creditsTotal active LTC income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 14A $ 14B $ Non-allowable deductions this yearPrior years’ non-allowable deductions claimed this year 14C $ 14D $ Adjusted LTC income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Either add Boxes 14B and 14C, or subtract Box 14D from 14B. Print your answer in Box 14E. 14E $ 15.Did the estate or trust receive income from business or rental activities? (Don't include any amounts shown in Boxes 9B, 10B, 11B, 12B, 13B, 14B or 14E.) No Go to Question 16.Ye s See pages 26 and 27 of the guide. Print the totals here. Net income from business or rental - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 15B $ 16.Did the estate or trust receive any other income? Includes income from any taxable property sales/disposals not shown in another question. No Go to Question 17.Ye s See pages 27 to 30 of the guide. Print the details below. Name of payer Type of income Total tax credits from other incomeTotal other income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 16A $ 16B $ Residential Land Withholding Tax (RLWT) credit 16AA $ Refer to page 30 of the guide 17.Total income and total tax credits. Add Boxes 9A, 10A, 11A, 12A, 13A, 14A and 16A. Print the total in Box 17A. Add Boxes 9B, 10B, 11B, 12B, 13B, 14E, 15B and 16B. Print the total in Box 17B. Total tax creditsTotal income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 17A $ 17B $ Staple here continued overleaf 18.Income allocation. See pages 31 and 32 of the guide before allocating income. Beneficiary incomeTrustee income 18A $ 18B $ 19.Can the estate or trust claim expenses? See page 33 of the guide. No Go to Question 20.Ye s Print the amount in Box 19. Total expenses claimed 19 $ 20.Does the estate or trust have losses brought forward? See page 33 of the guide. No Go to Question 21.Ye s Print the details in Box 20A and Box 20B. Amount brought forwardAmount claimed this year 20A $ 20B $ Foreign and non-complying trusts - distributions to beneficiaries Complete this section only if this return is for a foreign or non-complying trust. See pages 34 and 35 of the guide. 21.Did the estate or trust make a distribution to any beneficiary during the year? No Go to Question 22.Ye s Print the total distributions in Box 21. Attach details. Total distributions 21 $ 22.Did the estate or trust make a taxable distribution to any beneficiary during the year? No Go to Question 23.Ye s Print the total taxable distributions in Box 22. Total taxable distributions 22 $ Additional disclosure of foreign investments and BEPS information 23.If the estate or trust calculates CFC or FIF income under Question 13 or is required to make a BEPS disclosure, please read page 36 of the guide. Tick “Yes” if additional disclosure is required. 23 No Go to Question 24.Ye s Go to Question 24. Beneficiary details - attach completed IR6B 2019 form(s) to the top of this page 24.Read pages 37 to 42 of the guide for information about completing the details on the IR6B 2019 form(s) for each beneficiary. Add the total tax payable for all beneficiaries from Boxes 24S of your IR6B form(s) and print the total in Box 24T. 24T $ (Tick one) Credit Debit Trustee income and calculation of tax 25.Calculate tax on trustee income here (including allocations to minor beneficiaries - see page 43 of the guide). Subtract the amounts in Boxes 19 and 20B from the trustee income in Box 18B. Print the answer in Box 25A. If the result is a negative amount, print "0.00". 25A 00 $ Multiply the amount in Box 25A by 0.33 (33%). Print the answer in Box 25B. This is the total tax payable. 25B $ Print the trustee's share of overseas tax paid in Box 25C. See page 43 of the guide. 25C $ Subtract Box 25C from Box 25B. Print the answer in Box 25D. If 25C is larger than 25B print "0.00". 25D $ Print the trustee's share of dividend imputation credits in Box 25E. See pages 43 and 45 of the guide. 25E $ Subtract Box 25E from Box 25D. Print the answer in Box 25F. If 25E is larger than 25D print "0.00". 25F $ Print the trustee's share of RWT and other tax credits in Box 25G. See page 44 of the guide. 25G $ Print the difference between Box 25G and Box 25F in Box 25H. 25H $ If Box 25G is larger than Box 25F, the difference is a credit. If Box 25F is larger than Box 25G, the difference is a debit. (Tick one) Credit Debit March 2019 OFFICE USE ONLY 31 Correspondence indicatorA I Ye sNo Summary of tax payable 26.Calculate the tax payable here Copy the total tax payable on beneficiaries' income from Box 24T on page 3 to Box 26A. 26A $ Copy the total tax payable on trustees' income from Box 25H on page 3 to Box 26B. 26B $ (Tick one) Credit Debit If Box 26B is a debit, add Box 26A and Box 26B. If Box 26B is a credit, subtract Box 26B from Box 26A. Print your answer in Box 26C. This is the residual income tax. 26C $ (Tick one) Credit Debit Print any 2019 provisional tax paid in Box 26D, including any voluntary payments. 26D $ If Box 26C is a credit, add Box 26C and Box 26D. This is a refund. If Box 26C is a debit, subtract Box 26D from Box 26C. This is the tax to pay. If Box 26D is larger than Box 26C, the difference is a refund. Print your answer in Box 26E. 26E $ (Tick one) Refund Tax to pay Tax to pay is due by 7 February 2020. If you have a tax agent, see page 53 of the guide. 27.If the estate or trust is getting a refund, how do you want it paid? Copy the refund from Box 26E to Box 27. See pages 45-47 of the guide. 27 $ Print any overpayment of 2019 provisional tax to be refunded or transferred in Box 27A. 27A $ Add Boxes 27 and 27A. Print the answer in Box 27B. Please transfer the refund to: 27B $ 2020 provisional tax. Print the amount in Box 27C. 27C $ Another taxpayer's income tax account. Are you associated? See the note on page 46 of the guide. 27D Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving refund Their IRD number 27E Year ended 31 March Amount 27F $ Subtract Boxes 27C and 27F from Box 27B. Print the answer in Box 27G. This is the balance to be refunded. 27G $  The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your estate or trust's bank account. Please check the correct bank account number is preprinted at Question 6. If your bank account number isn't preprinted, please include it at Question 6. 28.Initial provisional tax liability. Is this the first year the estate or trust started to derive gross income from a taxable activity? See pages 47 to 48 of the guide. No Go to Question 29. 28 Day Month Year Ye s Print the start date in Box 28. 29.Read the notes on pages 48 to 51 of the guide to work out the provisional tax. Print the details below.  Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 29A. 29A  If you are using S or E, print the provisional tax payable in Box 29B. 29B $ Notice of assessment and declaration Please see page 54 of the guide. 30.Please read and sign the following. The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2019 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. / / Signature Date There are penalties for not putting in a tax return or putting in a false return. Please make a copy of this return for your own records. Remember, send your return by 7 July. If you have a tax agent see page 7 of the guide. For where to send this completed return - see page 56 of the guide. Privacy To find out what may happen to the information you provide on this form, see page 56 of the guide.