Income tax return Estate or trust Income Tax Act 2007, Tax Administration Act 1994 IR6 2022 If the estate or trust's name, IRD number and postal address are shown correctly above, go straight to Question 4. 1.If the estate or trust's IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. 1 (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 2.Is the correct estate or trust name shown above? No See the guide for further details.Ye s Go to Question 3. 3.If the correct postal address is not shown above, print it in Box 3. 3 Street address or PO Box number Suburb, box lobby or RDTown or city Do not print your tax preparer’s address here. See the guide for further details. 4.If the correct daytime phone number is not printed below, print it in Box 4. 4 Prefix Phone number 5.Print your business industry classification (BIC) code in Box 5. See the guide for further details. 5 6.If the estate or trust's correct bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 6. 6 Bank Branch Account number Suffix  If the suffix has only 2 numbers, enter them in the first 2 squares of the suffix box.  See the guide for further details about direct crediting. 7.Is this the estate or trust's first return? No Go to Question 7A.Ye s Print the date of death (estate) or the start date (trust) in Box 7. 7 Day Month Year 7A.Has the estate or trust ceased? No Go to Question 7B.Ye s See the guide for further details. 7B.Do you have any gross income, losses brought forward to declare at Question 23, distributions to declare at Questions 24 and 25, or any disclosures to make at Question 26? No See the guide for further details, then complete and sign the declaration at the end of this return. You do not need to answer any further questions. Ye s Go to Question 8. 8.Select the type of trust. See the guide for further details. (tick 1) 8 Complying trust Foreign trust Non-complying trust Income 9.Did the estate or trust have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to it? No Go to Question 10.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. To t a l RW TTotal gross interest - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 9A $ 9B $ 10.Did the estate or trust have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to it? No Go to Question 11.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total dividend imputation credits 10 $ Total dividend RWT creditsTotal gross dividends 10A $ 10B $ 11.Did the estate or trust receive any taxable distributions from a Māori authority? No Go to Question 12.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distributions 11A $ 11B $ 12.Did the estate or trust receive income from a partnership, estate or trust? No Go to Question 13.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total partnership, estate or trust tax creditsTotal partnership, estate or trust income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 12A $ 12B $ 13.Did the estate or trust receive any income from overseas? No Go to Question 14.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 13A $ 13B $ 14.Did the estate or trust receive any look-through company (LTC) income? (Exclude any income/loss received that you've included at Questions 9, 10, 11, 12, 17 and 18). No Go to Question 15.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total LTC tax creditsTotal active LTC income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 14A $ 14B $ Non-allowable deductions this yearPrior years’ non-allowable deductions claimed this year 14C $ 14D $ Adjusted LTC income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Either add Boxes 14B and 14C, or subtract Box 14D from 14B. Print your answer in Box 14E. 14E $ 15.Did the estate or trust receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? No Go to Question 16.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Select which method you are using. (tick 1) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 15A $ 15B $ Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 15C $ 15D $ Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxExcess residential rental deductions carried forward 15E $ 15F $ 16.Did the estate or trust incur any interest from residential property? No Go to Question 17.Ye sSee the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total interest on residential propertyInterest expense claimed 16A $ 16B $ Reason for interest expense claimed 16C A Maori exempt company or not a residential land company New build exemption Staple here continued overleaf Certain schedule 15 exclusions’ or property not in NZ Development or land business exemption Loans drawn down prior to 27 March 2021 or interest incurred before 1 October 2021 Emergency, transitional, social or council housing 17.Did the estate or trust receive income from business or other rental activities? (Do not include any income already shown at Questions 9 to 15). No Go to Question 18.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Net profit or loss from business or other rental - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 17B $ 18.Did the estate or trust receive any income from taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in the return? (Do not include any bright-line loss.) No Go to Question 19.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) credit 18A $ Profit/loss from sale of property - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 18B $ 19.Did the estate or trust receive any other income? No Go to Question 20.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Name of payer Type of income Total tax credits from other incomeTotal other income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 19A $ 19B $ 20. Total income and total tax credits. Add Boxes 9A, 10A, 11A, 12A, 13A, 14A, and 19A. Print the total in Box 20A. Add Boxes 9B, 10B, 11B, 12B, 13B, 14E, 15E, 17B, 18B and 19B. Print the total in Box 20B. Total tax creditsTotal income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 20A $ 20B $ 21. Income allocation. See the guide for further details before allocating income. Beneficiary incomeTrustee income 21A $ 21B $ 22.Can the estate or trust claim expenses? See the guide for further details. No Go to Question 23.Ye s Print the amount in Box 22. Total expenses claimed 22 $ 23.Does the estate or trust have losses brought forward? See the guide for further details. No Go to Question 23.Ye s Print the details in Box 23A and Box 23B. Amount brought forwardAmount claimed this year 23A $ 23B $ Foreign and non-complying trusts - distributions to beneficiaries Complete this section only if this return is for a foreign or non-complying trust. See the guide for further details. 24.Did the estate or trust make a distribution to any beneficiary during the year? No Go to Question 25.Ye sPrint the total distributions in Box 24. Attach details. Total distributions 24 $ 25.Did the estate or trust make a taxable distribution to any beneficiary during the year? No Go to Question 26.Ye sPrint the total taxable distributions in Box 25. Total taxable distributions 25 $ Additional disclosure of foreign investments and BEPS information 26.If the estate or trust calculates CFC or FIF income under Question 13 or is required to make a BEPS disclosure, see the guide for further details. Tick “Yes” if additional disclosure is required. 26 No Go to Question 27.Ye s Go to Question 27. Beneficiary details - attach completed IR6B 2022 form(s) to the top of this page 27.See the guide for further details about completing the details on the IR6B 2022 form(s) for each beneficiary. Add the total tax payable for all beneficiaries from Boxes 27T of your IR6B form(s) and print the total in Box 27AD. 27AD $ (Tick 1) Credit Debit Trustee income and calculation of tax 28. Calculate tax on trustee income here (including allocations to minor beneficiaries - see the guide for further details). Subtract the amounts in Boxes 22 and 23B from the trustee income in Box 21B. Print the answer in Box 28A. If the result is a negative amount, print "0.00". 28A 00 $ Multiply the amount in Box 28A by 0.33 (33%). Print the answer in Box 28B. This is the total tax payable. 28B $ Print the trustee's share of overseas tax paid in Box 28C. See the guide for further details. 28C $ Subtract Box 28C from Box 28B. Print the answer in Box 28D. If 28C is larger than 28B print "0.00". 28D $ Print the trustee's share of dividend imputation credits in Box 28E. See the guide for further details. 28E $ Subtract Box 28E from Box 28D. Print the answer in Box 28F. If 28E is larger than 28D print "0.00". 28F $ Print the trustee's share of RWT and other tax credits in Box 28G. See the guide for further details. 28G $ Print the difference between Box 28G and Box 28F in Box 28H. 28H $ If Box 28G is larger than Box 28F, the difference is a credit. If Box 28F is larger than Box 28G, the difference is a debit. (Tick 1) C redit Debit Summary of tax payable 29. Calculate the tax payable here Copy the total tax payable on beneficiaries' income from Box 27AD to Box 29A. 29A $ Copy the total tax payable on trustees' income from Box 28H to Box 29B. 29B $ (Tick 1) Credit Debit If Box 29B is a debit, add Box 29A and Box 29B. If Box 29B is a credit, subtract Box 29B from Box 29A. Print your answer in Box 29C. This is the residual income tax. 29C $ (Tick 1) Credit Debit Print any 2022 provisional tax paid in Box 29D, including any voluntary payments. 29D $ If Box 29C is a credit, add Box 29C and Box 29D. This is a refund. If Box 29C is a debit, subtract Box 29D from Box 29C. This is the tax to pay. If Box 29D is larger than Box 29C, the difference is a refund. Print your answer in Box 29E. 29E $ (Tick 1) Refund Tax to pay Tax to pay is due by 7 February 2023. See the guide for further details. 30. If the estate or trust is getting a refund, how do you want it paid? Copy the refund from Box 29E to Box 30. See the guide for further details. 30 $ Please transfer the refund to: 2023 provisional tax. Print the amount in Box 30A. 30A $ Another taxpayer's income tax account. Are you associated? See the guide for further details. 30B Ye s No Name of taxpayer receiving refund Their IRD number 30C Year ended 31 MarchAmount 30D $ Subtract Boxes 30A and 30D from Box 30. Print the answer in Box 30E. This is the balance to be refunded. 30E $  The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your estate or trust's bank account. Please check the correct bank account number is preprinted at Question 6. If your bank account number isn't preprinted, please include it at Question 6. 31. Initial provisional tax liability. Is this the first year the estate or trust started to derive gross income from a taxable activity? See the guide for further details. No Go to Question 32. 31 Day Month Year Ye s Print the start date in Box 31. 32.See the guide for further details on working out Provisional Tax. Print the details below.  Print the option used (S, E or R) in Box 32A. 32A  If you are using S or E, print the provisional tax payable in Box 32B. 32B $ 33. If you do not need to comply with the additional reporting requirements for NZ domestic trusts tick the box and go to Question 38. See the guide for further details. 34. Statement of Profit or Loss  Print the trust’s net profit/loss before tax. 34A $  Print the trust’s tax adjustments. 34B $  Print the trust’s untaxed realised gains/receipts. 34C $ Statement of financial position See the guide for further details. 35.Assets Associated persons financial arrangements 35A $ Land 35B $ Valuation method for Land 35C Historical cost Tax book value Market value Buildings 35D $ Valuation method for Buildings 35E Historical cost Tax book value Market value Shares/ownership interests 35F $ Valuation method for Shares/ownership interests 35G Historical cost Tax book value Market value Total assets 35H $ March 2022 OFFICE USE ONLY 39 Correspondence indicatorA I Ye sNo 36. Liabilities Associated persons financial arrangementsTotal liabilities 36A $ 36B $ 37.Equity Owner’s equity 37A $ Drawings 37B $ Current account year-end balances 37C $ Notice of assessment and declaration See the guide for further details. 38.Please read and sign the following. The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2022 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. / / Signature Date There are penalties for not putting in a tax return or putting in a false return. Please make a copy of this return for your own records. Remember, send your return by 7 July. If you have a tax agent see the guide for further details. Send this form to: Inland Revenue, PO BOX 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt, 5045 Privacy To find out what may happen to the information you provide on this form, see the guide for further details.