This registration form must be completed by the contact trustee of a foreign exemption trust. Please read the notes before completing the form. Remember to sign the declaration. The contact trustee must also complete a New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule – IR607A and a New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule – IR900A when applying for registration. 1.Trust details a. Full name of the foreign exemption trust b.IRD number (if known) c. Date trust established Day Month Year d. Date New Zealand resident trustee first appointed Day Month Year e. Start date if the trust is a foreign exemption trust Day Month Year f. Balance date See 'Trust details' in the notes Day Month g.Is this your first foreign exemption trust? See 'Trust details' in the notes Ye sNo 2.Contact trustee details a. Full name of the contact trustee b.IRD number c. Address of the contact trustee Street address or PO Box number Suburb or RDTown or cityPostcode d. Phone number and email address ( ) Phone number Email address 3.Are all the trustees natural persons and not professional trustees? Yes - go to question 5 No - go to question 4 4.Have you paid the registration fee to Inland Revenue? Ye sNo (See 'Fees and how to pay' in the notes) Date paid or credited 20 Day Month Year 5.Please provide the following details if the trust has any discretionary or residual beneficiaries including classes. Full names of discretionary or residual beneficiaries Names of classes of discretionary or residual beneficiaries IR607 February 2023 New Zealand foreign trust registration 6.Please ensure you have attached the following: • Copy of the trust deed and any amending or supplementary documents • Completed New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A • Completed New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule - IR900A Declaration Full name Designation or title (i.e. trustee, or director of trustee company) I declare that the information given on this form is true and correct. Signature Day/Month/Year Notes Purpose of the form The contact trustee uses this form to register a foreign exemption trust as a New Zealand foreign trust. If the trust is not registered or the details are not provided, the trust will not be eligible for the exemption on foreign sourced income. Definitions You must register as a New Zealand foreign trust if the trust meets the definition of a foreign exemption trust. A foreign exemption trust is: • a foreign trust – No settlors have been a New Zealand tax resident at anytime since the later of 17 December 1987 or the date the trust was first settled, or • has a trustee that uses, or has previously used, the foreign-sourced income exemption for resident trustees, and • has Ne w Zealand resident trustees – One or more trustees of the trust are tax resident in New Zealand. A trust can be both a foreign trust and a complying trust. A "complying trust" is one that has paid tax in New Zealand on all its income and met all its New Zealand tax obligations (HC 10 of the Income Tax Act 2007). In these circumstances the trust is known as a "dual-status trust". These trusts may also need to file income tax returns. Registration requirements At the time of registration, the contact trustee must also provide the names and details of everyone who is connected to the trust. This information is collected on the New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A. In addition, the contact trustee must provide details of historical settlements on the trust. This information is collected on the New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule - IR900A. The contact trustee must also provide the trust deed and any amending or supplementary documents as well as any functional equivalents. Trust details If the trust does not have a balance date, the default date is 31 March. Contact trustee details Please ensure the address on this form is the one we should use to contact you. Please note you are required to disclose your details as a trustee on a New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A. The address in the case of the IR607A is your physical residential or business address. Fees and how to pay If all the trustees are natural persons and not professional trustees, you do not have to pay a registration fee. If payment is required, registration fees must be paid into Inland Revenue's account with Westpac - 03-0049-0001100-27. The fee for registration is NZ $270. Use the following details when making a direct credit payment to us: ParticularsYour IRD number. If you have an 8-digit IRD number put a 0 at the beginning Payee CodeFTR ReferenceLeave blank Go to ird.govt.nz/pay to find out about paying by: • direct debit • cr edit or debit card • internet banking. Discretionary and residual beneficiaries Please complete the table at Question 5, listing all individual and classes of discretionary and residual beneficiaries. If a beneficiary receives a distribution during a return year, their full details must be provided with the annual return for that year. These details must be provided on the New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A. Changes The contact trustee must provide details of any additions or alterations to the information provided: • changes to contact trustees or their contact details within 30 days of the trustee becoming aware of it • changes to other information, would have to be provided in the next annual return at the latest. You may need to complete a New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A and/or a New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule - IR900A to provide details of the changes. If you anticipate ceasing to be the contact trustee you must advise: • the anticipat ed date when you will cease to be the contact trustee; • your email address and the physical residential address after the anticipated date; and • the name , email address and physical residential or business address of the new contact trustee after the anticipated date. Where to send the form Registration can be completed in myIR. You can also email the forms and attachments to nzforeigntrusts@ird.govt.nz Alternatively, you can post them to: International Revenue Strategy Inland R evenue PO Box 2198 W ellington 6140 More information For more information, please visit ird.govt.nz/international-tax/foreign-exemption-trusts