IR607A February 2023 New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule Full name of the foreign exemption trust IRD number (if known) This schedule must be completed by the contact trustee of a foreign exemption trust. Please read the notes before completing the form. Remember to sign the declaration. Please provide details of all persons connected to the trust, ticking all boxes that are applicable. If you are unable to locate any connected person, please provide known details of the person on this form, tick the box indicating you are unable to locate them and advise the steps that have been taken to locate them the comments section below. Settlor Settlor of settlor trust See notes Trustee of settlor trust See notes Trust name Settlor deceased Appointor Protector Trustee (including the contact trustee) Director of trustee company Beneficiary Minor beneficiary See notes Parent/Guardian Beneficiary nominee Name of other role Full name of person:IRD number (if applicable): Date of birth (if minor): Unable to locate Day Month Year Physical address: Street addressSuburb or RD Town or cityCountryPostcode Phone number: ( ) Email address: Jurisdiction of tax residence: Taxpayer Identification Number (if applicable): If the person does not have a TIN, please select a reason below: Jurisdiction does not issue TINsTIN not required in jurisdiction Comments: I declare that the information given in this schedule is true and correct, and each person referred to on this schedule (and is not a beneficiary who is a minor): - has been informed of, and has agreed to provide the information necessary for compliance with, the requirements relating to the provision of information relating to the trust and persons connected with the trust imposed by all of - (i) the Tax Administration Act 1994: (ii) the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act 2009: (iii) the regulations made under the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act 2009. - Unless the person is deceased, or despite the efforts of the New Zealand resident trustee detailed in the declaration, they cannot be located by the New Zealand resident trustee. Full name Designation or title Signature Day/month/year Notes Purpose of the schedule The contact trustee must provide the names and other details of everyone connected with the foreign exemption trust at the time of registration and when there are changes (see below). If the information is not provided, the trust is not eligible for the exemption on foreign sourced income. Connected person is unable to be located Please fill in details that are known and advise what actions you have undertaken to locate the person in the comments box or in an attachment. Connected person is deceased If a person connected to the foreign exemption trust is deceased, please provide the following: • their last known physical address • jurisdiction of tax residence • date of death. Re-settlements Where a New Zealand foreign trust receives a settlement from another trust (the head trust), there are at least two people that must be fully disclosed as settlors on the IR607A schedule. These are: (a) The settlor(s) of the head trust (tick “Settlor of settlor trust”) (b) The trustee(s) of the head trust (tick “Trustee of the settlor trust”). Please note that if the trustee of the head trust is a New Zealand tax resident, you do not need to disclose this person’s details on an IR607A schedule. When completing the settlor of the settlor trust role, please include the name of the trustee of that trust in the comments box. You must also record the name of the settlor trust in the “Trust name” field for both of these roles. Beneficiary is a minor If a beneficiary is a minor of a fixed trust, you only need to complete their name, date of birth, jurisdiction of tax residence and taxpayer identification number. You will, however, need to complete an IR607A schedule for their parent/guardian. Addresses You must provide a physical residential or business address for each person, including the contact trustee. Phone number/Email address If a connected person does not have an email address, please provide their contact phone number. Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) This is similar to an IRD number in other tax jurisdictions. If the connected person does not have a TIN, please select the reason for this. Either: • the jurisdiction of tax residence does not issue TINs; or, • the person is not required to obtain a TIN in their jurisdiction of tax residence. Changes Where a person is newly connected to a trust after the trust is registered, you must provide a New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A recording their details. You must provide us with the date they were appointed. Where a person has newly appointed powers, or has their powers removed under the trust deed, you must also provide a copy of the document that confirms this (eg. a deed removing a protector). Where a connected person ceases to be connected with the foreign trust (either because their powers were removed, or they are deceased), you must provide us with the date their connection ceased and the reason (eg. the person is now deceased, or their powers have been removed). Where changes relate to contact trustees or their contact details, the contact trustee must provide these updates within 30 days of becoming aware of the changes, including providing copies of amending documents. Changes to other information, would have to be provided in the next annual return at the latest. If you are not registered to use myIR, you should provide a New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A for each person whose details have changed. Where to send the schedule You can complete this schedule in myIR. You can also email this schedule and any attachments to nzforeigntrusts@ird.govt.nz Alternatively, you can post it to: International Revenue Strategy Inland Revenue PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 More information For more information, please visit ird.govt.nz/international-tax/foreign-trusts-nz-resident-trustees