Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 1 Payroll giving IR617 April 2020 Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 2 Contents What is payroll giving? 3 The employer's role 4 The employee's role 6 What is a donee organisation? 7 Calculating tax credits for payroll donations 7 Need more help? 12 Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 3 What is payroll giving? Payroll giving is a voluntary scheme where you pass your employee’s donations on to the chosen donee organisation and reduce their PAYE with a tax credit for payroll donations. As an employer, you can only offer payroll giving if you file your Employment information - IR348 electronically. If you offer payroll giving, your employees can make donations from their salary or wages to their chosen donee organisation. They may decide how much, when and who they'd like to donate to depending on how your scheme is set up. They receive an immediate tax credit for the payroll donation. This reduces their PAYE deducted from their wages. For information about donee organisations see page 7. Only approved donee organisations are eligible to receive donations through payroll giving. For a list of donee organisations go to ird.govt.nz/donee Using myIR If you want to offer payroll giving you'll need to register for a myIR Secure Online Services account. Go to ird.govt.nz/myIR to register. Once you have a myIR account you’ll be able to offer payroll giving. Who can offer payroll giving? NO NO YESYES Do you file your returns\* electronically? Do you want to offer payroll giving to your employees? Set up your payroll giving scheme using your payroll software and inform your employees they can make donations to approved donee organisations. You can't offer payroll giving to your employees. If you want to offer the scheme, you need to file your returns electronically. To register for myIR go to ird.govt.nz/myIR Continue filing your returns as you currently do. Go to diagram on page 4. \* Employment information - IR348 Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 4 The employer's role As an employer you are responsible for: • deducting the requested donation amount from your employee's salary or wage • calculating the correct tax credits for each payroll donation made • recording the tax credits for payroll donations on your IR348 • keeping records of all tax credits for payroll donations, donation amounts, donee organisations and payment dates • passing the donation on to the chosen donee organisations within the specified timeframe • advising the donee organisations that the donations are made through payroll giving. How payroll giving works This flowchart shows the process to follow when you deduct donations from your employee's salary or wages and pass them on to the chosen donee organisations. NO NO YES NO YES YES Is the donation recipient on the approved donee organisation list? The donation should not be made using payroll giving. Do you have sufficient details to make the requested donation? Ask the employee for the missing details. Does the employee provide you with the missing details? Advise the employee you can't make the deduction as you don't have all the details you need. Deduct the donation on the requested pay period. Calculate the tax credits for payroll donations. Deduct the amount of tax credits for payroll donations from the employee's PAYE. Show the amount of tax credits for payroll donations on the IR348. Record the donee organisation, donation amount, tax credits for payroll donations amount and date of donation in your wage records. Show the donation and tax credits for payroll donations on the employee's pay slip. Pass the donation on to the donee organisation. Advise them the donations are from a payroll giving scheme. If the donee organisation issues a receipt keep this with your employer records. Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 5 Timeframe for passing on donations Donations have to be passed to the donee organisation on or before the PAYE payment due date that is closest to the end of the two months from the last day of the pay period when the donation was deducted. The following explanation and table show how the date is calculated: • Date A is the last day of the pay period. If the pay covers 1–30 June, the last day of the pay period is 30 June. • To find Date B, add two months to Date A. • Date C is the nearest PAYE payment due date to Date B. This could either be before or after Date B. Date C is the last day you can pass the donation on to the donee organisation. You can pass the donation on at any time up to and including this date. PAYE filing frequencyDate A last day of pay period Date B two months from Date A Date C nearest PAYE payment due date to Date B Monthly filer7 January7 March20 March Twice monthly filer7 January7 March5 March Monthly filer30 January30 March20 March Twice monthly filer30 January30 March5 April Monthly filer12 February12 April20 April Twice monthly filer12 February12 April5 April Note: Don’t send us details of the donee organisations or donation amounts. Just tell us the amount of tax credits for payroll donations on your IR348. The donation and tax credits for payroll donations should show in your wage records and on your employee's pay slips. Setting up your payroll giving scheme You’ll need to register for myIR before you offer payroll giving. There are two options when filing online: • On-screen form where you complete details on your IR348 online. This may suit if you have a manual wage book. • File transfer through Gateway services where you attach a file from your own software. If you use an electronic payroll system this may suit you better. If you already use payroll software it may be set up for payroll giving in your workplace. Ask your payroll software provider for help if you have any questions about using their software to support your payroll giving scheme. You decide how payroll giving will run in your workplace but it's a good idea to involve your employees in the decision as they'll be using the scheme. Some options to consider when setting up your scheme include: • letting individual employees choose any approved donee organisation • offering a limited list of approved donee organisations • letting employees vote for an approved donee organisation (eg, donee organisation of the month or the year) that they can donate to • letting your employees promote their chosen donee organisation to each other then everyone voting for donee organisation of the month or the year. If your scheme allows it, the frequency, amount and donee organisations chosen by your individual employees can change at their discretion. Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 6 Your employee is responsible for checking their chosen donee organisation is on our approved list, but we recommend you check the list as well. If you use a payroll intermediary you can still choose to offer payroll giving to your employees. Here's how payroll giving could run in your workplace. Example 1 Company A files employment information electronically and decides to offer payroll giving to their employees. Each year, their employees select a charity, which they support with monthly fundraising activities. Company A limits their employees to donating to the chosen charity of the year. Example 2 Company B has 250 employees. It decides to offer payroll giving to its employees who can choose any approved donee organisation but a minimum donation amount (eg $10.00) is set. Example 3 Company C decides to offer payroll giving to their employees. They select five donee organisations and tell their staff these are the only donee organisations they can donate to. When you've decided how your scheme will run and when it will start, you need to let your staff know so they can decide if they're going to donate. The employee's role Employees are responsible for checking the donee organisation they choose is on the approved donee list. They're also responsible for giving you sufficient information for you to pass on their donation to the donee organisation. This includes: • donee organisation's name • amount of the donation • pay period, or periods, they want to donate in • bank account or postal address details for the donee organisation. Employees will receive tax credits for donations made through payroll giving in their pay. They cannot claim the same donations at the end of the year on the Tax credit claim form - IR526. Employees can use the IR526 to claim tax credits for donations not made through payroll giving. What is a donee organisation? A donee organisation is an organisation that has Inland Revenue donee status. Individuals, companies and Māori authorities can get certain tax benefits by making gifts of money to a donee organisation. A charity can also be a donee organisation. Note: Only Inland Revenue-approved donee organisations listed on our website at ird.govt.nz/donee are eligible to receive donations under payroll giving. If any of your employees ask you to donate to an organisation that isn't on our approved list, don't give them the tax credits. You may not wish to make the requested donation, but if you do, the donation made will not form part of the payroll giving scheme and not be eligible for tax credits for payroll donations. You may wish to discuss this with your employee. If you make a deduction for a donation and later discover the donee organisation isn't on the approved donee list, you must adjust the employee's PAYE. See page 11 "Correcting tax credits for payroll donations after you've filed your Employment information". Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 7 Calculating tax credits for payroll donations The tax credit for payroll donations is 33⅓ cents for each dollar donated. Calculate the tax credit for payroll donations and then reduce your employees' PAYE by the amount of this tax credit. Tax credits for payroll donations must not exceed the amount of tax for the pay period. Example Employee's gross wage$762.00 Donation amount$10.00 PAY E$150.08 Tax credit for payroll donation ($10.00 × 33⅓)$3.33 PAYE less tax credits for payroll donation$146.75 Employee's gross wage$762.00 less PAYE less tax credits for payroll donation$146.75 less donation$10.00 Employee's take home pay$605.25 You can use our PAYE/KiwiSaver calculator at ird.govt.nz/tools-calculators to calculate tax credits for payroll donations. Maximum donation amount Before donating, employees must have met all their tax obligations and had any legally required payments deducted from their pay. These include: • PAYE (tax and ACC earner levy) • student loan • child support • KiwiSaver. Example Paul’s tax code is M SL and he earns $1,400 a week. He is a KiwiSaver member contributing 4% of his pay and is also paying off his student loan. Paul wants to donate $200 to his local sports group, which is on the approved donee list. He checks the maximum donation he could make. Weekly wage$1,400.00 less PAYE$306.84 less KiwiSaver$56.00 less student loan$121.80 Maximum donation amount$915.36 He works out he could donate up to $885.87 so goes ahead with his donation of $200 and gets a tax credit of $66.66 ($200 donation × 33⅓%). Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 8 Employee pay details You need to provide each employee with a record of their donations and the tax credits they receive. Example Employee’s monthly pay slip. Gross wage$4,164.00 less PAYE (including ACC earners' levy)$724.14 less student loan$299.00 less KiwiSaver employee deduction$166.40 Donation (not on IR348)$150.00 Total deductions$1,340.80 plus tax credit for payroll donations$49.99 Take home pay (after donation)$2,873.19 The deductions for KiwiSaver and student loans have been calculated using the tax code M SL as at April 2020. The KiwiSaver employee deduction rate shown in this example is 4%. Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 9 Employment information You must record tax credits for payroll donations for your employee’s donations on your Employment information - IR348. The image below shows the employment information submission screen in your myIR payroll account. Use the ’Payroll donations’ field for this. Leave the field blank for any employees who don’t make donations. All tax credits for payroll donation entries will be added up and the total amount will show in the Total tax credits for payroll donations field. If you don’t offer payroll giving, these fields remain blank. Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 10 Employment information submissions You can check the details you’ve sent us by clicking on the “View submissions” box in your myIR Payroll returns account. If you want to see more details for an individual employee, simply select their name and a breakdown of their details will be displayed. 111-111-111 Payroll giving ird.govt.nz 11 Correcting tax credits for payroll donations after you’ve filed your IR348 If you’ve filed your employment information and then want to amend the tax credit amount you’ve recorded, you can do this in the Payroll returns account in myIR. Disallowed tax credits for payroll donations and penalties Situations where we will disallow tax credits for payroll donations include where a donation has been passed to a non-approved donee or where the donation has not been passed to the donee organisation within the specified timeframe. See page 5 to find out how to work out the timeframe. Keeping records Employers must keep any receipts received from donee organisations for donations made under the payroll giving scheme. Donee organisations may decide to issue receipts for donations made through payroll giving. These receipts should be clearly marked "payroll giving". Keep these receipts with your payroll records and don't include them as business or individual donation receipts for tax purposes. You may keep your records stored electronically, but you must be able to print them out if we ask you to. Keep all records for seven years. Need more help? ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online from the myIR login screen and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you. How to get our forms and guides You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides