ird.govt.nz/working-for-families 0800 227 773 ird.govt.nz/childsupport 0800 221 221 The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Families Ngā Whanāu This is a quick guide to show you what types of payments you may be entitled to and how to apply for them. Working for Families Tax Credits (WfFTC) are payments to help make it easier for you to work and raise a family. They're payments for families with dependent children aged 18 or under. There are different WfFTC payments and you may qualify for one or more, depending on your personal situation. Who can receive WfFTC To be eligible for WfFTC, you must: • be aged 16 years or older and the person responsible for the day-to-day care of the children, and • care for the children on more than a temporary basis (eg, not a child minder) The children must: • be 18 years or under, and • not be financially independent. One of these residency requirements must be met: • You were a New Zealand resident and present in New Zealand continuously for at least 12 months at any time. You must also be a New Zealand tax resident for the period you are claiming payments. However, you or your spouse, civil union or de facto partner cannot be claiming the transitional tax resident exemption. • Your child or children are both resident and present in New Zealand throughout the period you are claiming WfFTC payments. The WfFTC payments Family tax credit This payment offers financial support for most families. The amount of payment depends on your family situation. In-work tax credit In-work tax credit is for families who are in paid work. You can’t get in-work tax credit if you get an income- tested benefit or student allowance. From 1 April 2021, you’ll keep receiving the in-work tax credit payments for up to two weeks during an unpaid break from work. For example, changing jobs, leaving employment, or unpaid time such as school holidays. If you or your partner start receiving an income-tested benefit or student allowance, your payments will stop. What are Working for Families Tax Credits? For more information, go to ird.govt.nz/topics/ working-for-families/types-of-working-for-families Minimum family tax credit Minimum family tax credit tops up your family income to a minimum amount after tax each week. To get this, at least one parent must be working for salary or wages. A two-parent family must work at least 30 hours a week between them, and a single parent must work at least 20 hours a week. Best Start tax credit Best Start tax credit helps families with the costs in a child's first three years. You can't get Best Start tax credit while you receive paid parental leave for the same child. If you're entitled to both, your Best Start tax credit payments will start after your paid parental leave payments finish. How to apply for WfFTC If your main income is a benefit from Work and Income, you'll generally get your family tax credit from them. If you don't get a benefit, or if you want us to pay your family tax credit, you can apply online in your myIR account or you can call us on 0800 227 773 Monday to Friday 8am to 8pm and Saturday 9am to 1pm if you have no access to our online service. When we receive your application, we'll work out your weekly or fortnightly payments and send you a Notice of entitlement. Note: You can apply for your baby's IRD number and the Best Start tax credit if you register your baby's birth online at smartstart.services.govt.nz If you register for Best Start tax credit through SmartStart and want to receive other WfFTC payments, you'll need to give us your income details. You can do this in myIR, or by calling us on 0800 227 773. If you choose to get your WfFTC at the end of the year, we'll send you a letter confirming your application. Your WfFTC will be worked out as a lump sum after the end of the tax year. IR691 | April 2021 ird.govt.nz/working-for-families 0800 227 773 ird.govt.nz/childsupport 0800 221 221 The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password? Request these online from the myIR login screen and we’ll send them to the email address we hold for you. How to make sure you get the right amount Changes in your family's situation may change your payments. It's important you let us know if: • a child comes into, or leaves, your care • the amount or type of your family income changes (including starting paid parental leave), and • your partner's details change. It's also important you let us know if you're going to get more overtime or a bonus payment. You can update your family's details online in myIR, by writing to us, or calling us on 0800 227 773. If you don't let us know when your situation changes, you may get less WfFTC than you should, or you may have to pay some back. You may be entitled to extra help Paid parental leave Paid parental leave is available to eligible parents and other primary carers (such as adoptive parents, Home for Life parents, whāngai and grandparents) when they take parental leave or stop working to care for their newborn or a child under the age of six who they now have primary responsibility for. Entitlement for paid parental leave Paid for up to... for a newborn child...for a child that comes into the customers care... 26 weekswith a due date or born on or after 1 July 2020 on or after 1 July 2020 If your baby is born prematurely (before the 37th week of pregnancy) you'll qualify for additional pre-term payments. These payments cover the time between your baby's date of birth up to the end of the 36th week. Your regular PPL entitlement will start after this. To find out more about paid parental leave, including information about pre-term payments, go to employment.govt.nz/leave-and-holidays/parental- leave or call the Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment on 0800 209 020. For more information To check what Working for Families Tax Credits you may be able to get, go to ird.govt.nz/working-for-families or you can call us on 0800 227 773 Monday to Friday 8am to 8pm and Saturday 9am to 1pm. When calling, you can ask for a Language Assistance interpreter. Language Assistance - Ezispeak is a free phone- based interpreter service for customers whose first or preferred language is not English. There are 180+ languages available – go to www.ezispeak.nz/languages-we-speak for the full list.