IR6B March 2022 Estate or trust beneficiary details Income Tax Act 2007 ••Use this form for the 2022 tax year only. See the guide for further details before completing this form. ••Complete this form and attach it to the top of page 3 of the IR6 estate or trust income tax return. ••The combined totals of Boxes 27I must equal Box 21A of the IR6 return. Estate or trust name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Beneficiary’s full name B en e f i c i a r y ’s date of birth or commencement date Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Street address or PO Box number Suburb, box lobby or RDTown or city Beneficiary’s jurisdiction of tax residency 27A Jurisdiction does not issue tax identification numbers (TINs) TIN not required in Jurisdiction Beneficiary income: Interest 27D Dividends 27E Māori authority distributions 27F Overseas income 27G Other income 27H Taxable income (sum of Boxes 27D to 27H) 27I Estate or trust paying tax on beneficiary’s income 27J No Yes (if no, only complete boxes 27K, 27M, 27O, 27Q 27U, 27V, 27W, 27X, 27Y, 27Z, 27AA, 27AB & 27AC) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 27K Tax on taxable income 27L Overseas tax paid 27M Subtract Box 27M from 27L. Print your answer in Box 27N 27N Imputation credits 27O Subtract Box 27O from Box 27N. Print your answer in Box 27P. If 27O is greater than 27N print 0.00 in Box 27P 27P Beneficiary’s IRD number 27B Beneficiary’s TIN 27C RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in box 27M and 27O) 27Q Subtract Box 27Q from Box 27P. Print your answer in Box 27R - if the result is negative, put a minus in the last box 27R Calculate tax on Box 27K at 45 cents in the dollar 27S Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. Add Boxes 27R and 27S. If the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box 27T Beneficiary account movements Opening balance If the amount is negative, put a minus sign in the last box 27U Accounting income and other distributions 27V Corpus 27W Capital 27X Use of trust property for less than market value 27Y Distribution of trust assets 27Z Forgiveness of debt 27AA Amounts withdrawn from the trust during the year If the amount is negative, put a minus in the last box (Negative amount indicates repayments made to previous withdrawals – this is to be added to the closing balance) 27AB Closing balance. Add boxes 27U, 27V, 27W, 27X, 27Y, 27Z, 27AA and then subtract 27AB if amounts were withdrawn. Print your answer in box 27AC. If the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box 27AC 2022 Privacy To find out what may happen to the information you provide on this form see the guide for further details. T o get more forms go to ird.govt.nz or see the guide for further details, or our self-service numbers. Beneficiary’s full name B en e f i c i a r y ’s date of birth or commencement date Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Street address or PO Box number Suburb, box lobby or RDTown or city Beneficiary’s jurisdiction of tax residency 27A Jurisdiction does not issue tax identification numbers (TINs) TIN not required in Jurisdiction Beneficiary income: Interest 27D Dividends 27E Māori authority distributions 27F Overseas income 27G Other income 27H Taxable income (sum of Boxes 27D to 27H) 27I Estate or trust paying tax on beneficiary’s income 27J No Yes (if no, only complete boxes 27K, 27M, 27O, 27Q 27U, 27V, 27W, 27X, 27Y, 27Z, 27AA, 27AB & 27AC) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 27K Tax on taxable income 27L Overseas tax paid 27M Subtract Box 27M from 27L. Print your answer in Box 27N 27N Imputation credits 27O Subtract Box 27O from Box 27N. Print your answer in Box 27P. If 27O is greater than 27N print 0.00 in Box 27P 27P Beneficiary’s IRD number 27B Beneficiary’s TIN 27C RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in box 27M and 27O) 27Q Subtract Box 27Q from Box 27P. Print your answer in Box 27R - if the result is negative, put a minus in the last box 27R Calculate tax on Box 27K at 45 cents in the dollar 27S Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. Add Boxes 27R and 27S. If the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box 27T Beneficiary account movements Opening balance If the amount is negative, put a minus sign in the last box 27U Accounting income and other distributions 27V Corpus 27W Capital 27X Use of trust property for less than market value 27Y Distribution of trust assets 27Z Forgiveness of debt 27AA Amounts withdrawn from the trust during the year If the amount is negative, put a minus in the last box (Negative amount indicates repayments made to previous withdrawals – this is to be added to the closing balance) 27AB Closing balance. Add boxes 27U, 27V, 27W, 27X, 27Y, 27Z, 27AA and then subtract 27AB if amounts were withdrawn. Print your answer in box 27AC. If the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box 27AC