IR6B March 2020 Estate or trust beneficiary details Income Tax Act 2007 ••Use this form for the 2020 tax year only. Read pages 43 to 48 of the IR6 guide before completing this form. ••Complete this form and attach it to the top of page 3 of the IR6 estate or trust income tax return. ••Remember - the combined totals of Boxes 26H must equal Box 22B of the IR6 return. Estate or trust name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 26A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 26B NoYes - special rules apply. See pages 43 to 44 of the guide. Allocation of income Interest 26C Dividends 26D Māori authority distributions 26E Overseas income 26F Other income 26G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 26C to 26G) 26H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 26I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 26L, 26N, 26P) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 26J Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 26H - see page 46 of the guide. 26K Overseas tax paid 26L Subtract Box 26L from Box 26K. Print your answer in Box 26M. 26M Imputation credits 26N Subtract Box 26N from Box 26M. Print your answer in Box 26O. If 26N is greater than 26M print 0.00 in Box 26O. 26O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 26L and 26N) 26P Subtract Box 26P from Box 26O. Print your answer in Box 26Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 26Q Calculate tax on Box 26J at 45 cents in the dollar 26R Add Boxes 26Q and 26R. Print your answer in Box 26S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 26S If Box 26S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 26A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 26B NoYes - special rules apply. See pages 43 to 44 of the guide. Allocation of income Interest 26C Dividends 26D Māori authority distributions 26E Overseas income 26F Other income 26G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 26C to 26G) 26H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 26I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 26L, 26N, 26P) Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 26H - see page 46 of the guide. 26K Overseas tax paid 26L Subtract Box 26L from Box 26K. Print your answer in Box 26M. 26M Imputation credits 26N Subtract Box 26N from Box 26M. Print your answer in Box 26O. If 26N is greater than 26M print 0.00 in Box 26O. 26O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 26L and 26N) 26P Subtract Box 26P from Box 26O. Print your answer in Box 26Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 26Q Calculate tax on Box 26J at 45 cents in the dollar 26R 2020 Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 26J Add Boxes 26Q and 26R. Print your answer in Box 26S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 26S If Box 26S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 26A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 26B NoYes - special rules apply. See pages 43 to 44 of the guide. Allocation of income Interest 26C Dividends 26D Māori authority distributions 26E Overseas income 26F Other income 26G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 26C to 26G) 26H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 26I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 26L, 26N, 26P) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 26J Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 26H - see page 46 of the guide. 26K Overseas tax paid 26L Subtract Box 26L from Box 26K. Print your answer in Box 26M. 26M Imputation credits 26N Subtract Box 26N from Box 26M. Print your answer in Box 26O. If 26N is greater than 26M print 0.00 in Box 26O. 26O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 26L and 26N) 26P Subtract Box 26P from Box 26O. Print your answer in Box 26Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 26Q Calculate tax on Box 26J at 45 cents in the dollar 26R Add Boxes 26Q and 26R. Print your answer in Box 26S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 26S If Box 26S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 26A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 26B NoYes - special rules apply. See pages 43 to 44 of the guide. Allocation of income Interest 26C Dividends 26D Māori authority distributions 26E Overseas income 26F Other income 26G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 26C to 26G) 26H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 26I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 26L, 26N, 26P) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 26J Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 26H - see page 46 of the guide. 26K Overseas tax paid 26L Subtract Box 26L from Box 26K. Print your answer in Box 26M. 26M Imputation credits 26N Subtract Box 26N from Box 26M. Print your answer in Box 26O. If 26N is greater than 26M print 0.00 in Box 26O. 26O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 26L and 26N) 26P Subtract Box 26P from Box 26O. Print your answer in Box 26Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 26Q Calculate tax on Box 26J at 45 cents in the dollar 26R Add Boxes 26Q and 26R. Print your answer in Box 26S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 26S If Box 26S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Privacy To find out what may happen to the information you provide on this form read the note on page 62 of the guide. To get more forms go to ird.govt.nz or see page 61 of the guide for our self-service numbers.