IR6B March 2018 Estate or trust beneficiary details Income Tax Act 2007 •Use this form for the 2018 tax year only. Read pages 35 to 40 of the IR6 guide before completing this form. •Complete this form and attach it to the top of page 3 of the IR6 estate or trust income tax return. •Remember - the combined totals of Boxes 24H must equal Box 18A of the IR6 return. Estate or trust nameIRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 24A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 24B NoYes - special rules apply. See pages 37 and 38 of the guide. Allocation of income Interest 24C Dividends 24D Māori authority distributions 24E Overseas income 24F Other income 24G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 24C to 24G) 24H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 24I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 24L, 24N, 24P) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 24J Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 24H - see page 38 of the guide. 24K Overseas tax paid 24L Subtract Box 24L from Box 24K. Print your answer in Box 24M. 24M Imputation credits 24N Subtract Box 24N from Box 24M. Print your answer in Box 24O. If 24N is greater than 24M print 0.00 in Box 24O. 24O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 24L and 24N) 24P Subtract Box 24P from Box 24O. Print your answer in Box 24Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 24Q Calculate tax on Box 24J at 45 cents in the dollar 24R Add Boxes 24Q and 24R. Print your answer in Box 24S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 24S If Box 24S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 24A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 24B NoYes - special rules apply. See pages 37 and 38 of the guide. Allocation of income Interest 24C Dividends 24D Māori authority distributions 24E Overseas income 24F Other income 24G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 24C to 24G) 24H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 24I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 24L, 24N, 24P) Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 24H - see page 38 of the guide. 24K Overseas tax paid 24L Subtract Box 24L from Box 24K. Print your answer in Box 24M. 24M Imputation credits 24N Subtract Box 24N from Box 24M. Print your answer in Box 24O. If 24N is greater than 24M print 0.00 in Box 24O. 24O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 24L and 24N) 24P Subtract Box 24P from Box 24O. Print your answer in Box 24Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 24Q Calculate tax on Box 24J at 45 cents in the dollar 24R 2018 Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 24J Add Boxes 24Q and 24R. Print your answer in Box 24S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 24S If Box 24S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one)CreditDebit Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 24A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 24B NoYes - special rules apply. See pages 37 and 38 of the guide. Allocation of income Interest 24C Dividends 24D Māori authority distributions 24E Overseas income 24F Other income 24G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 24C to 24G) 24H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 24I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 24L, 24N, 24P) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 24J Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 24H - see page 38 of the guide. 24K Overseas tax paid 24L Subtract Box 24L from Box 24K. Print your answer in Box 24M. 24M Imputation credits 24N Subtract Box 24N from Box 24M. Print your answer in Box 24O. If 24N is greater than 24M print 0.00 in Box 24O. 24O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 24L and 24N) 24P Subtract Box 24P from Box 24O. Print your answer in Box 24Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 24Q Calculate tax on Box 24J at 45 cents in the dollar 24R Add Boxes 24Q and 24R. Print your answer in Box 24S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 24S If Box 24S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 24A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 24B NoYes - special rules apply. See pages 37 and 38 of the guide. Allocation of income Interest 24C Dividends 24D Māori authority distributions 24E Overseas income 24F Other income 24G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 24C to 24G) 24H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 24I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 24L, 24N, 24P) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 24J Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 24H - see page 38 of the guide. 24K Overseas tax paid 24L Subtract Box 24L from Box 24K. Print your answer in Box 24M. 24M Imputation credits 24N Subtract Box 24N from Box 24M. Print your answer in Box 24O. If 24N is greater than 24M print 0.00 in Box 24O. 24O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 24L and 24N) 24P Subtract Box 24P from Box 24O. Print your answer in Box 24Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 24Q Calculate tax on Box 24J at 45 cents in the dollar 24R Add Boxes 24Q and 24R. Print your answer in Box 24S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 24S If Box 24S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Privacy To find out what may happen to the information you provide on this form read the note on page 56 of the guide. To get more forms go to www.ird.govt.nz or see page 55 of the guide for our self-service numbers.