IR6B March 2021 Estate or trust beneficiary details Income Tax Act 2007 ••Use this form for the 2021 tax year only. See the guide for further details before completing this form. ••Complete this form and attach it to the top of page 3 of the IR6 estate or trust income tax return. ••Remember - the combined totals of Boxes 27H must equal Box 20A of the IR6 return. Estate or trust name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 27A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 27B NoYes - special rules apply. See the guide for further details. Allocation of income Interest 27C Dividends 27D Māori authority distributions 27E Overseas income 27F Other income 27G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 27C to 27G) 27H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 27I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 27L, 27N, 27P) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 27J Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 27H - See the guide for further details. 27K Overseas tax paid 27L Subtract Box 27L from Box 27K. Print your answer in Box 27M. 27M Imputation credits 27N Subtract Box 27N from Box 27M. Print your answer in Box 27O. If 27N is greater than 27M print 0.00 in Box 27O. 27O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 27L and 27N) 27P Subtract Box 27P from Box 27O. Print your answer in Box 27Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 27Q Calculate tax on Box 27J at 45 cents in the dollar 27R Add Boxes 27Q and 27R. Print your answer in Box 27S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 27S If Box 27S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 27A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 27B NoYes - special rules apply. See the guide for further details. Allocation of income Interest 27C Dividends 27D Māori authority distributions 27E Overseas income 27F Other income 27G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 27C to 27G) 27H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 27I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 27L, 27N, 27P) Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 27H - See the guide for further details. 27K Overseas tax paid 27L Subtract Box 27L from Box 27K. Print your answer in Box 27M. 27M Imputation credits 27N Subtract Box 27N from Box 27M. Print your answer in Box 27O. If 27N is greater than 27M print 0.00 in Box 27O. 27O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 27L and 27N) 27P Subtract Box 27P from Box 27O. Print your answer in Box 27Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 27Q Calculate tax on Box 27J at 45 cents in the dollar 27R 2021 Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 27J Add Boxes 27Q and 27R. Print your answer in Box 27S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 27S If Box 27S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 27A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 27B NoYes - special rules apply. See the guide for further details. Allocation of income Interest 27C Dividends 27D Māori authority distributions 27E Overseas income 27F Other income 27G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 27C to 27G) 27H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 27I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 27L, 27N, 27P) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 27J Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 27H - See the guide for further details. 27K Overseas tax paid 27L Subtract Box 27L from Box 27K. Print your answer in Box 27M. 27M Imputation credits 27N Subtract Box 27N from Box 27M. Print your answer in Box 27O. If 27N is greater than 27M print 0.00 in Box 27O. 27O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 27L and 27N) 27P Subtract Box 27P from Box 27O. Print your answer in Box 27Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 27Q Calculate tax on Box 27J at 45 cents in the dollar 27R Add Boxes 27Q and 27R. Print your answer in Box 27S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 27S If Box 27S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Beneficiary’s full nameDate of birth Day Month Year Beneficiary’s full address Beneficiary’s IRD number 27A Is the beneficiary a non-resident for tax purposes? 27B NoYes - special rules apply. See the guide for further details. Allocation of income Interest 27C Dividends 27D Māori authority distributions 27E Overseas income 27F Other income 27G Taxable income (sum of Boxes 27C to 27G) 27H Is the estate or trust paying the tax on the beneficiary’s income? 27I NoYes (if no, only complete boxes 27L, 27N, 27P) Taxable distribution by non-complying trust 27J Calculate tax on taxable income in Box 27H - See the guide for further details. 27K Overseas tax paid 27L Subtract Box 27L from Box 27K. Print your answer in Box 27M. 27M Imputation credits 27N Subtract Box 27N from Box 27M. Print your answer in Box 27O. If 27N is greater than 27M print 0.00 in Box 27O. 27O RWT and other tax credits (exclude any amounts shown in Boxes 27L and 27N) 27P Subtract Box 27P from Box 27O. Print your answer in Box 27Q - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. 27Q Calculate tax on Box 27J at 45 cents in the dollar 27R Add Boxes 27Q and 27R. Print your answer in Box 27S - if the result is negative, put a minus sign in the last box. Total tax payable on beneficiary’s income. 27S If Box 27S is negative, tick credit or if positive, tick debit. (Tick one) CreditDebit Privacy To find out what may happen to the information you provide on this form see the guide for further details. To get more forms go to ird.govt.nz or see the guide for further details, or our self-service numbers.