If the partnership's or LTC's name and IRD number are shown correctly above, go straight to Question 3. 1.If the partnership's or LTC's IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 1 2.If the correct partnership or LTC name is not shown above, print it in Box 2. 2 3.If the partnership's or LTC's trading name has changed or is not shown below, print it in Box 3. 3 4.If the correct postal address is not shown above, and is different to the street address below, print the full address in Box 4. Don't print your tax agent's address here. 4 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town, city or region below 5.If the correct street address is not shown below, print it in full in Box 5. 5 Please put street address above and suburb or RD and town, city or region below 6.Print your business industry classification (BIC) code in Box 6. See the guide for further details. 6 7.If the correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in Box 7. 7 8.Is this the partnership's or LTC's first return? No Go to Question 9. 8 Ye s Print the date the partnership or LTC began in Box 8. Day Month Year 9.Has the partnership or LTC ceased? No Go to Question 10. Ye s See the guide for further details. If you have no gross income or claimable losses, and no disclosures to make at Question 27, see the guide for further details. Then complete and sign the declaration at the end of this return. You don't need to answer any further questions. Income tax return Partnerships and look-through companies (LTCs) Income Tax Act 2007, Tax Administration Act 1994 IR7 2021 1 April 2020 to 31 March 2021The 2021 IR7 guide is available on our website. To view a copy go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Income 10.Did the partnership or LTC receive any schedular payments? No Go to Question 11.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the totals here. Total tax deductedTotal gross schedular payments 10A10B 11.Did the partnership or LTC have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to it? No Go to Question 12.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the totals here. Keep any certificates. To t a l RW TTotal gross interest - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 11A11B 12.Did the partnership or LTC have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to it, or did the partnership or LTC receive shares instead of dividends? Include any dividends from partnerships, LTCs or trusts. No Go to Question 13.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the totals here. Keep any statements. Total dividend imputation credits 12 Total dividend RWT creditsTotal gross dividends 12A12B 13.Did the partnership or LTC receive any taxable distributions from a Māori authority? No Go to Question 14.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the totals here. Keep your Māori authority distribution statements. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distribution 13A13B 14.Did the partnership or LTC receive any income from another partnership? (Exclude any income/losses received you have included at Questions 11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21.) No Go to Question 15.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the totals here. Total partnership tax creditsTotal partnership income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 14A14B 15.Did the LTC receive any income from another LTC? (Exclude any income/loss received that you've included at Questions 11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21.) No Go to Question 16.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the totals here. Total LTC tax credits 15A Total active LTC income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 15B Non-allowable deductions this year 15C Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 15D Adjusted LTC income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. Either add Boxes 15B and 15C, or subtract Box 15D from 15B. Print your answer in Box 15E. 15E 16.Did the partnership or LTC receive any income from overseas? No Go to Question 17.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the totals here. Total overseas tax paid To t a l overseas income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 16A16B 17.Did the partnership or LTC receive income from business activities? No Go to Question 18.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the total here. Net income from business activities - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 17B 18.Did the partnership or LTC receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? No Go to Question 19.Ye s Print the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using (tick one) Portfolio Individual Combination Total residential income 18B Residential rental deductions 18C 19.Did the partnership or LTC receive income from other rental activities? (Do not include any income already shown at Question 18.) No Go to Question 20.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the total here. Net income from rental activities - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 19B 20.Did the partnership or LTC receive any income from taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in the return? (Do not include any bright-line loss.) No Go to Question 21.Ye s Print details here. See the guide for further details. Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) credit Profit/loss from sale of property - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 20A20B 21.Did the partnership or LTC receive any other income? No Go to Question 22.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the total here. Name of payerTotal other income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 21B Type of income 22.Total income/loss Add Boxes 10B to 14B, 15E and 16B to 21B. Print the total in Box 22. Total income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 22 23.Can the partnership or LTC claim expenses? No Go to Question 24.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the total here. Total expenses 23 24.Total income/loss after expenses Subtract the amount in Box 23 from the total income in Box 22. Print your answer in Box 24. This amount must be completely attributed to the partners or owner(s). Total income after expenses - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 24 25.Did the partnership or LTC have any losses extinguished on transitioning from a qualifying company (QC) or loss attributing qualifying company (LAQC)? No Go to Question 26.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the amounts here. Extinguished losses 25 Prior years' deductionsDeductions claimed this year 25A25B Attribution of income/loss See the guide for further details before attributing income/loss. 26.Attribution of income/loss details attached are for (please tick one): 26 a partnership (IR7P)a look-through company (IR7L) Additional disclosure of foreign investments and BEPS legislation 27.If the partnership or LTC calculates CFC or FIF income under Question 16 or is required to provide BEPS information, see the guide for further details. Tick "yes" if additional disclosure is required. 27 NoGo to Question 28.Ye sGo to Question 28. Declaration 28.Read this declaration and sign the return. This is a true and correct return for the year ended 31 March 2021. Signature / / Date There are penalties for not putting in a tax return or putting in a false return. Keep a copy of this return for your own records. 29.What to do next  Remember - the last day for us to receive your return is 7 July 2021 unless you have an extension of time or a non-standard balance date.  Attach all necessary papers to the top of this page and make sure the partnership's or LTC's name and IRD number are on all papers.  All partners and owners must include their share of the partnership or LTC income/loss in their individual tax returns.  Post the return to us in the envelope supplied, or send to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045. March 2021 OFFICE USE ONLY 30 Correspondence indicatorAccounts includedYe sNo