If the partnership's or LTC's name and IRD number are shown correctly above, go straight to Question 3. 1.If the partnership's or LTC's IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 1 2.If the correct partnership or LTC name is not shown above, print it in Box 2. 2 3.If the partnership's or LTC's trading name has changed or is not shown below, print it in Box 3. 3 4.If the correct postal address is not shown above, and is different to the street address below, print the full address in Box 4. Do not print your tax preparer’s address here. 4 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town, city or region below 5.If the correct street address is not shown below, print it in full in Box 5. 5 Please put street address above and suburb or RD and town, city or region below 6.Print your business industry classification (BIC) code in Box 6. See the guide for further details. 6 7.If the correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in Box 7. 7 8.Is this the partnership's or LTC's first return? No Go to Question 9. 8 Ye s Print the date the partnership or LTC began in Box 8. Day Month Year 9.Has the partnership or LTC ceased? No Go to Question 10. Ye s See the guide for further details. If you have no gross income or claimable losses, and no disclosures to make at Question 28, see the guide for further details. Then complete and sign the declaration at the end of this return. You do not need to answer any further questions. Income tax return Partnerships and look-through companies (LTCs) Income Tax Act 2007, Tax Administration Act 1994 IR7 2023 1 April 2022 to 31 March 2023The 2023 IR7 guide is available on our website. To view a copy go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Income 10.Did the partnership or LTC receive any schedular payments? No Go to Question 11.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total tax deductedTotal gross schedular payments 10A10B 11.Did the partnership or LTC have any New Zealand interest paid or credited to it? No Go to Question 12.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Keep any certificates. To t a l RW TTotal gross interest - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 11A11B 12.Did the partnership or LTC have any New Zealand dividends paid or credited to it, or did the partnership or LTC receive shares instead of dividends? Include any dividends from partnerships, LTCs or trusts. No Go to Question 13.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Keep any statements. Total dividend imputation credits 12 Total dividend RWT creditsTotal gross dividends 12A12B 13.Did the partnership or LTC receive any taxable distributions from a Māori authority? No Go to Question 14.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Keep your Māori authority distribution statements. Total Māori authority creditsTotal Māori authority distribution 13A13B 14.Did the partnership or LTC receive any income from another partnership? (Exclude any income/losses received you have included at Questions 11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22.) No Go to Question 15.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total partnership tax creditsTotal partnership income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 14A14B 15.Did the LTC receive any income from another LTC? (Exclude any income/loss received that you've included at Questions 11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22.) No Go to Question 16.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total LTC tax credits 15A Total active LTC income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 15B Non-allowable deductions this year 15C Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 15D Adjusted LTC income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. Either add Boxes 15B and 15C, or subtract Box 15D from 15B. Print your answer in Box 15E. 15E 16.Did the partnership or LTC receive any income from overseas? No Go to Question 17.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total overseas tax paid To t a l overseas income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 16A16B 17.Did the partnership or LTC receive income from business activities? No Go to Question 18.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Net income from business activities - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 17B 18.Did the partnership or LTC receive any income or incur any expenses from residential property? No Go to Question 19.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Select which method you are using (tick one) Portfolio Individual Combination Gross residential rental incomeNet bright-line profit (excluding losses) 18B18C Other residential income Total combined residential income Add Boxes 18B, 18C and 18D. Print the total in Box 18E. 18D18E Residential rental deductions 18F 19.Did the partnership or LTC incur any interest from residential property? No Go to Question 20.Ye sSee the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total interest on residential propertyInterest expense claimed 19A $ 19B $ Reason for interest expense claimed 19C A Māori exempt company or not a residential land company New build exemption Certain schedule 15 exclusions or property not in NZ Development or land business exemption Loans drawn down prior to 27 March 2021 Emergency, transitional, social or council housing Approved build-to-rent exclusion 20.Did the partnership or LTC receive income from other rental activities? (Do not include any income already shown at Question 18.) No Go to Question 21.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Net income from rental activities - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 20B 21.Did the partnership or LTC receive any income from taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in the return? (Do not include any bright-line loss.) No Go to Question 22.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) credit Profit/loss from sale of property - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 21A21B 22.Did the partnership or LTC receive any other income? No Go to Question 23.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Name of payerTotal other income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 22B Type of income 23. Total income/loss Add Boxes 10B to 14B, 15E, 16B to 17B, 18E and 20B to 22B. Print the total in Box 23. Total income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 23 24.Can the partnership or LTC claim expenses? No Go to Question 25.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Total expenses 24 25. Total income/loss after expenses Subtract the amount in Box 24 from the total income in Box 23. Print your answer in Box 25. This amount must be completely attributed to the partners or owner(s). Total income after expenses - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box 25 26.Did the partnership or LTC have any losses extinguished on transitioning from a qualifying company (QC) or loss attributing qualifying company (LAQC)? No Go to Question 27.Ye s See the guide for further details. Print the details below. Extinguished losses 26 Prior years' deductionsDeductions claimed this year 26A26B Attribution of income/loss See the guide for further details before attributing income/loss. 27.Attribution of income/loss details attached are for (please tick one): 27 a partnership (IR7P)a look-through company (IR7L) Additional disclosure of foreign investments and BEPS legislation 28. If the partnership or LTC calculates CFC or FIF income under Question 16 or is required to provide BEPS information, see the guide for further details. Tick "yes" if additional disclosure is required. 28 NoYe s Declaration 29. Read this declaration and sign the return. The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2023 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. Signature / / Date There are penalties for not putting in a tax return or putting in a false return. Keep a copy of this return for your own records. 30. What to do next Remember - the last day for us to receive your return is 7 July 2023 unless you have an extension of time or a non-standard balance date. Attach all necessary papers to the top of this page and make sure the partnership's or LTC's name and IRD number are on all papers. All partners and owners must include their share of the partnership or LTC income/loss in their individual tax returns. Post the return to us in the envelope supplied, or send to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045. March 2023 OFFICE USE ONLY 31 Correspondence indicatorAccounts includedYe sNo