1 IR719 October 2023 Application for a higher maximum pooling value About this form If you depreciate items of depreciable property using the pooling method there is a statutory maximum pooling value of $5000 for each item. However, you can apply for a maximum pooling value higher than this by completing this form. We take the following factors into consideration when deciding whether to approve your application: –whether the items you wish to include under a higher maximum pooling value are relatively similar in nature; –whether your compliance costs will be materially reduced by pooling the items; and –how often you acquire and dispose of that class of item. Fees are payable for this application. Notes concerning fees, as well as the process and timeframe for responding to this application, are contained at the end of this form. Further information about depreciation is contained in the booklet Depreciation - a guide for businesses - IR260. Completed applications are to be sent to: Technical Lead, Legal Services – Technical Standards, Inland Revenue, PO Box 2198, Wellington 6140 or email TechnicalStandards@ird.govt.nz Applicant’s details Taxpayer’s full name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box 112 345 678 ) Address St reet address or PO Box Sub urb Town or City Postcode Phone number ( ) E-mail address Contact person for enquiries Instructions for completing this form Complete the item details for each type of item of depreciable property that you would like a higher maximum pooling value for. If this application relates to more than four types of items, please make photocopies of the following pages and staple them to this form. It may be useful to refer to the Commissioner’s Table of Depreciation to identify the industry or asset category and the asset class of your items, this is available in the booklet General depreciation rates - IR265 on our website ird.govt.nz 2 Item details Industry or asset category (As listed in the Commissioner’s Table of Depreciation Rates) Asset class (As listed in the Commissioner’s Table of Depreciation Rates) Specific item(s) (If you are applying for a higher maximum pooling value for all of your items under this asset class, write ‘not applicable’ here. If you are applying for a higher maximum pooling value for only some of your items under this asset class, describe the specific types of item – for example ‘all those acquired after 1 April 2006’. The answers you give to the subsequent questions should relate to the items described here.) Current number of items Average period of ownership of the items by your business Average number of items: purchased each year Average number of items: disposed of each year Current average replacement cost per item Higher maximum pooling value requested $ (excl GST) $ (excl GST) Additional number of items that could be pooled (How many more items of this type could you pool under the higher maximum pooling value you are applying for than under the statutory $5000 maximum pooling value?) Estimated savings in compliance costs each year (How much do you estimate you would save in compliance costs each year if we approve the higher maximum pooling value you are seeking for this type of item? You should include the savings you will make in professional advice, clerical time, computing costs, overheads and other related costs.) $ From what income year would you like the higher maximum pooling value to apply from? (that is, the income year in which your application is made or the following income year?) Industry or asset category (As listed in the Commissioner’s Table of Depreciation Rates) Asset class (As listed in the Commissioner’s Table of Depreciation Rates) Specific item(s) (If you are applying for a higher maximum pooling value for all of your items under this asset class, write ‘not applicable’ here. If you are applying for a higher maximum pooling value for only some of your items under this asset class, describe the specific types of item – for example ‘all those acquired after 1 April 2006’. The answers you give to the subsequent questions should relate to the items described here.) Current number of items Average period of ownership of the items by your business Average number of items: purchased each year Average number of items: disposed of each year Current average replacement cost per item Higher maximum pooling value requested $ (excl GST) $ (excl GST) Additional number of items that could be pooled (How many more items of this type could you pool under the higher maximum pooling value you are applying for than under the statutory $5000 maximum pooling value?) Estimated savings in compliance costs each year (How much do you estimate you would save in compliance costs each year if we approve the higher maximum pooling value you are seeking for this type of item? You should include the savings you will make in professional advice, clerical time, computing costs, overheads and other related costs.) $ From what income year would you like the higher maximum pooling value to apply from? (that is, the income year in which your application is made or the following income year?) 3 Item details Industry or asset category (As listed in the Commissioner’s Table of Depreciation Rates) Asset class (As listed in the Commissioner’s Table of Depreciation Rates) Specific item(s) (If you are applying for a higher maximum pooling value for all of your items under this asset class, write ‘not applicable’ here. If you are applying for a higher maximum pooling value for only some of your items under this asset class, describe the specific types of item – for example ‘all those acquired after 1 April 2006’. The answers you give to the subsequent questions should relate to the items described here.) Current number of items Average period of ownership of the items by your business Average number of items: purchased each year Average number of items: disposed of each year Current average replacement cost per item Higher maximum pooling value requested $ (excl GST) $ (excl GST) Additional number of items that could be pooled (How many more items of this type could you pool under the higher maximum pooling value you are applying for than under the statutory $5000 maximum pooling value?) Estimated savings in compliance costs each year (How much do you estimate you would save in compliance costs each year if we approve the higher maximum pooling value you are seeking for this type of item? You should include the savings you will make in professional advice, clerical time, computing costs, overheads and other related costs.) $ From what income year would you like the higher maximum pooling value to apply from? (that is, the income year in which your application is made or the following income year?) Industry or asset category (As listed in the Commissioner’s Table of Depreciation Rates) Asset class (As listed in the Commissioner’s Table of Depreciation Rates) Specific item(s) (If you are applying for a higher maximum pooling value for all of your items under this asset class, write ‘not applicable’ here. If you are applying for a higher maximum pooling value for only some of your items under this asset class, describe the specific types of item – for example ‘all those acquired after 1 April 2006’. The answers you give to the subsequent questions should relate to the items described here.) Current number of items Average period of ownership of the items by your business Average number of items: purchased each year Average number of items: disposed of each year Current average replacement cost per item Higher maximum pooling value requested $ (excl GST) $ (excl GST) Additional number of items that could be pooled (How many more items of this type could you pool under the higher maximum pooling value you are applying for than under the statutory $5000 maximum pooling value?) Estimated savings in compliance costs each year (How much do you estimate you would save in compliance costs each year if we approve the higher maximum pooling value you are seeking for this type of item? You should include the savings you will make in professional advice, clerical time, computing costs, overheads and other related costs.) $ From what income year would you like the higher maximum pooling value to apply from? (that is, the income year in which your application is made or the following income year?) 4 Declaration The details contained in this application are true and correct. I/We consent to the Commissioner referring the information contained in this application to a consultant to provide professional advice in order to make a determination. Signature Date Please complete this checklist Tick Have you: □ Answered every question? □ Attached any photocopied sheets for additional types of items? □ Paid the initial application fee of $150 (plus GST)? □ Signed the declaration? Please send your completed application to: Technical Lead, Legal Services – Technical Standards, Inland Revenue, PO Box 2198, Wellington 6140 or email TechnicalStandards@ird.govt.nz Notes Procedure for setting a determination Once we have received this application we will issue you a letter acknowledging receipt. We may also contact you to request any additional information. We may also engage the services of a consultant valuer. Once we have all of the necessary information to issue the determination we will prepare a draft determination and send it to you, or will issue you with a notice that we are declining to issue a determination. You may request a conference to discuss the draft determination or decision to decline. Timeframe for response We will issue the determination you have applied for, or decide to decline to issue a determination, within six months of receiving a completed application. If this is not possible we will contact you to request that you agree to an extension of the time limit. We will issue you written notice of the decision and a copy of the determination or the reasons for declining to issue the determination within 30 days. Fees The following fees are payable for this application: –an in itial fee of $150 (plus GST) payable with the application, –a pr ocessing fee of $75 (plus GST) per hour (or part hour) after the first two hours for work by Inland Revenue staff, –if we engage a consultant to advise on the estimated useful life or estimated residual value of the asset, we’ll charge you the consultant’s fee (excluding GST), plus GST, –further fees for the costs of consultants if you request that the consultant carries out further work, or if they are required to attend a conference. We will provide you with an estimate of the fees that are likely to be incurred in issuing the determination shortly after we have started processing your application. Withdrawal of application You may withdraw an application at any time by writing to the address supplied above. Fees will be charged up to the date we receive your written notice of withdrawal. Further information For further information about depreciation, go to our website ird.govt.nz/depreciation or by reading our guide Depreciation - a guide for businesses - IR260. You may also seek further information by calling us on 0800 377 774.