•This form is for use by all taxpayers, either personally or by their authorised agent, applying for a status ruling following the amendment or repeal of a taxation law that is stated as applying in a private or product ruling they have applied for and obtained. •The Commissioner may only issue a status ruling for question(s) concerning the taxation laws contained in the private or product ruling to which this application applies. •Please read the IR715 Binding Rulings Booklet for information about the binding rulings process, including when we can and can’t give rulings. If you need further assistance, or to arrange a pre-lodgement meeting, please contact us at rulings@ird.govt.nz Ruling details Ruling to which the status ruling will apply B R Choose PRD or PRV and print above Applicant details Complete the details of the persons to whom this status ruling will apply. If there are not enough spaces, use a seperate sheet of paper and attach it to this form. The applicants must be the same as the applicants for the existing private or product ruling. If this is a joint application, please provide a separate schedule showing the following details for each joint applicant. Full name of applicant IRD number of applicant (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Full name of applicant IRD number of applicant (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Full name of applicant IRD number of applicant (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Agent details If this application is made on behalf of an applicant(s), the agent must have written consent from the applicant(s). The written consent must be supplied on request to the Commissioner. Agents business name Agents IRD number Contact person for enquires Daytime number ( ) Email address Postal address Application fee An initial application fee of $322.00 (including GST) is payable when the application is lodged. Processing your application will commence when the initial application fee is received. The application fee can be paid electronically through your bank’s internet facility. Application for status ruling IR712 February 2020 Agreement to Communicate with Inland Revenue via Email In order for us to email you about your application, please list all persons (including any support personnel) who are authorised to communicate with us about this application (in addition to the contact person named on page one). If there are not enough spaces, please use a separate sheet of paper and attach it to this form. Full name Email address Full name Email address Full name Email address Declarations I consent to communicate with Inland Revenue via email. I accept that Inland Revenue will communicate via email where appropriate in relation to the above application; understanding that at times these emails will contain confidential and or commercially sensitive information. Inland Revenue will take all reasonable steps to mitigate any risk of unauthorised access or disclosure of confidential information, but cannot guarantee that emails will not be intercepted or read by an unintended recipient. The details contained in this application are true and correct. I hold the written consent of the applicant(s). Signature of agent/applicant Date / / Checklist This checklist is a prompt to help you provide the best application for a private ruling possible which will minimise processing delays. • Have you had a pre-lodgement meeting? A pre-lodgement meeting is a requirement if you want a draft ruling within three months. Ye sNo • Have you identified the applicants and all parties to the arrangement, including counter-parties? Ye sNo • Have you identified the private or product ruling on which the status ruling is sought, and included a copy of that ruling? Ye sNo • Have you stated the taxation laws that have been amended or repealed and stated any propositions of law relevant to the issues raised? Ye sNo • Have you paid the application fee electronically? (If paying by cheque, post to address below). Ye sNo Email this form with your supporting documentation to rulings@ird.govt.nz