1 For full details go to ird.govt.nz/offshore IRD number application - non-resident/offshore individual IR742 July 2024 If these do not apply then use the IRD number application - resident individual - IR595 form. Note: If you're an Australian citizen present in New Zealand at the time you're applying for your IRD number you will complete an IRD number application - resident individual - IR595 form. Only use this form if you're a non-resident or offshore person. An offshore person is someone who: oror • is a New Zealand citizen who has been overseas for the last three or more years continuously (and is not currently in New Zealand), • does not have a New Zealand residence visa granted by Immigration New Zealand, • has a New Zealand residence class visa and has been overseas for the last twelve months continuously (and is not currently in New Zealand). To apply for an IRD number for you or a child in your care Use the applicant checklist on page 2 before completing the form and signing the declaration on page 5. If you're in New Zealand take the form with the original and legible copies of supporting documents and photo ID for an "In person verification" to an Automobile Association (AA) Driver Licensing agent. If you're outside New Zealand, and you understand that Inland Revenue can't guarantee that emails won't be intercepted or read while in transit, email to: offshore@ird.govt.nz or post to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39050, Wellington Mail Centre 5045, New Zealand If you’re outside New Zealand only send legible copies of supporting documents and photo ID. If your request is URGENT then clearly state the reason why on a separate piece of paper. If you have any questions about the required documents please call us on 0800 377 774 (if calling from New Zealand) or +64 3 951 2020 (if calling from overseas). If the documents you provide are in another name, you must provide a legible copy of the document that confirms how your name was changed, eg, marriage certificate, deed poll, change of name certificate. To apply for an IRD number for you You must provide each of the following: • a form of photographic identification, such as a passport or an overseas driver licence • proof of your current or most recent previous address, which may include: -a utility (eg, electricity or water) statement -national identity card or overseas driver licence (if not used as photographic identification) • proof of your intended activity in New Zealand, see the notes for Question 8 on page 2 • proof of your fully functional New Zealand bank account or proof that customer due diligence has been completed - see the notes for Question 10 on page 2. • proof of your taxpayer identification number (TIN) or reason why you do not have a TIN - see the notes for Question 9 on page 2 To apply for an IRD number for a child If you're applying for a child who is in your care and they're under 16, you must provide the following. For you: • a form of photographic identification - refer to "To apply for an IRD number for you". • proof of your current or most recent previous address - refer to "To apply for an IRD number for you". For the child: • a document which shows the relationship between you and the child, eg, -a full birth certificate -court documents showing the child's and caregiver's names, eg, adoption papers, parenting orders, guardianship orders • Documentation as stated in the section - To apply for an IRD number for you 2 Question 1 - children under 16 If you're applying on behalf of a child, the IRD number shown here must belong to the person who will provide the relevant documents identifying their relationship to the child. If you're also applying for an IRD number, attach the child's application to your own one. Questions 2-4 - applicant information • If you're completing the application for a child, enter the child's information in this section. • If you're completing the application for yourself, enter your information in this section. • If you're using a preferred name, which is different from your given name, you must provide a document confirming your preferred name. Questions 5 - current postal address Complete only if it's different from the residential address. If not a street address show one of the following: - PO Box - private or locked bag Line 1 - PO Box number Line 1 - private or locked bag number Line 2 - box lobby Line 2 - box lobby Do not show your tax agent's address here. Question 7 - contact information By ticking the box at Question 7b you agree to receive your new IRD number by email. If you provided a mobile phone number, you will also receive a text message with your new IRD number. Inland Revenue will take all reasonable steps to reduce any risk of unauthorised access or release of confidential information. If you do not provide consent, your IRD number will be mailed to the postal address you provided. Question 8 - reason for applying for an IRD number Provide proof of the following: • If buying and/or selling New Zealand real estate - the property purchase agreement or letter from your tax agent, lawyer, real estate agent, or property conveyancer confirming activity. • If for rental property - the rental agreement, property purchase agreement or letter from your tax agent confirming activity. • If for employment - your work visa or letter of employment on the employer's letterhead. • If for a student loan - the acceptance letter from the tertiary institution. • If a director or shareholder of New Zealand registered company - a copy of New Zealand Companies Office register or letter from your tax agent to confirm activity. • If a partner in a partnership - the partnership agreement or a letter from your tax agent confirming activity. • If a trustee of a trust - the trust deed or a letter from your tax agent confirming activity. • If "other", proof of activity or letter from your tax agent confirming activity. Question 9 - Taxpayer identification number If you have a taxpayer identification number (TIN) in another country/ jurisdiction outside of New Zealand or as well as New Zealand, you will need to show your most recent TIN and the country/jurisdiction it applies to. Or if you do not have a TIN, give the reason why you do not have one. A TIN can have a different name in other countries, eg, personal, national identity, tax or social security number. Question 10 - Fully functional New Zealand bank account or customer due diligence completed Bank account To prove that you have a fully functional New Zealand bank account, you can provide a bank statement showing at least one deposit and one withdrawal for differing amounts, or a letter from your bank advising the account is fully functional, active or has had Anti Money Laundering checks completed. You can take our Documents to confirm your New Zealand bank account is fully functional - IR984 to your bank. It provides the details your bank needs to confirm your bank account is active. You can download this form from our website ird.govt.nz/forms-guides to take to your bank to show the proof we require. Customer due diligence by a New Zealand reporting entity To prove customer due diligence the NZ reporting entity can complete question 10b on this form, or give you a letter confirming customer due diligence has been completed in accordance with the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act 2009. Customer due diligence must be completed by a NZ reporting entity. The Department of Internal Affairs, the Financial Markets Authority and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand provide lists of reporting entities. Where neither a NZ bank account or proof of customer due diligence can be obtained go to ird.govt.nz/offshore for more information. Question 11 - temporary tax exemption on foreign income (complete this question if you continue to receive income from overseas) You qualify for a temporary tax exemption on foreign income for four calendar years (up to 49 months) if you meet both these requirements: • You have qualified as a tax resident in New Zealand. • You have not been a New Zealand tax resident at any time in the 10 years prior to your arrival date in New Zealand. Please note: • You can only claim this exemption once. • You cannot receive Working for Families (if eligible) while your foreign income is tax-exempt. For more information on temporary tax exemption on foreign income, go to ird.govt.nz/tte Question 12 - non-resident contractor or non-resident seasonal worker • If you have arrived in New Zealand to work as an independent contractor (whether the person paying you is a New Zealand resident or not) you will be a "non-resident contractor" for the first 183 days (in any 12-month period) of your presence in New Zealand. • You are not an independent contractor if you're working as an employee receiving salary and/or wages from an employer. • Complete this section if you're a non-resident contractor or a non-resident seasonal worker and will be using the NSW tax code. For more information please ask your employer. Nominated persons We cannot discuss your tax affairs with anyone except you. However, you can nominate someone else to do this for you and have access to your Inland Revenue records once you have received your IRD number. You'll still be responsible for your own tax affairs, so you'll need to make sure any returns are filed and tax is paid by the due date. For more information, or if you wish to nominate someone to act on your behalf, complete an Elect someone to act on your behalf - IR597 form. You download this form from our website ird.govt.nz/forms-guides. Yo u don't need to complete the IR597 if you're using a tax agent and not a nominated person. Applicant's checklist Have you: • included a form of photographic identification? • included proof of your residential address? • included proof of your New Zealand bank account number or confirmation of customer due diligence completed? • included proof of your intended activity in New Zealand? • included linking documents for your child, if applying for an IRD number for them? • completed and signed the application? Please retain pages 1 - 2 for your own records. If you’re outside New Zealand only send legible copies of these documents. 3 IR742 May 2022 OFFICE USE ONLY IRD number issued/confirmed IRD number application - non-resident/offshore individual • Please read the Notes on page 2 before you complete this application. • Please write in capital letters, eg, ABC. Don't use abbreviations, eg, ST. • If handwriting, please complete the application in blue and/or black pen. Children under 16 1. I f you are applying for a child, print your own IRD number here, or attach to your own application (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Applicant information 2. Name of applicant as shown on identity documents First name(s) Last/family name or surname TitleMrMrsMissMsOther Preferred nameFirst name(s) Last/family name or surname 3. Date of birth Day Month Year 4. Previous nameFirst name(s) Last/family name or surname (maiden name, change of name) Address information Please provide the address you are currently living at and the address you wish to have your IRD number sent to (if different) 5. Current residential address (not a PO Box or private bag number) Street address SuburbTown or cityState or province CountryPostcode/Zipcode Current postal address (only if it's different from your home or street address) Street address, PO Box, Private or Locked Bag number SuburbTown or cityState or province CountryPostcode/Zipcode Previous address (not a PO Box or private bag number) Street address SuburbTown or cityState or province CountryPostcode/Zipcode 4 Contact information 6. Contact number(s) (include country and area code) MobileDaytimeEvening 7a. Email address 7b.For the purposes of this application, I consent to receiving my IRD number by email or text message, or both, depending on the contact information I provided. I acknowledge that Inland Revenue will take all reasonable steps to reduce any risk of unauthorised access or release of confidential information but can’t guarantee emails won’t be intercepted or read while in transit. Refer to notes on page 2 for more information Reason for applying 8a. Please give your reason for applying for an IRD number. Choose as many as required Buying or selling New Zealand real estateApplying for a New Zealand student loan Operating rental property in New ZealandDirector or shareholder of a New Zealand registered company For employment in New ZealandPartner in a partnership or trustee in a trust Other 8b. If purchasing New Zealand real estate, will this involve property investment, property dealing, or property speculation? Ye sNo Refer to the notes on page 2 for the information you are required to provide based on your stated reason for applying Taxpayer identification number (TIN) 9. Most recent TIN and the country/jurisdiction it relates to If you don't have a TIN, give the reason why you don't have one Fully functional New Zealand bank account or customer due diligence completed Complete either 10a or 10b or refer to ird.govt.nz/offshore 10a. Enter your fully functional New Zealand bank account Refer to the notes on page 2 for more information Bank Branch Account number Suffix 10b.Tick how you will confirm customer due diligence by a New Zealand reporting entity has been completed The reporting entity has completed, signed and stamped the statement below: A letter from a New Zealand reporting entity is attached Refer to the notes on page 2 for more information I \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (full name), of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (name of reporting entity) confirm customer due diligence has been completed for \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (name of applicant) in accordance with the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act 2009. S TA M P My declaration as above is true and correct to the best of my knowledge. Signature Day Month Year Tax exemption and non-resident contractor information (refer to the notes on page 2 before answering) 11. Do you qualify for a temporary tax exemption on foreign income?Ye sNo If "Yes", please enter your date of arrival in New Zealand Day Month Year 5 S TA M P 12. Please tick to show if you are a: non-resident contractornon-resident seasonal workerneither Declaration - please read carefully before signing I declare that the information in this form is true and correct. I authorise Inland Revenue to contact any agency or person that issued a document I have used in support of this application, to verify the details of that document for the purpose of this application. I have read the privacy statement below before signing this declaration. Signature Date Day Month Year If completing this form online an electronic signature is acceptable Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities or your entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you do not. We may also exchange information about you with: • some New Zealand government agencies • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask to see the personal information we hold about you, we'll show you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Call us on 0800 377 774 (if calling in New Zealand) or +64 3 951 2020 (if calling from overseas) for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to ird.govt.nz/privacy Verifier use only Information verified by Print nameName of organisation and branch Date Day Month Year Documents provided AdultProof of photo IDYe sNo Proof of address Ye sNo Proof of activity Ye sNo TIN/reason why no TIN Ye sNo Proof of fully functional New Zealand bank account or customer due diligence completed or alternative documentation Ye sNo Urgent (if yes, please note the reason why urgent) Ye sNo Notes Child Linking document Ye sNo Proof of fully functional New Zealand bank account or customer due diligence completed or alternative documentation Ye sNo Urgent (if yes, please note the reason why urgent) Ye sNo Notes