Declaration for an intermediary IR768 July 2024 1 Complete this declaration if you’re applying to be an intermediary as an individual or as a key office holder of an entity (not a natural person), on behalf of the entity. Each key office holder of an entity must also complete their own declaration. New key office holders joining an entity must also complete a declaration. Note: A key office holder may have to complete 2 declarations; 1 as a key office holder of the entity and 1 as the entity itself. Key office holders Key office holders of an entity include: • Body corporates (other than a closely held company) - tax manager, chief financial officer, chief executive officer and directors • Closely held companies - all shar eholders • Partnerships - all partners • Unincorporated bodies - each member of the entity • Trusts - all trustees Consideration given when approving/declining applications Inland Revenue will determine whether or not it will approve an application. An application may be declined if the applicant or a key officer holder: • is an undischarged bankrupt • is a liquidated company • is a company under voluntary administration or in receivership • is not allowed by the Registrar of Companies to be a company director • has been notified of a breach by the disciplinary body of a professional organisation they belong to • has been convicted of any criminal offence involving dishonesty - we will request a criminal conviction history report from the Ministry of Justice • has an unsatisfactory compliance record with us, including outstanding returns or payments, or social policy we administer We may also refuse to accept the entity as an intermediary if doing so would adversely affect the integrity of the tax system. Please read these notes before filling in the form: Questions 1. Your/Entity’s name and IRD number Please enter the entity’s/your full legal name, trade name (if dif ferent from the legal name) and IRD number. If making this declaration as a key office holder of an entity enter the entity’s details here. Note: For individuals and key office holders, please provide a copy of your NZ or Overseas Passport or NZ driving license. An overseas passport must be current; a NZ passport/driving license cannot be expired for more than 2 years. The ID cannot be cancelled or defaced and the signature must be visible. When uploading your Declaration for an intermediary - IR768 in myIR, please also upload a copy of your photo ID. 2. Your IRD number and photo ID Please provide your personal IRD number and attach photo ID (refer note 1.) if different from above. 3. Contact details Please provide your telephone number(s), email and address. 4. Other names Please provide details of any names you personally have been pr eviously known as. 5 - 13. Supporting Information If you are applying as an individual complete Questions 5 - 13. If you are applying on behalf of an entity complete Questions 8 - 13. If you are making a declaration as a key office holder of an entity applying complete Questions 5 - 13. Declaration A declaration must be made by the individual or a key office holder of an entity applying to be an intermediary. All key office holders of the entity applying are also required to make a declaration. Declaration for an intermediary IR768 July 2024 2 1. Your/Entity’s name and IRD number Full legal name Trade name (if different from legal name) IRD number ( 8 digit numbers start in the second box ) Individual/key office holder - photo ID attached (refer note 1.) 2. Your (key office holders) IRD number ( 8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 3. Your contact details ( )( ) Business phone numberBusiness mobile number Email address Street address or PO Box number Town or cityPostcode 4. Please provide other names you have been known by or traded under 5. Have you been convicted, or do you have any charges pending in New Zealand or any other country? (Please note this question does not apply to any conviction covered by the Criminal Records (Clean Slate) Act 2004) NoYes - Provide details below 6. Have you been removed from practising your profession, or been disciplined by a professional body in the last ten years? NoYes - Provide details below (name of body, date of refusal, cancellation and reasons) 7. Are you currently an undischarged bankrupt? NoYes - Provide details below 3 8. Have you previously been an intermediary or a nominee of an intermediary? If so, please provide the following details. Name you are/were listed under 9. Have you/the entity been a key officer holder of a company under voluntary administration, receivership or liquidation? NoYes - Provide details below 10. Are you/the entity currently in dispute with the Commissioner of Inland Revenue (include any associated entities)? NoYes - Provide details below 11. Do you/the entity have any tax arrears or outstanding returns? NoYes - Provide details below 12. Do any of your/the entity’s associated entities have tax arrears or outstanding returns? NoYes - Provide details below 13. Do you know of any other reason why Inland Revenue may not accept the application to be an intermediary? NoYes - provide details below 4 You must make and sign this declaration. WARNING It is an offence to knowingly provide altered, false, incomplete, or misleading information for the purpose of being an intermediary. If approval status is obtained by fraud, false representation or the concealment of any material fact, the approval can be removed and the person concerned can be fined up to $25,000 in the first instance and up to $50,000 for any other subsequent occasion under the Tax Administration Act 1994. Inland Revenue expects that you will always deal with our staff in a respectful and professional manner. Failure to do so may be taken into consideration as to whether you pose a risk to the integrity of the tax system. Declaration I, Your full name or the entity’s full name of (place of abode) (occupation) solemnly and sincerely declare that the information provided by me/the entity (delete whichever does not apply) is complete and correct. NameSignature Date Day Month Year