1 Notice of Response Reply to a notice of proposed adjustment IR771 September 2022 Use this form if we have sent you a Notice of proposed adjustment and you disagree with one or more of the proposed changes. For more information on disputes, visit our website ird.govt.nz/disputes Our website includes guides to help you complete this process. Time limits apply for replying to a Notice of proposed adjustment we've sent you. See below for more information. Taxpayer's details Full name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Address Street address or PO Box number Suburb, box lobby or RDTown or city Contact details ( ) TelephoneContact person (if applicable) Tax agent's details (if applicable) Name Address Street address or PO Box number Suburb, box lobby or RDTown or city Contact details ( ) TelephoneContact person (if applicable) This notice is for the attention of (if known): Name Date Day Month Year Time limits You must send this form to us within two months of the date our Notice of proposed adjustment was issued to you. If you do not send this form within the time limit you'll generally be considered by law to have accepted our position. You're allowed by law to send us this form outside this timeframe if there are exceptional circumstances, or you've demonstrated you intended to continue the disputes process. Please include a note explaining why it is late or how you demonstrated you intended to continue the disputes process (if this applies). Completing this form If there is not enough space on this form do not complete the boxes on the next 2 pages. Instead, attach your own document to this form and use the same headings used in the next 2 pages. 2 What is the change you want? Describe the change you want to any amounts on our Notice of proposed adjustment. Alternatively, if you think all the amounts you provided on your tax return were correct then you can just refer to your return (eg "Refer to IR4 return for period ended 31/03/2022”). What facts support the change you want? Describe the facts and circumstances that support your view that one or more of the proposed changes in our Notice of proposed adjustment are wrong. Include any important facts you think we're missing. If you disagree with our view of the facts then explain how we're wrong. 3 Why do you think your view is correct? Explain why you think your view is correct. You'll need to provide details of the law you're relying on to support your view. If you can not do this, then you'll need to provide enough detail so we can identify any relevant legislative provisions for you. You’ll also need to explain how the law applies to the facts. If you disagree with our view of the law then explain how we're wrong. You can find examples to help you answer this question and information about tax laws by searching our website. You can also refer to publications, court cases and legal principles that support your view. We can not help you answer this question. If you need help we recommend you get advice from a professional tax advisor. List the documents you've attached In tax disputes you have the responsibility to prove the changes proposed in our Notice of proposed adjustment are wrong. Attach copies of documents you're aware of that are significantly relevant to the issues you've raised. List the documents you've attached in the space below. You do not have to provide copies of any law, cases or publications you're relying on. Just refer to these sources by name with enough detail so we can find them. 4 Agreement for email communication I agree to two-way communication with Inland Revenue by email throughout the disputes process. I understand this email agreement will also cover any communication with Inland Revenue’s Disputes Review Unit. I also understand these emails may be encrypted, password protected and may contain confidential and/or commercially sensitive information. Inland Revenue will take all reasonable steps to reduce any risk of unauthorised access or release of confidential information, but cannot guarantee emails will not be intercepted or read while in transit. Tick here Email address: Checklist Under the law you need to provide a sufficient amount of information for this form to be valid. The checklist below will help you meet those legal requirements: My Notice of response form: shows the changes to any amounts on our Notice of proposed adjustment that result from the facts and legal arguments I've made. (Tick each circle to confirm) describes any facts or legal arguments which I rely on in support of my view that the proposed changes in our Notice of proposed adjustment are wrong. identifies any facts or legal arguments that were wrong in the Notice of proposed adjustment we issued to you and explains why they're wrong, and applies legal arguments to the facts to explain why the proposed changes in our Notice of proposed adjustment are wrong. Next steps Once you've completed this form, please send it to us (with any attachments). • I f you have been in contact with an Inland Revenue staff member about the dispute, send this form to that person • message through myIR with the completed form attached • posting it to us Inland Revenue PO Box 39010 Wellington Mail Centre Lower Hutt 5045 We'll reply to you within two months. If we decide your view is correct we'll either make a new assessment in line with your view or the assessment in your return stands and the matter ends there. Otherwise, we'll contact you to arrange a conference between you (or your agent) and us. We get together in a conference to: • exchange relevant information and documents about the dispute, and • t ry and resolve differences about the facts, laws, and legal arguments. This can be done over the phone or in person. You can choose to have a senior Inland Revenue staff member act as facilitator for the conference. This facilitator will have had no previous involvement with the dispute. For further information about the disputes process, go to our website ird.govt.nz/disputes