Partnership and look-through company (LTC) return guide 2022 Read this guide to help you fill in your IR7 return. Complete and send us your IR7 return by 7 July 2022, unless you have an extension of time to file. IR7G March 2022 PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE2 ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • • Calculators and tools - Use our calculators, worksheets and tools. You can check your tax code, find filing and payment dates and calculate your student loan repayment. • • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. Forgotten your user ID or password Request these online from the myIR login screen and we'll send them to the email address we hold for you. How to get our forms and guides You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides The information in this guide is based on current tax laws at the time of printing. 3 ird.govt.nz Contents Page ird.govt.nz2 How to get our forms and guides2 Introduction4 Q10Schedular payments6 Q11New Zealand interest6 Q12New Zealand dividends8 Q13Māori authority distributions9 Q14Income from another partnership11 Q15Income from another LTC11 Q16Overseas income13 Q17Business income16 Q18Income and expenditure from residential property 17 Q19Interest incurred from residential property23 Q20Other rental activities income27 Q21Income from taxable property sales/ disposals 27 Q21AResidential land withholding tax (RLWT) credit 28 Q22Other income29 Q24Expenses31 Q26Deduction for losses extinguished on transition from a QC or LAQC 32 Q27Attribution of income/loss34 Completing your IR7L or IR7P34 Boxes Q27AIRD number34 Q27BAttribution of income/loss34 Q27C to 27JAttributed income/loss35 Q27KTotal income35 Q27LDeduction for extinguished losses35 Q27MResidential rental deductions35 Q27N to 27PAttributed tax credits35 Q27Q to 27TNon-allowable deductions (IR7L only)36 Example 1Loss limitation rule no longer applies - owner with previously non-allowable deductions 36 Example 2LTC loss limitation rule - current year limitation only 41 Example 3LTC loss limitation rule - with non-allowable deductions brought forward 46 Q28Additional disclosure of foreign investments56 ACC levies57 Services you may need58 Need to speak with us?58 Privacy58 If you have a complaint about our service59 PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE4 Introduction Who must complete an IR7 return Every partnership or look-through company (LTC) must complete an IR7 return showing their total income after expenses and attach either the Partnership income/loss attribution - IR7P or the Look-through company (LTC) income/loss attribution - IR7L. The partnership or LTC is not assessed for tax, but each partner or owner is liable for tax on their share of income from the partnership or LTC. Each partner or owner must complete an individual tax return showing all income, including their share from the partnership or LTC. Return due date If the partnership or LTC has a 31 March balance date, you have until 7 July 2022 to send in the return, unless you've been granted an extension of time. If you have an agent or a balance date other than 31 March this date may be different. Business industry classification (BIC) code We're lawfully required to supply the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) with a code for your business or trading activity, for levy classification and calculation. If your BIC code is not preprinted on the return or is different from the preprinted one, please enter the correct code. To work out your main business or trading activity and its code, go to businessdescription.co.nz or call ACC on 0508 426 837. It's important that you choose the code which most accurately reflects your main business or trading activity. Please provide the code only. Do not provide a description. 5 ird.govt.nz Has the partnership or LTC ceased? If this is the final return, include a set of accounts (if required) up to the date the partnership or LTC ceased. Also include details of any distribution of assets and liabilities. If the partnership or LTC is registered for GST or as an employer, you will also need to complete a Business cessation - IR315 form to finalise your records. Depending on the partnership's or LTC's circumstances, other issues may also need to be finalised, for example outstanding returns and/or arrears. Find out how to finalise the partnership's or LTC's tax accounts or deregister for GST at ird.govt.nz Note An LTC is still a legal entity until it's taken off the Companies Register. An LTC can stop trading but still have tax obligations, for example completing returns. Nil returns Every partnership and LTC must complete an income tax return, whether or not it has been active. If there is no gross income to declare, losses to claim, and no disclosures to make at Question 28 (read page 56) you can complete a nil return. Complete the return up to Question 9 and sign the declaration at Question 29. For more information on look-through company rules, read our Look-through companies - IR879 guide. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE6 Questions Question 10 Schedular payments If the partnership or LTC has received schedular payments, we'll send you a Summary of income, detailing the payments received and the tax deducted. From your Summary of income, copy the total tax deducted into Box 10A and gross payments into Box 10B. The Summary of income may not contain all your earnings information. If any details are missing, please include them at Question 10. If the partnership or LTC is registered for GST, your gross schedular payments should not include any GST. If they do, show the gross payments at Question 10 and deduct the GST portion at Question 24. Question 11 New Zealand interest Include interest from all New Zealand sources at Question 11. The interest payer will usually send you an RWT withholding certificate - IR15, showing the gross interest paid and the amount of RWT deducted. Write the total of all RWT deducted in Box 11A. Add up all the gross interest amounts (before the deduction of any tax) and write the total in Box 11B. Note If expenses are deductible against the interest income (for example commission), claim them at Question 24. Read the note about expenses on page 31. Do not send us interest statements or IR15 certificates with the return. Keep these in case we ask for them later. 7 ird.govt.nz Interest on broken term deposits If you've broken a term deposit during the year, you may have to account for "negative interest". This is interest repaid on a term deposit and may reduce the amount of interest to declare in your return. If the term deposit was broken in full, or it was business related, deduct the negative interest from the gross interest shown on the IR15 or equivalent statement. Deduct the allowable negative interest component, using the worksheet below, before entering the gross amount at Question 11 of your return. In all other cases, the negative interest is deductible in a later return when the term deposit matures. Worksheet Copy your gross interest from your RWT on interest form to Box 1. 1 Print any negative interest you've paid in Box 2. 2 Subtract Box 2 from Box 1 and print the answer in Box 3. 3 Copy this amount to Box 11B of your tax return. Interest paid or charged by Inland Revenue If we paid you interest, include it in Box 11B for the income year the partnership or LTC received the interest. If the partnership or LTC paid us interest, include it as a deduction in Box 24 of the return for the income year the interest is paid. Read about expenses on page 31. Interest from overseas If the partnership or LTC received interest from overseas, convert your overseas interest and tax credits to New Zealand dollars and show the amounts at Question 16. Please read the notes about overseas income on pages 13 to 16. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE8 Income from financial arrangements If the partnership or LTC was a party to a financial arrangement, such as government stock, local authority stock, mortgage bonds, futures contracts or deferred property settlements, you may have to calculate the income or expenditure from the financial arrangement using a spreading method, rather than on a cash basis. To work out if you must use a spreading method, please read Financial arrangements on pages 30 to 31. If the financial arrangement matures, is sold, remitted or transferred, you must do a "wash-up" calculation known as a base price adjustment. Any RWT will be deducted on a cash basis. Show the RWT deducted and any income from the financial arrangement in Boxes 11A and 11B. Question 12 New Zealand dividends Dividends are the part of a company's profits that it passes on to its shareholders. Unit trusts are treated as companies for income tax purposes. Distributions from unit trusts will generally be taxable and are treated as dividends. Complete Question 12 if you received any New Zealand dividends, including dividends from your local electricity or gas supplier. Do not include a dividend that's a distribution of the trust's capital and is tax free. The company or unit trust that paid you the dividend will send you a dividend statement. Do not send us any dividend statements with the return. Keep these in case we ask for them later. Note If expenses are deductible against the dividend income (for example commission), claim them at Question 24. Read the note about expenses on page 31. 9 ird.govt.nz Credits attached to dividends A New Zealand company or unit trust may attach several types of credits to dividends. Imputation credits are credits for part of the tax the company has already paid on its profits, which means the dividends are not taxed twice. RWT is deducted from your dividend to bring the total credits withheld up to 33% of the gross dividend. What to show in your return Your dividend statements show the amount: • • you received (net dividend) • • of any imputation credits, and • • of any RWT credits. Add all these amounts together to work out your total gross dividends and enter this in Box 12B. Add up all the imputation credits and print the total in Box 12. Add any dividend RWT credits and print the total in Box 12A. Shares instead of dividends If the partnership or LTC received shares instead of dividends, include them as income at Question 12. Write the amount as if you received dividends instead of shares. Dividends from overseas Please read about overseas income on pages 13 to 16 of this guide. Question 13 Māori authority distributions Māori authorities can make various types of distributions. Fill in Question 13 if you received any taxable Māori authority distributions. The Māori authority that paid you the distribution will send you a Māori authority distribution statement. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE10 Credits attached to distributions The Māori authority may attach a credit to the distribution it makes to members. This credit will be classified as a Māori authority credit and is part of the tax the Māori authority has already paid on its profits, so the distributions are not taxed twice. What to show in your return Your Māori authority distribution statement shows the amount of: • • the distribution made to you, including the taxable portion and the non-taxable portion, and • • Māori authority credit. Transfer these amounts, leaving out any non-taxable distributions, to the relevant boxes at Question 13. Example A Māori authority makes a pre-tax profit of $10,000. It pays tax on this profit of $1,750 (Māori authority tax rate of 17.5%) and distributes the entire profit to their 10 members. Each member will receive $825 as a cash distribution and $175 of Māori authority credits. Each member of the authority liable to complete an IR7 return would show the following information at Question 13: Box 13A - $175 Box 13B - $1,000 (made up of $825 + $175) Non-taxable distribution You do not need to include in the IR7 return any other distributions received from a Māori authority that are not taxable in the hands of a Māori authority member. These amounts are non-taxable distributions and cannot have credits attached. For more information read our Māori authority guide - IR487. 11 ird.govt.nz Question 14 Income from another partnership If the partnership or LTC received any income or loss from another partnership, write the details at Question 14. Do not include any: • • interest and RWT - show these at Question 11 • • dividends, imputation credits, and dividend RWT - show these at Question 12 • • Māori authority distributions and credits - show these at Question 13 • • overseas income and any credits attached - show these at Question 16, see pages 13 to 16 • • residential property income - show this at Question 18, see page 17 • • other rental income - show this at Question 20, see page 27 • • taxable property sales/disposals - show this at Question 21, see page 27 • • other income - show this at Question 22, see page 29. Add up all the other income from partnerships and include the total in Box 14B. If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. Add up any other tax credits and include the total in Box 14A. Question 15 Income from another LTC If the LTC received income from another LTC, write the details at Question 15. Note A partnership does not receive income or deductions from an LTC. If 2 or more people jointly receive income or deductions from an LTC, they should show these on their own returns, not the partnership's return. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE12 LTCs are transparent (looked through), meaning the owners are treated as having received the income and incurred the loss of the company. The LTC will normally supply the information required to complete your return. Do not include any of the following types of income received from another LTC at Question 15: • • interest and RWT - show these at Question 11 • • dividends, imputation credits, and dividend RWT - show these at Question 12 • • Māori authority distributions and credits - show these at Question 13 • • overseas income and any credits attached - show these at Question 16, see pages 13 to 16 • • residential property income - show this at Question 18, see page 17 • • other rental income - show this at Question 20, see page 27 • • taxable property sales/disposals - show this at Question 21, see page 27 • • other income - show this at Question 22, see page 29. Change to the loss limitation rule This rule limits the amount of deductions an owner can claim to the amount of their owner's basis, which represents their economic interest in the LTC. The loss limitation rule no longer applies to most LTC owners. It continues to apply for owners of LTCs that are in a partnership or joint venture that includes another LTC. What to show on your return Add up all the other income from LTCs and include the total in Box 15B. If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. Add up any other tax credits and include the total in Box 15A. Add up any non-allowable deductions this year from LTCs and include the total in Box 15C. 13 ird.govt.nz Note There should not be non-allowable deductions this year unless the loss limitation rule still applies. If you had any non-allowable deductions brought forward from last year, you may be able to claim some, or all, of the brought forward amount this year. Print the amount claimable in Box 15D prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year. If you have an amount in Box 15C, add this to Box 15B and put the total in Box 15E. If you have an amount in Box 15D, subtract this from Box 15B and put the total in Box 15E. If you do not have any amounts in Box 15C or Box 15D, copy the amount from Box 15B into Box 15E. Box 15E is your adjusted LTC income. Question 16 Overseas income If the partnership or LTC received overseas income, for example from interest or financial arrangements, show this at Question 16. Convert all overseas income and qualifying overseas tax paid to New Zealand dollars. You can do this by: • • using the rates available on ird.govt.nz/tools-calculators • • contacting the overseas section of a trading bank and asking for the exchange rate for the day you received your overseas income. Tax paid overseas is distributed to the partners or owners and the tax credit limit is calculated on the partner's or owner's income tax return. Keep evidence of overseas tax paid with your tax records for 7 years. For more information about foreign tax credits read A guide to foreign investment funds and the fair dividend rate - IR461. If the income was received from a financial arrangement, please read our Tax Information Bulletin (TIB), Vol 20, No 3 (April 2008). PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE14 Overseas dividends There are 2 situations covering the treatment of overseas dividends. Each owner or partner will need to determine which of the following applies to their share of foreign investments: • • If the shares have FIF income or loss calculated, do not include any dividends paid from these shares on the IR7 return. Instead, show the calculated FIF income or loss at Box 16B. • • If the shares are covered by 1 of the FIF exclusions (see page 15), show the dividends at Box 16B. Each owner or partner will need to advise their individual amount of either the FIF income or loss (or their FIF calculation method) or the dividend, to be included on the IR7 return. Show each owner's or partner's individual amount, plus any other allocation of overseas income, at Box 16B on the IR7 return and at Box 27F on the IR7L or IR7P form - see page 34. This information is also used in determining the income amount at Box 4 on page 38 of this guide. In either situation, include any qualifying overseas tax credits attached to the dividends at Box 16A. Some Australian dividends can have New Zealand imputation credits attached. Include these at Box 12. Note you cannot claim Australian franking credits. If the partnership or LTC received dividends from an overseas company through an agent or trustee who deducted RWT in New Zealand or dividends treated as interest, show the New Zealand RWT deducted at Box 12A. Note If you've shown an imputation credit in Box 12 or an RWT credit in Box 12A and there is no income associated to these in Box 12B, you'll need to attach a note to the top of page 3 of your return with the details. 15 ird.govt.nz Foreign investment fund (FIF) income or loss If at any time during the 2022 income year the partnership or LTC held rights like shares, units or an entitlement to benefit in any foreign company, foreign unit trust, foreign superannuation scheme or foreign life insurance policy, the partners or owners may be required to calculate FIF income or loss in their own income tax returns. Generally, the partners or owners will use the fair dividend rate to calculate FIF income. The partners or owners may also need to complete an additional FIF disclosure form. See Question 28 on page 56. The main exclusions from an interest in a FIF are: • • investments in certain Australian resident companies listed on approved indices on the Australian stock exchange, that maintain franking accounts. Investments covered in the list are available in the Australian share exemption list - IR871 • • interest in certain Australian unit trusts • • limited exemptions for interest in certain venture capital interests that move offshore (for 10 income years from the income year in which the company migrates from New Zealand) • • a 10% or greater interest in a CFC • • an individual or trustee of certain trusts, who is a partner or owner and holds, at all times in the income year, FIFs with a total cost of $50,000 or less. You can find more information on the exclusions and the FIF rules at ird.govt.nz/foreign-investment-funds and in our Tax Information Bulletins (TIBs) - see the online index for relevant issues. Controlled foreign company (CFC) income or loss If at any time during the 2022 income year the partnership or LTC has attributed CFC income or loss, the partners or owners may be required to calculate this in their own income tax returns. A loss from a CFC cannot be used to offset domestic income or be included in domestic losses that are carried forward to the 2022 income year. Generally, these losses PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE16 can only offset income or future income from CFCs that are resident in the same country as the CFC that incurred the loss. The partners or owners may also need to complete an additional CFC disclosure form. See Question 28 on page 56. Question 17 Business income Write the net profit or loss in Box 17B. This is the amount of income or loss after deducting all allowable business expenditure. If this is a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. Refer to our Smart business - IR320 guide for information on allowable business expenditure and record keeping. Attach 1 of these to the top of page 3 of your return: • • a set of the partnership's or LTC's financial accounts • • a completed Financial statements summary - IR10 form • • a completed Farming income - IR3F form, or Schedule of business income - IR3B form. If you complete an IR10, which speeds up the processing of the return, you do not need to send us your financial accounts as well, but keep them in case we ask for them later. Attribution rule Anyone who provides services and puts an intermediary between themselves and the recipient of the personal service has income earned allocated to them, not the intermediary. If this rule applies to persons associated to your partnership or LTC, it will affect the amount of taxable income in this return. When applying the attribution rule, LTCs are treated as associated entities and not as being transparent. To find out how to apply this rule, please read our Ta x Information Bulletins (TIBs), Vol 12, No 12 (December 2000), Vol 13, No 11 (November 2001), and Vol 21, No 8 Pt 2 (October/November 2009). If you need more information, contact us - see page 58. 17 ird.govt.nz Question 18 Income and expenditure from residential property This question applies to owners of residential property, including overseas property, that gives rise to net income from a bright-line sale, and property subject to the residential property deduction rules. Bright-line property rule for residential property The bright-line property rule needs to be considered when none of the other land sale rules at Question 21 apply to the disposal of the property. This rule for residential property looks at the length of time a property is owned. If you sell or dispose of a residential property within a certain timeframe and no exclusion applies, then your profit on the sale will be taxable. This applies no matter what your reason was for buying the property or what kind of buyer you are. The bright-line property rule applies if you sell or dispose of a residential property you have owned for less than: • • 5 years for properties acquired between 29 March 2018 and 26 March 2021. • • 5 years for properties acquired as a result of an offer made on or before 23 March 2021 and that offer was not able to be revoked or withdrawn before 27 March 2021. • • 5 years for properties acquired on or after 27 March 2021 that qualify as a ‘new build’. • • 10 years for all other properties acquired on or after 27 March 2021. For tax purposes, a property is generally acquired on the date a binding sale and purchase agreement is entered into (even if some standard conditions like getting finance or a building report still need to be met). This date will determine which bright-line period (5 or 10 years) applies for your property. For more information on when a property is acquired, see our Question we’ve been asked (QB) 17/02: Date of acquisition of land, and start date for 2-year bright-line test at taxtechnical.ird.govt.nz PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE18 There are other dates that are relevant for figuring out whether your property sale is taxable under the bright- line property rule. Generally, your bright-line period starts when the legal title is transferred to you and ends when you enter into a binding sale and purchase agreement to sell the property. There are some different rules if you purchase “off the plan” in a new development, for example. The bright-line property rule does not tax any profit made while the property was your main home. It also does not apply to a sale of inherited property, or if you’re the executor or administrator of a deceased estate, or if you transfer property to a partner or spouse under a relationship property agreement (however, for any subsequent sale the bright-line property rule will apply). You can use the property tax decision tool on our website to work out if you need to pay tax on the sale of your property. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/brightline Income and losses for property subject to the bright-line property rule are treated differently in the tax return. After a taxable bright-line sale: • • if you have net income from the sale of the property (a profit), the net income is included in Box 18B. Unless the property is part of a portfolio, expenses from other properties cannot be offset against the net income from the disposal. • • if you have made a net loss when the property is sold, the loss must be carried forward to a later income year when it can be used to offset net income from the land sale provisions, including from future disposals subject to the bright-line rule. A bright-line loss is not recorded in the tax return. Please keep your own record of any bright-line losses you have made. Complete a Bright-line residential property sale information - IR833 form for each bright-line property sold or disposed of and include it with your return. The form explains how to calculate the resulting profit or loss. Complete the form even if the details have been included in a Financial statements summary - IR10 or set of accounts, unless the income will be included in your 19 ird.govt.nz return as part of your business income as a property speculator, property dealer, developer or builder. If you sell/dispose of a residential property and the sale is taxable under the bright-line property rule, the amount of the previously denied interest under the interest limitation rules is treated as if it were part of the cost of the property in the year of disposal. If this results in a net loss, the deduction for the net loss is limited under the current rule that applies to losses from the disposal of bright-line property. If the disposal is not taxable, the interest previously denied a deduction remains non- deductible. If you are a New Zealand tax resident you’ll need to pay tax on your worldwide income under New Zealand tax law. This includes any property sales both in New Zealand and overseas subject to the bright-line property rule or the land sale rules. For more information on the land sale rules, go to ird.govt.nz/buying-selling or read our guide Bright-line property tax - IR1227. You can find our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Residential property deduction rule Most residential rental properties are subject to the residential property deduction rules (also known as the ring-fencing rules). The rules generally limit the amount of residential deductions you can claim in the year to the total amount of residential income earned in that year. If the residential property makes a loss it must be carried forward to the next year in which residential income, including income from properties held on revenue account, is earned. The residential property calculations are made at the partner or owner level as they may have other residential income and deductions that need to be included. There are 2 levels of exclusions from the rules. Any rental income or loss and net income or loss from a taxable disposal is fully excluded from the rules if the property is: • • the main home • • property subject to the mixed-use asset rules (holiday home rented out part-time) PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE20 • • property owned by companies other than close companies • • property owned by government enterprises • • certain employee accommodation. For these types of property, the existing rules apply with the rental income or loss shown at Box 20B and net income or net loss from a taxable disposal shown in Box 21B. Any rental net loss and net loss from a taxable disposal is partially excluded from the new rules if it is for: • • property that will always be taxed on sale, being revenue account property of a person in the business of building, developing or dealing in land • • other revenue account property the person has notified us they want the exclusion to apply to. For these types of property any rental net loss is shown at Box 20B and taxable disposal net loss is shown at Box 21B. Net rental income and net income from a taxable disposal plus any depreciation recovered is shown as residential income at Box 18B. Refer to the Rental income - IR264 guide for information on when the rules apply, how to calculate your income, the amount of deductions you can claim this year, and the amount of any excess deductions that must be carried forward. The residential property deduction rules also apply to a partnership or LTC that has borrowed money to acquire an interest in certain entities with significant rental property holdings - a residential land-rich entity - and has interest expenditure on the borrowed money. Residential land-rich entity - a close company, partnership or LTC that holds more than 50% of its assets by value in residential land directly or indirectly. They come under the interposed entities rules as part of the residential property deduction rules. For more information about the interposed entity rules, see page 60 of the Tax Information Bulletin Vol 31 No.8 September 2019. 21 ird.govt.nz Completing Question 18 in your return Tick the method you used to calculate your residential property income and deductions. You use 1 of the following: • • Portfolio basis - combine the income and deductions for all rental properties in the portfolio. • • Individual, property-by-property basis - income and deductions of individual property calculated separately to other property. You need to maintain separate records for each property to choose this option. The details for each property need to be provided to the partners or owners. • • Combination of the property-by-property basis and portfolio basis - choose to apply different methods to different property. Some properties are held in a portfolio and others are held on property-by-property basis. For a partnership most of the calculations for excess rental deductions are made in the partners return. The partnership needs to provide sufficient information for the partners to complete their return correctly. If a partner wants to use the individual method the partnership needs to maintain separate records for each rental property and pass each property’s details to the partner. For an LTC, the owners need to complete their return using the same method chosen by the LTC for their share of the income and deductions. An owner can choose a different method for other rental properties they own. Example An LTC uses the portfolio method. The portfolio was loss-making overall, so any shareholder who directly holds other residential properties subject to the ring- fencing rules can include those other properties as part of the portfolio. They can then use their share of the deductions that flow through from the LTC against their total residential income. This includes their residential income from the LTC and any other residential income they derive. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE22 Example An LTC uses the property-by-property basis. The shareholders must also use this method in their own returns. So, if residential deductions for the property exceed the residential income from the property, the shareholder can only use their share of the deductions up to their share of the income from the property. Their excess deductions cannot be used against residential income from a property they own directly. The Residential property deductions worksheets - IR1226 can be used to calculate the information required to be shown in your return. Write the total residential income in Box 18B. This is the total of the following amounts: (a) all residential rental income from a portfolio and/or individual property (b) all depreciation recovery income for assets disposed of from a portfolio and/or individual property (c) net income from the taxable sale/disposal of a property in a portfolio and/or individual property, and (d) all net residential rental income, depreciation recovery income and net income from the taxable disposal of property from residential property excluded because it is held on revenue account. Only include the net income from a disposal once. Write the total eligible deductions for residential rental properties in Box 18C. Include the amount of any interest paid on an investment in a residential land rich entity that relates to residential rental activity in Box 18B. Include the amount of other interest paid in Box 19B. The partners or owners share of these are shown in boxes 27G and 27M on the IR7P or IR7L. 23 ird.govt.nz Note If you have taxable net income from other residential properties outside the rules, such as net rental income from a property held on revenue account or net income from a taxable disposal, you can allocate this income across any rental properties with excess deductions and include it in Box 18B Total residential income. Question 19 Interest incurred from residential property This question applies to owners of residential property subject to the interest limitation rules. You do not need to complete this question for the following types of property: • • farmland • • hospitals, hospices, convalescent homes, nursing homes • • rest homes and retirement villages • • hotels, motels, inns, camping grounds, hostels. For interest to be deductible, the general deductibility rules must be met. The interest will also not be deductible to the extent to which it is of a private or domestic nature. From 1 October 2021, interest is not deductible for residential property in New Zealand acquired on or after 27 March 2021, unless an exclusion or exemption applies (see below). For properties acquired before 27 March 2021, the ability to deduct interest on existing loans is being phased out between 1 October 2021 and 31 March 2025. For the 2022 tax year, you can claim: • • 100% of the interest incurred from 1 April 2021 to 30 September 2021 • • 75% of the interest incurred from 1 October 2021 to 31 March 2022. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE24 Interest on any new loans drawn down on or after 27 March 2021 is not deductible. Special rules also apply for refinanced loans and for interest on revolving credit and overdraft facilities. Any interest on borrowings above the closing balance on 26 March 2021 is not deductible. For more information, go to ird.govt.nz/property/renting-out-residential-property If you sell/dispose of a residential property and the sale is taxable under the bright-line property rule, the amount of the previously denied interest under the interest limitation rules is treated as if it were part of the cost of the property in the year of disposal. If this results in a net loss, the deduction for the net loss is limited under the current rule that applies to losses from the disposal of bright- line property. If the disposal is not taxable, the interest previously denied a deduction remains non-deductible. Completing Question 19 in your return Complete this question for any interest expense you are claiming in this income tax return at Boxes 18C and 20B in relation to a house, apartment, flat or other structure that could be used for residential accommodation, either short-term or long-term. This includes if you have an arrangement to build such a structure, and bare land that could be used to build such a structure under the relevant district plan. Write the total interest on residential property in Box 19A. This is the total interest incurred on your borrowings for all your residential properties for this year. If you are using an IR3R form to prepare a summary for each rental property, this is the total of all the 7A Boxes. Write the amount of interest expense claimed in Box 19B. If you are using an IR3R form to prepare a summary for each rental property, this is the total of all the 7B Boxes. Note The partners’ or owners’ share of Boxes 19A and 19B is included in their income tax returns in proportion to their share in the partnership or effective look-through interest in the LTC. 25 ird.govt.nz If you have claimed an interest expense in Box 19B, at Box 19C tick the reason(s) for the interest expense claimed: • • A Māori exempt company or not a residential land company – The interest limitation rules do not apply to non-close companies or groups if less than 50% of its total assets consist of residential property (excluding development property but including shares in other companies that exceed this 50% test) at all times during the income year. A close company that is a Māori authority, eligible to be a Māori authority, or wholly-owned by an entity that is a Māori authority or eligible to be one is an exempt Māori company if it passes this 50% test. • • Certain schedule 15 exclusions or property not in NZ - The interest limitation rules apply to land in New Zealand only. Schedule 15 of the Income Tax Act 2007 also allows you to claim interest for the following: • • main home – if a portion is used to earn income such as a flatting situation • • business premises (for example, a villa now used as a dental clinic) except if the business premises is used for providing accommodation and it’s not a person’s main home • • certain Māori land, papakāinga and kaumātua housing, and land transferred as part of settlement under Te Tiriti o Waitangi/Treaty of Waitangi • • employee accommodation • • student accommodation. • • Loans drawn down prior to 27 March 2021 or interest incurred before 1 October 2021 – Interest incurred from 1 April 2021 to 30 September 2021 is fully deductible. From 1 October 2021, the ability to claim interest is being phased out for the following situations: • • loans drawn down prior to 27 March 2021 • • property acquired before 27 March 2021 but the loan for the settlement of the property was not drawn down until on or after 27 March 2021 • • loans that relate to the purchase of a property acquired as a result of an offer made on or before 23 PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE26 March 2021 and that offer was not able to be revoked or withdrawn before 27 March 2021. In other situations where the property is acquired on or after 27 March 2021, interest cannot be claimed from 1 October 2021 onwards. • • Emergency, transitional, social or council housing - You can claim interest for loans if your property is used for emergency, transitional or social housing when leased to the Crown (for example, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development or Kāinga Ora) or to a registered community housing provider. • • New build exemption - the exemption generally applies to new build residential properties for 20 years from the date a new build’s Code Compliance Certificate (CCC) is issued under the Building Act 2004. A ‘new build’ includes a self-contained dwelling: • • that received a CCC on or after 27 March 2020. The dwelling can be made from new or existing materials and can be constructed onsite or relocated onto the land • • acquired off the plans that received a CCC on or after 27 March 2020 • • created by converting an existing dwelling into 2 or more dwellings, that received a CCC on or after 27 March 2020 • • converted from commercial premises that received a CCC on or after 27 March 2020 • • converted from a hotel or motel and building consent authority records show that the conversion was completed on or after 27 March 2020 • • that has been removed from the earthquake prone buildings register on or after 27 March 2020, provided there is proof the remediation has been completed (either in the form of a CCC being issued, or local or building consent authority records showing the work has been completed and verified by a suitably qualified engineer) • • that was remediated because of weathertightness issues, provided more than 75% of the dwelling has been re-clad and a CCC was issued on or after 27 March 2020. 27 ird.govt.nz • • Development or land business exemption - The land business exemption applies to land held as part of a developing, subdividing, or land-dealing business, or a business of erecting buildings on land. The development exemption does not require you to have a ‘land business’ and applies to land that you develop, subdivide, or build on to create a new build. The development may be a one-off. For more information about the interest limitation rules and how to calculate the amount of interest you can claim, go to ird.govt.nz/property/renting-out-residential-property or read our guide Rental income - IR264. You can find our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Question 20 Other rental activities income Write the net profit or loss (total rents minus expenses) in Box 20B. If this is a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. Only include net residential rental income or losses not covered by the residential property deduction rules such as commercial rental income. Do not include any residential rental income already included at Question 18. Attach 1 of these to the top of page 3 of your return: • • a set of the partnership's or LTC's financial accounts • • a completed Financial statements summary - IR10 form, or • • a completed Rental income - IR3R form. Question 21 Income from taxable property sales/disposals Include the total net income or loss from land. Do not include net income or loss from a bright-line sale at Box 21B. Bright-line sales are included under residential income at Question 18. Profits from land sales are taxable if you bought a property for the purpose of reselling it or are in the business of buying and selling land and/or buildings. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE28 The profits may also be taxable if you: • • are a builder and improved a property before selling it • • developed or subdivided land and sold sections, or • • had a change of zoning on your property and sold it within ten years of buying it. Show the total profit or loss from other property in Box 21B. If you are a New Zealand tax resident you’ll need to pay tax on your worldwide income under New Zealand tax law. This includes any property sales worldwide subject to the bright-line property rule for residential land, or the other land sale rules. For more information on the land sale rules, go to ird.govt.nz/buying-selling or read our guide Tax and your property transactions - IR361. You can find our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Question 21A Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) credit If a partner had RLWT deducted from the sale or transfer of a residential property located in New Zealand, they’ll need to show the full amount of the RLWT in their own individual income tax return. Do not include it in the partnership tax credits. If the LTC is an “offshore RLWT person” and has sold or transferred residential property located in New Zealand, RLWT may have been deducted from the sale price. The LTC should have received a statement on the completion of the sale process showing the amount of RLWT deducted. The LTC can claim a credit for any RLWT deducted. Show the amount of RLWT deducted, less any RLWT paid back to the LTC and/or transferred to outstanding amounts during the income year. If there was more than 1 amount of RLWT deducted, show the combined amount, less any RLWT paid back to the LTC and/or transferred to outstanding amounts during the income year. 29 ird.govt.nz Question 22 Other income If you invested capital in a partnership or LTC but did not take an active part in the day-to-day operation or management of the business, any earnings would be considered passive income. Enter this amount at Question 22 unless you’ve already included it at another Question on your return. Also at Question 22 show any other income the partnership or LTC received, for example sale of: • • non-FIF shares or other property • • securities. If the partnership or LTC received any of the income listed above, please read the following. Income from sale of non-FIF shares or other property Profits from the sale of shares and other property are taxable if the partnership or LTC buys: • • and sells shares or other property as a business • • shares or other property for resale, or • • shares or property to make a profit. List the details of gross income and expenses from these sales on a separate sheet of paper and attach it to the top of page 3 of your IR7. Include the total profits in Box 22B. Selling or disposing of assets If the partnership or LTC sold or disposed of a depreciated asset for more than its adjusted tax value, you may need to account for depreciation recovered. You can use the depreciation calculator on our website ird.govt.nz to get a complete depreciation schedule for any asset. The schedule includes the amount to claim in the year of purchase and any adjustment in the year of sale. For more information read Depreciation - a guide for businesses - IR260, and either Depreciation rates - IR265 or Historic depreciation rates - IR267. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE30 Losses from shares or other property If the partnership or LTC has made a loss and you can show that if the partnership or LTC had made a profit it would have been taxable, the partnership or LTC may be able to claim the loss as an expense. Include the total loss at Box 22B. Write the details of the loss on a separate sheet of paper and attach it to the top of page 3 of your IR7. Include details of other profits or losses made from similar sales, whether in this tax year or earlier. Financial arrangements A partner or owner must account for income from financial arrangements on an accrual basis. Financial arrangements include government stock, local authority stock, mortgage bonds, futures contracts and deferred property settlements. Changes to the rules for the treatment of financial arrangements have split the rules into 2 sets. Generally, the first set applies to financial arrangements entered into before 20 May 1999 and the second applies to financial arrangements entered into, on or after that date. Both sets of rules require the income or expenditure to be spread over the term of the financial arrangement. Both sets of rules allow some exceptions from these spreading provisions if the partner or owner is a cash-basis holder (under the first set of rules), or a cash-basis person (under the second set of rules). The partner or owner is a cash-basis holder if, before 20 May 1999: • • they held financial arrangements of $600,000 or less in value, or • • the income derived from the financial arrangements was $70,000 or less, and • • the difference between the person's gross income calculated under the cash basis and that calculated under the accrual method is no more than $20,000. 31 ird.govt.nz The partner or owner is a cash-basis person if, from 20 May 1999: • • the value of all financial arrangements added together is less than $1 million, or • • the absolute value (the value no matter whether it's a positive or a negative figure) calculated under the accrual rules in the income year from the financial arrangement is less than $100,000, and • • in comparing the gross income and expenditure using a spreading method under the accrual rules with the cash-basis income and expenditure, the result is less than $40,000. To determine whether the partner or owner is a cash-basis holder or cash-basis person, they must take into account their share of the financial arrangement, or their share in the gross income or expenditure under the financial arrangement the partnership or LTC is a party to. Sale or maturity of financial arrangements Whether or not the exemption from the spreading methods applies, when a financial arrangement matures, is sold, remitted or transferred, you must do a "wash-up" calculation, known as a base price adjustment. The calculation ensures the total gains or losses from the financial arrangement are accounted for. If you need any information about calculating a base price adjustment, call us on 0800 443 773. Question 24 Expenses The partnership or LTC may have incurred expenses in generating its income, for example: • • commission deducted from interest and dividends • • expenses for return preparation, or • • interest paid to Inland Revenue for late payment of tax in the income year it is paid. If the expenses have not already been claimed in the return, print the amount in Box 24. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE32 Question 26 Deduction for losses extinguished on transition from a QC or LAQC If the partnership or LTC had losses which were extinguished on transitioning from a QC or LAQC, each owner or partner is allowed a deduction for an amount equal to the amount given by the following formula: (Loss balance extinguished − prior years' deductions) × partnership share or owner's effective interest Note This is limited to the partner's or owner's share of net partnership or net LTC income for the year. Loss balance extinguished is the loss balance extinguished on transition from a QC or LAQC. If it includes foreign losses please contact us to make sure they are accounted for correctly. Prior years' deductions is the total amount of deductions for extinguished losses allowed in previous income years for all persons with a share in the partnership, or an effective look-through interest in the LTC. If this is the first year deductions have been claimed for extinguished losses, the amount will be zero. Work out the maximum allowable deduction for each owner or partner using the calculation table below and on page 33. Boxes 1 to 3 only need to be completed once. Use the resulting figures for all owners or partners. Boxes 4 to 9 must be completed for each owner or partner using their information from the IR7L or IR7P. Loss balance extinguished (copy this figure to Box 26 on the IR7) 1 Prior years' deductions (copy this figure to Box 26A on the IR7) 2 Subtract Box 2 from Box 1 and print the answer in Box 3. 3 33 ird.govt.nz If the answer in Box 3 is zero, no further deductions for extinguished losses can be claimed by the owners or partners. If it is greater than zero, continue below. Note Information on completing the IR7L is explained later in this guide. Attribution of income/loss is explained on page 34, and how to complete Box 27Q is explained on page 36 of this guide. Copy the total income figure from Box 27K on the IR7L or IR7P to Box 4 4 For LTC owners, copy any non-allowable deductions this year from Box 27Q on the IR7L to Box 5 5 Add Boxes 4 and 5 and print the answer in Box 6. 6 If Box 6 is a loss, the owner or partner is not entitled to a deduction this year. If it is not a loss, continue below. Convert the owner's or partner's attribution of income/loss from Box 27B on the IR7L or IR7P to a decimal amount (for example 40% = .40). Print the answer in Box 7. 7 Multiply Box 3 by Box 7 and print the answer in Box 8. 8 Print the amount from either Box 6 or Box 8, whichever is the lesser, in Box 9 below. This is the maximum deduction for the owner or partner. Maximum deduction 9 Copy the amount from Box 9 to Box 27L on the IR7L or IR7P form. Add up the maximum deductions for all owners or partners and print the answer in Box 26B of the IR7 return. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE34 Question 27 Attribution of income/loss All income, losses and tax credits must be attributed to the partners or owners in proportion to their share in the partnership or effective look-through interest in the LTC. At Question 27 tick which entity the income/loss details are attached for. • • partnerships, complete the IR7P to provide attribution details for all partners, or • • LTCs, complete the IR7L to provide attribution details for all owners. Show the details for each partner or owner on the relevant form. If there are more than 2 partners or owners, use additional IR7P or IR7L forms. You can print them from our website ird.govt.nz Attach all IR7P or IR7L forms to the top of page 3 of your IR7 return. Completing your IR7L or IR7P Box 27A IRD number Print the partner's or owner's IRD number. If you do not know their IRD number you will need to contact them to request it. Box 27B Attribution of income/loss Show the attribution of income or loss the partner or owner is entitled to as a percentage of the total. Write percentages as four-digit numbers, for example show 15% as 15.00. Note For LTCs with only 1 owner the percentage will be a five-digit number, for example show 100% as 100.00. For LTCs, effective look-through interest determines each owner's attribution of income or loss from the LTC. Each owner's effective look-through interest is generally determined by the percentage of shares the owner has in t h e LTC . For more information read our Look-through companies - IR879 guide 35 ird.govt.nz Boxes 27C to 27J Attributed income/loss Print the partner's or owner's attribution of: • • interest (from Question 11) in Box 27C • • dividends (from Question 12) in Box 27D • • Māori authority distributions (from Question 13) in Box 27E • • overseas income (from Question 16) in Box 27F • • residential income (from Question 18) in Box 27G • • other rental income (from Question 20) in Box 27H • • other passive income (from Questions 21 and 22 minus any relevant expenses at Question 24, including income received by a non-active partner or owner in the business) in Box 27I • • all other income and expenses (not already included in Boxes 27C to 27I) in Box 27J. Box 27K Total income Print the total of all Boxes 27C, 27D, 27E, 27F, 27G, 27H, 27I and 27J in Box 27K. If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. Note The totals of all partners' or owners' Box 27Ks must add up to the IR7 income or loss shown in Box 25. If they do not, it will take us longer to process your return. Box 27L Deduction for extinguished losses See instructions on pages 32 to 33 of this guide. Box 27M Residential rental deductions Print the partner’s or owner’s attribution in Box 27M. Boxes 27N, 27O and 27P Attributed tax credits Print the partner's or owner's attribution of: overseas tax paid (from Question 16) in Box 27N • • imputation credits (from Question 12) in Box 27O • • other tax credits (from Questions 10 to 15, excluding any imputation credits) in Box 27P. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE36 Boxes 27Q to 27T Non-allowable deductions (IR7L only) - where loss limitation rule does not apply for the owner(s) Note This information applies for an LTC who is not subject to the loss limitation rule. See the note on page 12. Non-allowable deductions this year There will not be non-allowable deductions this year as the loss limitation rule no longer applies. Do not include an amount in Box 27Q. Non-allowable deductions brought forward Note The LTC should have records of the non-allowable deductions brought forward. Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year This will be the same as the amount in Box 27R and is the amount claimable this year. Copy the amount in Box 27R to Box 27S. Non-allowable deductions carried forward There should be no non-allowable deductions to carry forward. Leave Box 27S blank. Example 1 Loss limitation rule no longer applies - owner with previously non-allowable deductions The following details are for Catherine who owns all of the shares in Company A, an LTC. IRD number 12-121-212 Total gross income $10,000 Expenses/deductions $15,000 Loss $5,000 Non-allowable deductions brought forward $10,000 37 ird.govt.nz Boxes 27Q to 27T Non-allowable deductions (IR7L only) - where loss limitation rule still applies for the owners Note This information only applies for an LTC that is in a partnership or joint venture with another LTC. The loss limitation rule ensures that the deductions claimed reflect the level of an owner's economic loss in the LTC. The "owner's basis" refers to the adjusted tax book value of an owner's investment in the LTC. The deductions an owner can claim are restricted if the overall deductions exceed the owner's basis in the LTC. See examples of the loss limitation rule on pages 41 to 56. Note For each owner calculate their owner's basis and any non-allowable deductions using the tables and information on pages 38 and 39. Please see Part 7 of our Look-through companies - IR879 guide before calculating the owner's basis. It explains the terms used in the following calculation. If there's more than 1 owner, complete the tables on pages 38 and 39 for each owner separately. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE38 Calculate the owner's basis here: Investments 1 Distributions 2 Subtract Box 2 from Box 1 3 Income 4 Add Boxes 3 and 4 5 Deductions from previous tax years (but excluding any non-allowable deductions in those years) 6 Subtract Box 6 from Box 5 7 Disallowed amounts 8 Subtract Box 8 from Box 7\* 9 \* If Box 9 is a negative amount it means the owner has negative equity in the LTC and their owner's basis will be treated as nil. Print "0.00" in Box 9. Note Deductions in Box 6 above also includes all the deductions claimed against gross income from the LTC from all sources in previous years in which the company was an LTC. For example, if the LTC has a rental property, all the deductions claimable against the rental income will be included in the total deductions figure, as well as expenses incurred in producing income from all other sources. 39 ird.govt.nz When each owner's basis (Box 9 on the previous page) has been calculated you can work out if there is any limitation on the deductions claimable for each owner. If the: • • owner's basis (Box 9) is more than their attribution of the deductions (expenses), you will not need to complete Box 27Q - go to Non-allowable deductions • • attribution of deductions (expenses) to the owners are more than their owner's basis you'll need to complete Boxes 1 to 3 below to calculate the amount to declare at Box 27Q. Attribution of this year's deductions (expenses) 1 Owner's basis (from Box 9 on page 38) 2 Subtract Box 2 from Box 1 3 The result is non-allowable deductions this year. Copy the amount from Box 3 into Box 27Q on your IR7L. Any deductions an owner cannot claim because of the loss limitation rule are carried forward and may be claimed in future years, subject to the application of the loss limitation rule in those years. Owners may only use these deductions against income from the LTC. Non-allowable deductions Complete the calculation (Boxes 1 to 5) on the following page if you have: • • non-allowable deductions brought forward from last year (copy the amount from Box 26R Non-allowable deductions on your IR7L 2021 form into Box 27R on your IR7L 2022 form), or • • non-allowable deductions this year (that means Box 27Q has an amount in it). PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE40 Non-allowable deductions brought forward (also show this amount in Box 27R). 1 Non-allowable deductions this year (Box 3 on page 38, put zero if you do not have non-allowable deductions). 2 Add Boxes 1 and 2. 3 If your Owner's basis (Box 9 on page 38) was more than your attribution of this year's deductions (expenses), copy the difference to Box 4, otherwise print $0.00. 4 Subtract Box 4 from Box 3 (print $0.00 if this would equal a negative value). 5 Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimable this year If there is a figure in Box 4, you will be able to claim prior years' non-allowable deductions. Enter the smaller number of Box 3 and Box 4 as prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year in Box 27S on your IR7L. Non-allowable deductions carried forward The amount in Box 5 is the non-allowable deductions to carry forward. Copy this amount into Box 27T. 41 ird.govt.nz Example 2 LTC loss limitation rule - current year non-allowable deductions only The following details are for Company A which is an LTC: IRD number 12-345-678 Total gross income $6,000 Expenses/deductions $10,000 Loss $4,000 One owner (shareholder): Sam (100%) IRD number 91-111-213 Sam's owner's basis $5,500.00 Note: Company A is in a partnership with another LTC. Calculate the non-allowable deductions for Sam: Attribution of this year's deductions (expenses) 1 10,000 00 Owner's basis (from Box 9 on page 38) 2 5,500 00 Subtract Box 2 from Box 1 3 4,500 00 Box 3 is Sam's non-allowable deductions this year. The amount in Box 3 ($4,500) is shown at Box 27Q. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE42 Non-allowable deductions brought forward (also show this amount in Box 27R on the IR7L). 1 0 00 Non-allowable deductions this year (copy from Box 3 on previous page) 2 4,500 00 Add Boxes 1 and 2 3 4,500 00 Excess owner's basis (not applicable to Sam) 4 Subtract Box 4 from Box 3 (Print $0.00 if negative). 5 4,500 00 Box 5 is Sam's non-allowable deductions to carry forward. The amount in Box 5 ($4,500) is shown at Box 27T. 43 ird.govt.nz PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE44 Company A’s IR7L would look like this: IR7L March 2022 2022 See the guide for further details before completing this form. Complete this form and attach it to the top of page 3 of the LTC’s IR7 income tax return. Look-through company (LTC) name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Owner’s name IRD number 27A Attribution of income/loss (See the guide for further details) 27B Attributed income/loss and tax credits Interest – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Deduction for extinguished losses (See the guide for further details) 27C27L DividendsResidential rental deductions 27D27M Māori authority distributionsOverseas tax paid 27E27N Overseas income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxImputation credits 27F27O Total residential incomeOther tax credits (See the guide for further details) 27G27P Other rental income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions this year (See the guide for further details) 27H27Q Other passive income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions bought forward 27I 27R All other income (not already included at Boxes 27C to 27I) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxPrior years’ non-allowable deductions claimed this year 27J27S Total income (sum of boxes 27C to 27J) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Non-allowable deductions carried forward (either add Boxes 27Q and 27R, or subtract Box 27S from 27R) 27K27T Look-through company (LTC) income/loss attribution 91111213 COMPANY A 12345678 1 00 00 SAM 4500 00 4500 00 4000 00 - 4000 00 - 45 ird.govt.nz Company A’s IR7L would look like this: IR7L March 2022 2022 See the guide for further details before completing this form. Complete this form and attach it to the top of page 3 of the LTC’s IR7 income tax return. Look-through company (LTC) name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Owner’s name IRD number 27A Attribution of income/loss (See the guide for further details) 27B Attributed income/loss and tax credits Interest – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxDeduction for extinguished losses (See the guide for further details) 27C27L DividendsResidential rental deductions 27D27M Māori authority distributionsOverseas tax paid 27E27N Overseas income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxImputation credits 27F27O Total residential incomeOther tax credits (See the guide for further details) 27G27P Other rental income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions this year (See the guide for further details) 27H27Q Other passive income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions bought forward 27I 27R All other income (not already included at Boxes 27C to 27I) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxPrior years’ non-allowable deductions claimed this year 27J27S Total income (sum of boxes 27C to 27J) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Non-allowable deductions carried forward (either add Boxes 27Q and 27R, or subtract Box 27S from 27R) 27K27T Look-through company (LTC) income/loss attribution 91111213 COMPANY A 12345678 1 00 00 SAM 4500 00 4500 00 4000 00 - 4000 00 - PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE46 S a m’s Individual income tax return - IR3 Question 19 would look like this: 17Did you receive any overseas income? Attach proof of overseas tax paid and a letter detailing any overseas losses to the return. NoGo to Question 18Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income 17A17B If your total overseas income includes a withdrawal and/or transfer from a foreign superannuation scheme, see the guide and tick Box 17C if applicable. 17C 18Did you receive any partnership income? Exclude any income/losses shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25, or 27 as appropriate. NoGo to Question 19Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total partnership tax creditsTotal active partnership income 18A18B 19Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? Exclude any income/loss shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25 and 27. No Go to Question 20Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total LTC tax credits 19A Total active LTC income - if this amount is a loss, put a minus sign in the last Box. 19B Non-allowable deductions this year 19C Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 19D Adjusted LTC income Either add Boxes 19B and 19C or subtract Box 19D from 19B. Print your answer in Box 19E. 19E 20Did you receive a shareholder-employee salary with no tax deducted? NoGo to Question 21Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total shareholder-employee salary 20 If you did not receive a shareholder-employee salary but may in the future, tick Box 20A. 20A Shareholder AIM tax credit 20B If you qualify for WfFTC, and you are a major shareholder working full-time without pay for your close company which earns gross income, see the guide and tick Box 20C if it applies to you. 20C 21Tax credit and income subtotal Add the blue Boxes 11E, 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A, 18A, 19A and 20B. Print the total in Box 21A. Add the dark red Boxes 11B, 12D, 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, 16C, 17B, 18B, 19E and 20. Print the total in Box 21B. Tax credit subtotalIncome subtotal 21A21B 22Did you receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? NoGo to Question 23.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 22A22B Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 22C22D Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last BoxExcess residential rental deductions carried forward 22E22F 23Did you receive any other rents? Do not include any income already shown at Question 22. NoGo to Question 24Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Net rents 23 4 000 00 - 500 00 √ 4 500 00 Sam's adjusted LTC income is in effect calculated by subtracting his allowable deductions ($5,500) from Company A's gross income ($6,000) = $500. Example 3 LTC loss limitation rule - with non- allowable deductions brought forward The following details are for Company C which is an LTC in a partnership with another LTC: IRD number 22-324-252 Total gross income $6,000 Expenses/deductions $8,000 Loss $2,000 Company C's owners (shareholders) details are: Linda (50%) IRD number 62-728-293 Marley (50%) IRD number 31-323-334 Both Linda and Marley had non-allowable deductions last year of $500. 47 ird.govt.nz S a m’s Individual income tax return - IR3 Question 19 would look like this: 17Did you receive any overseas income? Attach proof of overseas tax paid and a letter detailing any overseas losses to the return. NoGo to Question 18Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income 17A17B If your total overseas income includes a withdrawal and/or transfer from a foreign superannuation scheme, see the guide and tick Box 17C if applicable. 17C 18Did you receive any partnership income? Exclude any income/losses shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25, or 27 as appropriate. NoGo to Question 19Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total partnership tax creditsTotal active partnership income 18A18B 19Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? Exclude any income/loss shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25 and 27. NoGo to Question 20Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total LTC tax credits 19A Total active LTC income - if this amount is a loss, put a minus sign in the last Box. 19B Non-allowable deductions this year 19C Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 19D Adjusted LTC income Either add Boxes 19B and 19C or subtract Box 19D from 19B. Print your answer in Box 19E. 19E 20Did you receive a shareholder-employee salary with no tax deducted? NoGo to Question 21Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total shareholder-employee salary 20 If you did not receive a shareholder-employee salary but may in the future, tick Box 20A. 20A Shareholder AIM tax credit 20B If you qualify for WfFTC, and you are a major shareholder working full-time without pay for your close company which earns gross income, see the guide and tick Box 20C if it applies to you. 20C 21Tax credit and income subtotal Add the blue Boxes 11E, 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A, 18A, 19A and 20B. Print the total in Box 21A. Add the dark red Boxes 11B, 12D, 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, 16C, 17B, 18B, 19E and 20. Print the total in Box 21B. Tax credit subtotalIncome subtotal 21A21B 22Did you receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? NoGo to Question 23.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 22A22B Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 22C22D Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last BoxExcess residential rental deductions carried forward 22E22F 23Did you receive any other rents? Do not include any income already shown at Question 22. NoGo to Question 24Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Net rents 23 4 000 00 - 500 00 √ 4 500 00 Sam's adjusted LTC income is in effect calculated by subtracting his allowable deductions ($5,500) from Company A's gross income ($6,000) = $500. Example 3 LTC loss limitation rule - with non- allowable deductions brought forward The following details are for Company C which is an LTC in a partnership with another LTC: IRD number 22-324-252 Total gross income $6,000 Expenses/deductions $8,000 Loss $2,000 Company C's owners (shareholders) details are: Linda (50%) IRD number 62-728-293 Marley (50%) IRD number 31-323-334 Both Linda and Marley had non-allowable deductions last year of $500. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE48 Calculate the non-allowable deductions for Linda and Marley: LindaMarley Attribution of this year's deductions (expenses) 1 4,000 004,000 00 Owner's basis (from Box 9 on page 38) 2 6,000 003,000 00 Subtract Box 2 from Box 1 3 -2,000 001,000 00 Non-allowable deductions brought forward (also show this amount in Box 27R). 4 500 00500 00 Add Boxes 3 and 4. (Print $0.00 if this would equal a negative value.) 5 0 001,500 00 49 ird.govt.nz PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE50 Company C’s IR7L details for Linda would look like this: IR7L March 2022 2022 See the guide for further details before completing this form. Complete this form and attach it to the top of page 3 of the LTC’s IR7 income tax return. Look-through company (LTC) name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Owner’s name IRD number 27A Attribution of income/loss (See the guide for further details) 27B Attributed income/loss and tax credits Interest – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Deduction for extinguished losses (See the guide for further details) 27C27L DividendsResidential rental deductions 27D27M Māori authority distributionsOverseas tax paid 27E27N Overseas income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxImputation credits 27F27O Total residential incomeOther tax credits (See the guide for further details) 27G27P Other rental income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions this year (See the guide for further details) 27H27Q Other passive income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions bought forward 27I 27R All other income (not already included at Boxes 27C to 27I) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxPrior years’ non-allowable deductions claimed this year 27J27S Total income (sum of boxes 27C to 27J) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Non-allowable deductions carried forward (either add Boxes 27Q and 27R, or subtract Box 27S from 27R) 27K27T Look-through company (LTC) income/loss attribution 62728293 22324252 COMPANY C LINDA 50 00 500 00 500 00 1000 00 - 1000 00 - 0 00 51 ird.govt.nz Company C’s IR7L details for Linda would look like this: IR7L March 2022 2022 See the guide for further details before completing this form. Complete this form and attach it to the top of page 3 of the LTC’s IR7 income tax return. Look-through company (LTC) name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Owner’s name IRD number 27A Attribution of income/loss (See the guide for further details) 27B Attributed income/loss and tax credits Interest – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxDeduction for extinguished losses (See the guide for further details) 27C27L DividendsResidential rental deductions 27D27M Māori authority distributionsOverseas tax paid 27E27N Overseas income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxImputation credits 27F27O Total residential incomeOther tax credits (See the guide for further details) 27G27P Other rental income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions this year (See the guide for further details) 27H27Q Other passive income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions bought forward 27I 27R All other income (not already included at Boxes 27C to 27I) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxPrior years’ non-allowable deductions claimed this year 27J27S Total income (sum of boxes 27C to 27J) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Non-allowable deductions carried forward (either add Boxes 27Q and 27R, or subtract Box 27S from 27R) 27K27T Look-through company (LTC) income/loss attribution 62728293 22324252 COMPANY C LINDA 50 00 500 00 500 00 1000 00 - 1000 00 - 0 00 PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE52 Linda will show her income from Company C on her Individual income tax return - IR3 at Question 19 "Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income?" as shown below. Linda's attribution of this year's deductions is not limited, so she can claim her full share of the loss ($1,000). In addition, she is now able to claim the $500 she was not allowed last year, making her adjusted LTC income a $1,500 loss. Linda’s IR3 Question 19 would look like this: 17Did you receive any overseas income? Attach proof of overseas tax paid and a letter detailing any overseas losses to the return. NoGo to Question 18Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income 17A17B If your total overseas income includes a withdrawal and/or transfer from a foreign superannuation scheme, see the guide and tick Box 17C if applicable. 17C 18Did you receive any partnership income? Exclude any income/losses shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25, or 27 as appropriate. NoGo to Question 19Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total partnership tax creditsTotal active partnership income 18A18B 19Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? Exclude any income/loss shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25 and 27. No Go to Question 20Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total LTC tax credits 19A Total active LTC income - if this amount is a loss, put a minus sign in the last Box. 19B Non-allowable deductions this year 19C Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 19D Adjusted LTC income Either add Boxes 19B and 19C or subtract Box 19D from 19B. Print your answer in Box 19E. 19E 20Did you receive a shareholder-employee salary with no tax deducted? NoGo to Question 21Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total shareholder-employee salary 20 If you did not receive a shareholder-employee salary but may in the future, tick Box 20A. 20A Shareholder AIM tax credit 20B If you qualify for WfFTC, and you are a major shareholder working full-time without pay for your close company which earns gross income, see the guide and tick Box 20C if it applies to you. 20C 21Tax credit and income subtotal Add the blue Boxes 11E, 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A, 18A, 19A and 20B. Print the total in Box 21A. Add the dark red Boxes 11B, 12D, 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, 16C, 17B, 18B, 19E and 20. Print the total in Box 21B. Tax credit subtotalIncome subtotal 21A21B 22Did you receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? NoGo to Question 23.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 22A22B Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 22C22D Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last BoxExcess residential rental deductions carried forward 22E22F 23Did you receive any other rents? Do not include any income already shown at Question 22. NoGo to Question 24Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Net rents 23 1 0 0 0 00 - 1 5 0 0 00 - √ 500 00 53 ird.govt.nz Linda will show her income from Company C on her Individual income tax return - IR3 at Question 19 "Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income?" as shown below. Linda's attribution of this year's deductions is not limited, so she can claim her full share of the loss ($1,000). In addition, she is now able to claim the $500 she was not allowed last year, making her adjusted LTC income a $1,500 loss. Linda’s IR3 Question 19 would look like this: 17Did you receive any overseas income? Attach proof of overseas tax paid and a letter detailing any overseas losses to the return. NoGo to Question 18Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income 17A17B If your total overseas income includes a withdrawal and/or transfer from a foreign superannuation scheme, see the guide and tick Box 17C if applicable. 17C 18Did you receive any partnership income? Exclude any income/losses shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25, or 27 as appropriate. NoGo to Question 19Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total partnership tax creditsTotal active partnership income 18A18B 19Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? Exclude any income/loss shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25 and 27. NoGo to Question 20Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total LTC tax credits 19A Total active LTC income - if this amount is a loss, put a minus sign in the last Box. 19B Non-allowable deductions this year 19C Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 19D Adjusted LTC income Either add Boxes 19B and 19C or subtract Box 19D from 19B. Print your answer in Box 19E. 19E 20Did you receive a shareholder-employee salary with no tax deducted? NoGo to Question 21Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total shareholder-employee salary 20 If you did not receive a shareholder-employee salary but may in the future, tick Box 20A. 20A Shareholder AIM tax credit 20B If you qualify for WfFTC, and you are a major shareholder working full-time without pay for your close company which earns gross income, see the guide and tick Box 20C if it applies to you. 20C 21Tax credit and income subtotal Add the blue Boxes 11E, 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A, 18A, 19A and 20B. Print the total in Box 21A. Add the dark red Boxes 11B, 12D, 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, 16C, 17B, 18B, 19E and 20. Print the total in Box 21B. Tax credit subtotalIncome subtotal 21A21B 22Did you receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? NoGo to Question 23.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 22A22B Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 22C22D Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last BoxExcess residential rental deductions carried forward 22E22F 23Did you receive any other rents? Do not include any income already shown at Question 22. NoGo to Question 24Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Net rents 23 1 0 0 0 00 - 1 5 0 0 00 - √ 500 00 PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE54 Company C’s IR7L details for Marley would look like this: IR7L March 2022 2022 See the guide for further details before completing this form. Complete this form and attach it to the top of page 3 of the LTC’s IR7 income tax return. Look-through company (LTC) name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Owner’s name IRD number 27A Attribution of income/loss (See the guide for further details) 27B Attributed income/loss and tax credits Interest – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Deduction for extinguished losses (See the guide for further details) 27C27L DividendsResidential rental deductions 27D27M Māori authority distributionsOverseas tax paid 27E27N Overseas income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxImputation credits 27F27O Total residential incomeOther tax credits (See the guide for further details) 27G27P Other rental income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions this year (See the guide for further details) 27H27Q Other passive income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions bought forward 27I 27R All other income (not already included at Boxes 27C to 27I) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxPrior years’ non-allowable deductions claimed this year 27J27S Total income (sum of boxes 27C to 27J) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Non-allowable deductions carried forward (either add Boxes 27Q and 27R, or subtract Box 27S from 27R) 27K27T Look-through company (LTC) income/loss attribution 31323334 MARLEY 50 00 500 00 1000 00 1000 00 - 1000 00 - 1500 00 Marley will show his income from Company C on his Individual income tax return - IR3 at Question 19 "Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income?". He would also have $1,500 non-allowable deductions to carry forward to next year. 55 ird.govt.nz Company C’s IR7L details for Marley would look like this: IR7L March 2022 2022 See the guide for further details before completing this form. Complete this form and attach it to the top of page 3 of the LTC’s IR7 income tax return. Look-through company (LTC) name IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Owner’s name IRD number 27A Attribution of income/loss (See the guide for further details) 27B Attributed income/loss and tax credits Interest – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxDeduction for extinguished losses (See the guide for further details) 27C27L DividendsResidential rental deductions 27D27M Māori authority distributionsOverseas tax paid 27E27N Overseas income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxImputation credits 27F27O Total residential incomeOther tax credits (See the guide for further details) 27G27P Other rental income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions this year (See the guide for further details) 27H27Q Other passive income – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxNon-allowable deductions bought forward 27I 27R All other income (not already included at Boxes 27C to 27I) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last boxPrior years’ non-allowable deductions claimed this year 27J27S Total income (sum of boxes 27C to 27J) – if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Non-allowable deductions carried forward (either add Boxes 27Q and 27R, or subtract Box 27S from 27R) 27K27T Look-through company (LTC) income/loss attribution 31323334 MARLEY 50 00 500 00 1000 00 1000 00 - 1000 00 - 1500 00 Marley will show his income from Company C on his Individual income tax return - IR3 at Question 19 "Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income?". He would also have $1,500 non-allowable deductions to carry forward to next year. Note For Marley, limiting the deductions has the effect of treating his share of the deductions as $3,000. When this amount is allowed against his share of the gross income ($3,000) the result is $0.00, the amount of the adjusted LTC income. PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE56 Marley’s IR3 Question 19 would look like this: 17Did you receive any overseas income? Attach proof of overseas tax paid and a letter detailing any overseas losses to the return. NoGo to Question 18Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income 17A17B If your total overseas income includes a withdrawal and/or transfer from a foreign superannuation scheme, see the guide and tick Box 17C if applicable. 17C 18Did you receive any partnership income? Exclude any income/losses shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25, or 27 as appropriate. NoGo to Question 19Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total partnership tax creditsTotal active partnership income 18A18B 19Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? Exclude any income/loss shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25 and 27. No Go to Question 20Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total LTC tax credits 19A Total active LTC income - if this amount is a loss, put a minus sign in the last Box. 19B Non-allowable deductions this year 19C Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 19D Adjusted LTC income Either add Boxes 19B and 19C or subtract Box 19D from 19B. Print your answer in Box 19E. 19E 20Did you receive a shareholder-employee salary with no tax deducted? NoGo to Question 21Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total shareholder-employee salary 20 If you did not receive a shareholder-employee salary but may in the future, tick Box 20A. 20A Shareholder AIM tax credit 20B If you qualify for WfFTC, and you are a major shareholder working full-time without pay for your close company which earns gross income, see the guide and tick Box 20C if it applies to you. 20C 21Tax credit and income subtotal Add the blue Boxes 11E, 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A, 18A, 19A and 20B. Print the total in Box 21A. Add the dark red Boxes 11B, 12D, 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, 16C, 17B, 18B, 19E and 20. Print the total in Box 21B. Tax credit subtotalIncome subtotal 21A21B 22Did you receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? NoGo to Question 23.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 22A22B Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 22C22D Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last BoxExcess residential rental deductions carried forward 22E22F 23Did you receive any other rents? Do not include any income already shown at Question 22. NoGo to Question 24Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Net rents 23 1 0 0 0 00 - 0 00 √ 1 000 00 Question 28 Additional disclosure of foreign investments If the partnership or LTC has an interest in an FIF or CFC, the partners or owners may be required to complete an additional disclosure form for their investments. Find out more about the base erosion profit shifting (BEPS) hybrid mismatch rules at ird.govt.nz/beps Full details of the disclosure requirements are available in the May issue of our Tax Information Bulletin (TIB) each year. FIF and CFC disclosure forms are available on our website ird.govt.nz/forms-guides 57 ird.govt.nz Marley’s IR3 Question 19 would look like this: 17Did you receive any overseas income? Attach proof of overseas tax paid and a letter detailing any overseas losses to the return. NoGo to Question 18Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total overseas tax paidTotal overseas income 17A17B If your total overseas income includes a withdrawal and/or transfer from a foreign superannuation scheme, see the guide and tick Box 17C if applicable. 17C 18Did you receive any partnership income? Exclude any income/losses shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25, or 27 as appropriate. NoGo to Question 19Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total partnership tax creditsTotal active partnership income 18A18B 19Did you receive any look-through company (LTC) income? Exclude any income/loss shown at Questions 13, 14, 15, 17, 22, 23, 25 and 27. NoGo to Question 20Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total LTC tax credits 19A Total active LTC income - if this amount is a loss, put a minus sign in the last Box. 19B Non-allowable deductions this year 19C Prior years' non-allowable deductions claimed this year 19D Adjusted LTC income Either add Boxes 19B and 19C or subtract Box 19D from 19B. Print your answer in Box 19E. 19E 20Did you receive a shareholder-employee salary with no tax deducted? NoGo to Question 21Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Total shareholder-employee salary 20 If you did not receive a shareholder-employee salary but may in the future, tick Box 20A. 20A Shareholder AIM tax credit 20B If you qualify for WfFTC, and you are a major shareholder working full-time without pay for your close company which earns gross income, see the guide and tick Box 20C if it applies to you. 20C 21Tax credit and income subtotal Add the blue Boxes 11E, 12A, 13A, 14A, 15A, 16A, 18A, 19A and 20B. Print the total in Box 21A. Add the dark red Boxes 11B, 12D, 13B, 14B, 15B, 16B, 16C, 17B, 18B, 19E and 20. Print the total in Box 21B. Tax credit subtotalIncome subtotal 21A21B 22Did you receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? NoGo to Question 23.Ye sPrint the totals below. See the guide for further details. Select which method you are using (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 22A22B Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 22C22D Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last BoxExcess residential rental deductions carried forward 22E22F 23Did you receive any other rents? Do not include any income already shown at Question 22. NoGo to Question 24Ye sPrint the totals here. See the guide for further details. Net rents 23 1 0 0 0 00 - 0 00 √ 1 000 00 Question 28 Additional disclosure of foreign investments If the partnership or LTC has an interest in an FIF or CFC, the partners or owners may be required to complete an additional disclosure form for their investments. Find out more about the base erosion profit shifting (BEPS) hybrid mismatch rules at ird.govt.nz/beps Full details of the disclosure requirements are available in the May issue of our Tax Information Bulletin (TIB) each year. FIF and CFC disclosure forms are available on our website ird.govt.nz/forms-guides ACC levies The amount liable for ACC levies is based on the partners' or owners' share of the partnership or LTC income derived from personal effort that is, "active" declared in the individual partners' or owners' IR3 income tax returns. Partners' or owners' wages Regular salaries or wages paid by the partnership or LTC to partners or owners have already had earners' levy accounted for in PAYE withheld. ACC will invoice the partnership or LTC for other levies. For more information If you have any questions about ACC or levies, please go to ACC's website acc.co.nz/productslevies or contact the ACC Business Service Centre. Phone 0800 222 776 Email business@acc.co.nz PARTNERSHIP AND LTC RETURN GUIDE58 Services you may need Need to speak with us? Have your IRD number ready and call us on one of these numbers. General tax, tax credits and refunds 0800 775 247 Employer enquiries 0800 377 772 General business tax 0800 377 774 Overdue returns and payments 0800 227 771 We're open 8am to 6pm Monday to Friday, and 9am to 1pm Saturday. We record all calls. Our self-service lines are open 7 days a week - except between 5am and 6am each day. They offer a range of automated options, especially if you're enrolled with voice ID. Find out more at ird.govt.nz/contact-us Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your tax and entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you do not. We may also exchange information about you with: • • some government agencies • • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them, and • • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). You can ask for the personal information we hold about you. We'll give the information to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Find our full privacy policy at ird.govt.nz/privacy 59 ird.govt.nz If you have a complaint about our service We're committed to providing you with a quality service. If there's a problem, we'd like to know about it and have the chance to fix it. If you disagree with how we've assessed your tax, you may need to follow a formal disputes process. Find out more about making a complaint, and the disputes process, at ird.govt.nz/disputes