When to use this form You have received this form because our records show you have sold/transferred a property and you may be required to declare income from the sale or transfer. Use the flowchart below to determine whether you are required to complete this form: Have you sold a residential property during the tax year? (for further information see notes on page 3) Have you owned the property for more than 5 years? (for further information see notes on page 3) Does one of the exclusions apply? (for further information see notes on page 3) Will the income be included in your return as part of your business income as a property speculator, property dealer, developer or builder? You do not need to complete this form The bright-line test applies and you need to complete this form Ye s No No No Ye s Ye s Ye s No Use a separate IR833 for each property you've sold. IR833 August 2020 Bright-line property sale information IR833 August 2020 Bright-line property sale information Follow the flowchart to check if you need to fill out this form. Refer to the notes on the following pages to help you complete the form. Tax year ending Your nameIRD number Bright-line test Is this property sale subject to the bright-line test? 1 Ye s No (You do not need to complete this form) Property title number 2 You'll find this information on the land title as the Identifier. E.g. NA87A/809 Property address 3 Date of purchase/acquisition 4 Day Month Year Date of sale/disposal of property 5 Day Month Year To determine which dates to use, refer to the notes on page 3. Property sale income The total price you sold the property for before deducting any expenses.Sale price 6 Expenses Purchase price 7 Deductible expenses 8 Total costs Add Boxes 7 and 8. 9 Net profit (loss) Subtract Box 9 from Box 6 and print in Box 10. Use a negative sign if a loss, eg, -1234.56 10 Percentage of property ownership 11 % If the property is owned by more than one person, enter the percentage of the property owned by you or the organisation. For example, if the property was purchased by you and your partner as an investment property, and you own half of it, the percentage will be 50%. If you do not share ownership of the property, copy the amount in Box 10 to Box 12. Your share of net profit (loss) Your share of net profit (loss) from your property sale. If you share ownership of the property, calculate this by multiplying the total net profit (Box 10) by the percentage of property ownership (Box 11). 12 Add the figure from Box 12 to the residential income box in your tax return. Do not include the loss in your return if it is a bright-line loss. Take a copy for your records and send this page with your income tax return, alternatively you can complete this form in myIR as part of your tax return. Notes to complete the IR833 Bright-line test for residential property Residential property includes land: • with a house on it • the owner will build a house on at some stage, or • the owner may one day build a house on. Under the bright-line test a sale of residential property is taxable in certain circumstances, regardless of your intentions when you acquired it. This includes: • properties bought/acquired on or after 1 October 2015 through to 28 March 2018 inclusive, which have subsequently been sold/ disposed of within two years, and • properties bought/acquired on or after 29 March 2018 which have subsequently been sold/disposed of within five years. If the bright-line test applies to your property transaction, and none of the exclusions apply, then you will have to pay tax on any profit you've made on the sale or disposal of the property. Exclusions For individuals and trusts (in limited circumstances), there are specific exclusions to the bright-line test. These are: Main home - If you are selling a property you need to decide if it's your main home. You can only have 1 main home. It is the property you have the greatest connection to. You can use the main home exclusion if the following 2 situations apply: • you have used a property as your main home for more than 50% of the time you’ve owned it, and • you have used more than 50% of the property's area (including your backyard, gardens and garage). Main home held in a trust - a sale/disposal by a trustee where the property was the main home of the principal settlor of the trust (or the principal settlor does not have a main home) and it was the main home of a beneficiary of the trust. Inherited property - a transfer of property to an executor or administrator, followed by the transfer to an individual beneficiary, and the sale of the property by the beneficiary. Note: The main home exclusion does not apply if it has been used two or more times in the previous two years. Relevant dates for property sales subject to the bright-line test (Boxes 4 and 5) If you have ticked that the sale or disposal of the property is taxable under the bright-line test, use the dates in the table below. Type of purchase/acquisitionDate to use Purchase of propertyRegistration date (date the property transfer was registered with Land Information New Zealand) Purchase of property where no registration occurs prior to the bright-line sale/disposal date Latest date that you acquired an interest in the property e.g. date of contract Sale “off the plan” where there is no title for the landDate of agreement for sale and purchase Acquiring property by way of subdivision of property where registration of the undivided property has occurred prior to the bright-line sale/disposal date The original date of registration for the undivided property Acquiring property by way of subdivision of property where no registration occurs prior to the bright-line sale/disposal date The latest date you acquired an interest in the undivided land e.g. date of contract Type of sale/disposalDate to use Sale, transfer or disposal of property under an agreementDate you entered into an agreement for sale, transfer or disposal Gifting of propertyDate the gift was made Compulsory acquisition of property by the Crown, a local authority or a public authority Date of compulsory acquisition Mortgagee saleDate the property is disposed of by or for the mortgagee as a result of the mortgagor's default Disposals not covered aboveDate you disposed of the property Deductible expenses (Box 8) Capital expenses incurred in acquiring the property and capital improvements will generally be deductible expenditure. You may not claim a deduction for private expenses relating to using the property as your residence. Holding costs are expenses such as interest, rates and insurance that are incurred as a result of owing land and are deductible to the extent that the land is used to earn taxable income. If you're not sure whether an expense is deductible, we recommend you seek advice from a tax agent. Bright-line loss If your total costs are more than the sale price of your property, you can only offset the loss against net income from another property sale. Any remaining loss can only be used in a future year when you have net income from another property sale. Provisional tax If your tax to pay on the taxable profit from your property sale is more than $5,000 tax at the end of the year from your last return ($2500 before 2020 return), you may be required to pay provisional tax in the following tax year. If you're not likely to have the same amount of tax to pay, you could consider estimating your provisional tax for the following year. Because there are penalties for under- paying provisional tax, we recommend you get professional advice about doing this. For more information read our Provisional tax - IR289 guide. Further information on property sales and disposals For more details on the property sales tax rules, go to ird.govt.nz/buying-selling or read our guides Buying and selling residential property - IR313 and Tax and your property transactions - IR361. You can also use the property tax decision tree to help you work out if the property you are buying and selling is taxable under the bright-line test or the intention test of the property rules. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/property/buying-selling