1 Prescribed investor rate What is a prescribed investor rate (PIR)? A PIR is the tax rate that your portfolio investment entity (PIE) uses to calculate the tax on the income from the investment of your contributions. The PIR for New Zealand tax-resident individuals is based on your previous 2 years taxable income, such as salary, wages and any other sources of income you would include in your income tax return. You’ll also need to include any income or loss attributed to you from your PIE when determining your PIR. Why do I need a PIR? Managed funds that become PIEs can calculate and pay tax based on each investor’s PIR. These are called multi- rate PIEs (MRP). PIE investors need to give their PIR and IRD number to their MRP to ensure their investment income is taxed at the right rate. When do I need to provide my PIR? You need to provide your PIR when your MRP asks you for it, or before the MRP calculates the tax on the income it attributes to its investors. You should review your rate each year to make sure it’s correct and notify your MRP of any changes. Failure to provide your PIR It’s important you provide your PIR and IRD number to the PIE. Your investment income will be taxed at the default rate of 28% if you do not provide them. This rate could be higher than your PIR. The diagram on the next page shows the different rates and how to work out your PIR. Providing your IRD number If you’re a New Zealand tax resident, you must give your IRD number to your PIE. Your investment will be taxed at the default rate of 28% and additional penalties may be applied if you do not provide it. New investors in a PIE have 6 weeks to provide their IRD number. After this time the PIE is required to close the account and return the funds less any PIE tax calculated at the 28% default rate. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/pir IR861 September 2024 2 Work out your prescribed investor rate (PIR) There are 4 rates that can apply to an investor who has also provided their IRD number: 0%, 10.5%, 17.5% and 28%. Use the chart below to identify the correct rate for your circumstances. New residents, transitional residents and notified foreign investors please read page 3. Company, incorporated society, tax charity or PIE Your PIR is 0% Joint investment, partnership or unincorporated society The investment should be split and each partner/holder should give the PIE their correct PIR and IRD number: 0%, 10.5%, 17.5% or 28% No No Resident individual investor Note: The income details are for the 2 income years prior to the income year the PIR is to be applied to. Your PIR is 10.5% In either of the last 2 income years was your taxable income excluding PIE income or loss $14,000 or less and your taxable income including your PIE income, less any PIE loss, $48,000 or less? Note: PIE loss does not reduce the taxable income Yes In either of the last 2 income years was your taxable income excluding PIE income or loss $48,000 or less and your taxable income plus your PIE income, less any PIE loss, $70,000 or less? Note: PIE loss cannot exceed PIE income and does not reduce taxable income Yes Your PIR is 17.5% Your PIR is 28% In all other cases Superfund and trustee (excluding charitable trusts) You can choose a PIR of either 0%, 17.5% or 28% to best suit your beneficiaries Note: Trustees of testamentary trusts may also choose 10.5%. Non-resident investorYour PIR is 28% Note: Non-resident investors who are notified foreign investors, read page 3. 3 Foreign investment zero-rate PIE (zero-rate PIE) and a foreign investment variable-rate PIE (variable-rate PIE) These PIEs allow qualifying non-residents (notified foreign investors) who invest in these PIEs to be taxed at a similar rate to what they would pay if they invested directly in the PIE’s investment. Transitional residents and new New Zealand tax residents If you become a transitional resident individual of New Zealand, you need to include your worldwide income when determining your PIR. That is, income that may be excluded for income tax purposes is included when determining your PIR. However, if you reasonably expect your taxable income in either of your first 2 years as a New Zealand tax resident will be significantly lower than your total income from all sources for previous income years, you may choose not to include your worldwide income for either or both of the income years. For New Zealand tax resident natural person investors, your PIE income will be included in the PIE calculation in the income tax assessment and an adjustment made to your income tax to pay or refund due. You should include a letter explaining how you have calculated your PIR in your first 2 tax returns as a new New Zealand tax resident individual. If you’re a transitional resident individual who invests in a zero-rate PIE, you qualify for the 0% PIR until the end of the tax year in which your transitional residence period ends. You should advise us how you have calculated your PIR by sending us a message in myIR or in a letter at the time of filing your tax returns during the transitional residence period. If you are a new resident in New Zealand other than a transitional resident individual you should notify the PIE your PIR as noted in the table on page 2. Notified foreign investors A non-resident who holds an investment in a foreign investment PIE may notify the PIE that they wish to be treated as a notified foreign investor. The investor must not be a tax resident in New Zealand, a controlled foreign company, a foreign investment fund with a New Zealand resident investor who has an income interest of 10% or more, or a non-resident trustee of a trust that is not a foreign trust. If the investor does not notify the PIE it will continue to use the 28% PIR. If you’re a notified foreign investor who invests in a zero-rate PIE, you’ll have all your income from the PIE taxed at 0% as most of the income will be foreign-sourced income. If you’re a notified foreign investor in a variable-rate PIE, you’ll have set rates applied based on the type and source of the income. Also, for dividend income attributed to you, the rate will vary based on whether you live in a country with which we hold a double tax agreement. A notified foreign investor cannot choose a rate. For more information on these rates see our Information for non-residents who invest in PIEs - IR858. You need to provide the foreign investment PIE with the following additional information: • your date of birth, if you’re an individual • your home address in the country or territory where you reside for tax purposes • the equivalent of your tax file (IRD) number in the country or territory where you reside for tax purposes, or a declaration if you’re unable to provide this number.