1 New Zealand tax residence questionnaire When you arrive in or leave New Zealand, it's important to understand your tax residence status and whether you have any New Zealand tax obligations or entitlements. You can work out whether you're a New Zealand tax resident by referring to the information on our website or our New Zealand tax residence guide - IR292. If you can't decide for yourself you can complete this form and we'll reply in writing. Your tax residence status may change if your circumstances change, so you'll need to review your tax residency if this happens. Note: This form is not compulsory. Please get professional advice if you need help completing this form. Please answer the following questions and send the completed form to Inland Revenue, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045, New Zealand. If you need more space to answer a question, please attach a separate sheet of paper and write the number of the question you're providing additional information for. Include your name and IRD number. Request to be considered Non-resident Resident Remain resident Date of departure Date of arrival Day Month Year Day Month Year 1.Your details First name(s) Surname Date of birthIRD number Day Month Year (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 2. Partner or spouse details Do you have a partner?Ye sNo Note: A partner means spouse or civil union or de facto partner. Information about you and your partner will help to determine your tax residence status. If your partner will be arriving in, returning to or leaving New Zealand with you, we require that they fill in a separate IR886 form and send it to us when you send yours. Is/will your partner be arriving in , returning to , leaving , or remaining in New Zealand? First name(s) Surname Date of birthIRD number Day Month Year (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 3. Dependent child/children details (if applicable) Note: If you have more than three children, please provide their details on a separate sheet of paper. Name IRD number Date of birth (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Day Month Year Living in New ZealandYe sNo NameIRD number Date of birth (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Day Month Year Living in New ZealandYe sNo NameIRD number Date of birth (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) Day Month Year Living in New ZealandYe sNo Are your children arriving in , returning to , leaving , or remaining in New Zealand? IR886 November 2019 2 4.At the time of your departure from New Zealand do/did you have an expected date of return? Ye sNoLeaving permanently If yes, what is that date? Approximate/Definite Day Month Year 5.At the time of your arrival in New Zealand do/did you have an expected date of return overseas? Ye sNoArriving permanently If yes, what is the expected return date? Approximate/Definite Day Month Year 6.Have you been or will you be in New Zealand for more than 183 days in any 12-month period? Ye sNo Have you been or will you be absent from New Zealand for more than 325 days in any 12-month period? Ye sNo Note: Date of departure and date of arrival both count as days present in New Zealand. 7. Travel to and from New Zealand Please give us information about your trips in and out of New Zealand. If you want to, you can get details of your visits from the New Zealand Customs Service. Call them on 0800 428 786 for further information. Name of country you travelled to/from Purpose of your tripDate of arrival in New Zealand Date of departure from New Zealand Please provide an explanation if departure or arrival dates for your partner and child/children (if applicable) are different from yours. Note: If any child/children are remaining in New Zealand in the care of another person, please write the child's/children's name(s) and provide details of their caregiver(s). 8.If you make or intend to make regular visits to New Zealand please give the reason(s) for your visits. Property and accommodation 9.Do you or your partner rent, lease, pay board, or have the ability to stay for free in a property in New Zealand? Ye sNo If yes, please provide the address(es), details of how the property is currently used and when any tenancy agreement ends. AddressUse of the propertyTenancy or other relevant details 10.Do you or your partner and/or any related entities (eg, trust, company or partnership) own any properties in New Zealand? Ye sNo If the answer is yes, please provide the address for each property, ownership details and purchase dates and describe the use of the property (eg, residence/holiday home/investment/commercial property/rental property). AddressWho owns the property?Purchase dateUse (include any tenancy details) 3 11.If you answered yes to questions 9 or 10, would you be able to live in any of these properties in the future? If yes, please provide details about your potential ability to live in the property. Ye sNo 12.Overseas properties owned and rented. If you own or rent any properties overseas, please provide details below. Attach a separate sheet of paper if you can't fit all details in the box. Include your name and IRD number. Address(es)Purpose Personal property 13.Please list your main items of personal, family, and relationship property (eg, car, furniture, household goods, other possessions) and where they are located, below. New Zealand Overseas Employment and financial ties 14.Please provide details of your current and future employment and/or business arrangements. Include the following: • Have you resigned from employment in New Zealand or applied for leave to go overseas? • Are you employed by your New Zealand employer while overseas, or do you have (or could you have) New Zealand employment to return to? • Will you retain business interests in New Zealand while overseas? • Do you intend to retain membership of New Zealand professional or trade associations while you're away? 15.Please provide details of your New Zealand and overseas financial ties (eg, loans and investments, people you are supporting financially in New Zealand). New ZealandOverseas 16.Please provide details of any current or expected income. For example, income from employment, pensions, welfare benefits, rents, companies or partnerships, trusts, shareholder salaries, directors' fees, Mäori authorities, royalties. New Zealand Overseas 4 17.Are you a settlor, trustee or beneficiary of a trust? If yes, please provide trust details including the name of the trust. Name of trustDetails of income received from the trust New Zealand Overseas Social ties 18.Please provide details of any membership(s) in professional, social, sporting or cultural groups or clubs, and any other organisations. Note: Include on-hold memberships, eg, gym. New Zealand Overseas Other factors 19.Please include any other factors you think may affect your tax residence status. These may include, but are not limited to. voluntary work or study overseas, other overseas connections, dependants (not previously listed), other personal relationships, property disposed of, or other connections to New Zealand which ended because of your departure. Other obligations and entitlements to consider If you have a student loan and you're overseas for 184 consecutive days (about 6 months) or more, you must check what your student loan obligation will be. Go to ird.govt.nz/student-loans 20.Do you have a student loan and are applying to be treated as being physically present in New Zealand and have included all necessary documentation required to support your application? Go to ird.govt.nz/sl-interest-free Ye sNo 21.Are you or your partner registered for Working for Families Tax Credits? Ye sNo Note: If yes, we may use the information you provide on this form to help us work out when/if your entitlement should stop. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/working-for-families 22.Do you or your partner pay or receive child support through Inland Revenue? Ye sNo For more information about your child support obligations go to ird.govt.nz/childsupport Keeping in touch 23.Please provide the following information: Your current phone number in New Zealand ( ) Mobile ( ) Overseas phone number ( ) ( ) Country Email address The postal address you'd like us to send correspondence to Note: You can nominate someone to look after your tax matters when you arrive in New Zealand or while you're overseas. To add a nominated person, you'll need to complete an Elect someone to act on your behalf - IR597 form. We recommend you register for a myIR secure online services account so you can update your personal details online, view account balances, complete forms and returns and use our secure online services. You can register at ird.govt.nz. We recommend you do this before you leave New Zealand because you'll need to call us to activate your account. To the best of my knowledge the information I have given is true and correct. Signature Date / / Send the completed form to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045, New Zealand