IR9 2020 1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020 Income tax return Clubs or societies Income Tax Act 2007, Tax Administration Act 1994 The 2020 IR9 guide is available on our website. To view a copy go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides If the club or society’s name, IRD number and postal address are shown correctly above, go to Question 4. 1.If the club or society’s IRD number is not shown above, print it in Box 1. 1 (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) 2.If the correct name is not shown above, see page 5 of the guide. 3.If the correct postal address is not shown above and is different to the street address below, print the full address in Box 3. Don’t print your tax agent’s address here. See page 5 of the guide. 3 Please put street address or PO Box number above and suburb, box lobby or RD and town, city or region below. 4.If the correct street address is not shown below, print it in full in Box 4. 4 Please put street address above and suburb or RD and town, city or region below. 5.If the correct daytime phone number is not shown below, print it in Box 5. 5 Prefix Phone number 6.If your club or society’s correct bank account number is not shown below, print it in Box 6. 6 Bank Branch Account number Suffix •• If the suffix has only two numbers enter them in the first two squares of the suffix box. •• For information about direct crediting see page 5 of the guide. 7.Is this the club or society’s first return? No Go to Question 8. Ye s Print the date on which the club or society started in Box 7. 7 Day Month Year 8.Is the club or society incorporated? 8 No Please make sure you complete this question because different tax rates apply. See page 5 of the guide. Ye s 9.Has the club or society ceased? No Go to Question 10. Ye s See page 6 of the guide. Income 10.Did the organisation receive any income or incur any expenditure from residential property? No Go to Question 11.Ye sPrint the totals below. See page 6 of the guide. Select which method you are using. (tick one) PortfolioIndividualCombination Total residential incomeResidential rental deductions 10A10B Excess residential rental deductions brought forwardResidential rental deductions claimed this year 10C Not applicable 10D Net residential income - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Excess residential rental deductions carried forward 10E10F 11.Did the organisation receive any income from taxable property sales/disposals not already included elsewhere in the return? (Do not include any bright-line loss.) No Go to Question 12. Profit/loss from sale of property - if a loss, put a minus sign in the last box Ye sPrint details here. See page 13 of the guide. 11 12. Is the organisation a friendly society? See page 14 of the guide. No Go to Question 13. Ye s •• If the society, credit union or association of a credit union is registered (or treated as registered) under the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act 1982, print the net income from business carried on with non-members in Box 12. Attach a completed Financial statements summary - IR10 form or a set of financial accounts. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) 12 Net income or loss •• Add Boxes 10E, 11 and 12. Print the total in Box 12A. This is the total income. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) 12A •• Go to Question 15. 13. Is the organisation one of the following? See Exempt income on page 15 of the guide. –amateur sports club –racing club –charitable society –district improvement society –veterinary services promoter –scientific or industrial research promoter –herd improvement promoter. No Go to Question 14. Ye s •• If any part of the club or society’s funds is available for the private benefit of any of the members, or the organisation’s income is not exempt, complete Boxes 13, 13A, 13B, 13C and 13D. Attach a completed Financial statements summary - IR10 form or a set of financial accounts. ••Print any interest in Box 13. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) 13 •• Print any dividends in Box 13A. 13A •• Print any taxable Māori authority distributions in Box 13B. 13B •• Other income not already included elsewhere in the return. Print the net income in Box 13C. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) 13C •• Add Boxes 10E, 11, 13, 13A, 13B and 13C. Print the total in Box 13D. This is the total income. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) 13D •• Go to Question 15. 14. All other clubs and societies If you answered “No” to Questions 12 and 13, complete Boxes 14, 14A, 14B, 14C and 14D. Attach a completed Financial statements summary - IR10 form or a set of financial accounts. See page 15 of the guide. ••Print any interest in Box 14. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) 14 •• Print any dividends in Box 14A. 14A •• Print any taxable Māori authority distributions in Box 14B. 14B •• Other income not already included elsewhere in the return. Print the net income in Box 14C. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) 14C •• Add boxes 10E, 11, 14, 14A, 14B and 14C. Print the total in Box 14D. This is the total income. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) 14D •• Income tax deduction for non-profit bodies. Print the deduction in Box 14E. Read page 19 of the guide. 14E •• If Box 14E is larger than Box 14D leave Box 14F blank. Subtract Box 14E from Box 14D. Print the total in Box 14F. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) 14F 15. Net income (before donations). Copy the total from Box 12A, Box 13D or Box 14F to Box 15. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) 15 16.Donations deduction Is your organisation a friendly society, building society, or a society registered under the Incorporated Societies Act 1908, or Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1908? No Go to Question 17. 16 Ye sSee page 20 of the guide. Print the amount in Box 16. 17. Net income. Subtract Box 16 from Box 15 and print your answer in Box 17. 17 18. Can the club or society claim net losses brought forward? No Go to Question 19. 18 Ye sPrint the net loss brought forward in Box 18. 19. Taxable income Subtract Box 18 from Box 17. Print the answer in Box 19. (If a loss, put a minus sign in the last box.) This is the taxable income. 19 Tax calculation 20. Calculate the tax payable. See page 20 of the guide. Work out the tax on the amount in Box 19. Print the answer in Box 20. If Box 19 is a loss, print “0.00” in Box 20. 20 Print any overseas tax paid during the year in Box 20A. 20A Subtract Box 20A from Box 20. Print the answer in Box 20B. If Box 20A is larger than Box 20, print “0.00”. 20B Print any imputation credits (from dividend statements) received in Box 20C. 20C If you are unincorporated, print any excess imputation credits brought forward in Box 20D. See page 21 of the guide. 20D Add up the total imputation credits from Boxes 20C and 20D and print the answer in Box 20E. 20E Subtract Box 20E from Box 20B. Print the answer in Box 20F. See page 21 of the guide. If Box 20E is larger than Box 20B, print “0.00”. 20F Print any Resident withholding tax (RWT) in Box 20G. 20G Print any Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) tax credit in Box 20GG. See page 22 of the guide. 20GG Subtract Box 20G and 20GG from Box 20F. Print the answer in Box 20H. 20H Print any other tax credits received in Box 20I. 20I Print the difference between Box 20I and Box 20H in Box 20J. 20J If Box 20H is a credit, add Box 20H and Box 20I. This is a credit. If Box 20H is a debit, subtract Box 20 I from Box 20H. (If Box 20H is larger than Box 20 I, the difference is a debit.) (If Box 20 I is larger than Box 20H, the difference is a credit.) This is the organisation’s residual income tax. Tick one) CreditDebit Print any 2020 provisional tax paid in Box 20K. 20K Subtract Box 20K from Box 20J. Print the answer in Box 20L. 20L If Box 20J is a credit, add Box 20J and Box 20K. This is a refund. If Box 20J is a debit, subtract Box 20K from Box 20J. This is tax to pay. (If Box 20K is larger than Box 20J, the difference is a refund.) Tick one) RefundTax to pay March 2020 OFFICE USE ONLY 26 Correspondence indicatorAccounts Included?Ye sNo 21. If the club or society is getting a refund, how do you want it paid? Copy the refund from Box 20L to Box 21. 21 Print any overpayment of 2021 provisional tax you would like refunded or transferred in Box 21A. 21A Add Box 21 and Box 21A. Print the answer in Box 21B. 21B Please transfer the refund to: 2021 provisional tax. Print the amount in Box 21C. 21C Another taxpayer’s income tax account Name of taxpayer receiving refundTheir IRD number 21D Year ended 31 March 21E Add Boxes 21C and 21E and subtract the total from Box 21B. Print the answer in Box 21F. This is the balance to be refunded. 21F The fastest and safest way to receive your refund is by direct credit to your club or society’s bank account. Please check the correct bank account number is preprinted at Question 6. If your bank account isn’t preprinted, please include it at Question 6. If your suffix has only two numbers, enter them in the first two squares of the suffix box. 2021 Provisional tax 22. Initial provisional tax liability. Is this the first year that the club or society started to derive income from a taxable activity? See page 24 of the guide. No Go to Question 23. Ye s Print the start date of the taxable activity in Box 22. 22 Day Month Year 23. See page 26 of the guide to work out the club or society’s 2021 provisional tax. ••Print either S or E or R in Box 23. 23 ••If you are using S or E, print the 2021 provisional tax payable here. 23A 00 Notice of assessment and declaration Please read page 31 of the guide. 24. Please read and sign the following. Your name Your designation The information in this return is true and correct and represents my assessment for the year ended 31 March 2020 as required under the Tax Administration Act 1994. Signature Date / / Please make a copy of this return for your own records. There are penalties for not putting in a tax return or putting in a false return. 25. What to do next ••Send us your return by 7 July 2020, unless you have an extension of time or a non-standard balance date. ••Remember—if there is tax to pay, pay it by 7 February 2021 or if you use a tax agent see page 29 of the guide. You can make payments: – electronically, through your bank - we recommend you pay electronically using the “pay tax” function provided by most New Zealand banks. – by credit or debit card online throuh our website. ••Attach a completed Financial statements summary - IR10 form or a set of financial accounts to this return. ••Write the date you sent the return to us on your copy of the return. ••Post us the return (even if there is no tax to pay) in the envelope supplied. If you have misplaced the envelope, our address is below. ••Keep your copy for your records. Send the completed return to us at: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045