IR900A February 2023 New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule Full name of the foreign exemption trust IRD number (if known) This schedule must be completed by the contact trustee of a foreign exemption trust with one or more New Zealand resident trustees. Please read the notes before completing the form. Remember to sign the declaration. Please tick: Name of settlor or beneficiaryNature of the settlement or distributionAmount Settlement received OR Description of the settlement or distributionDate paid or creditedCurrency Distribution to beneficiary Day Month Year Name of settlor or beneficiaryNature of the settlement or distributionAmount Settlement received OR Description of the settlement or distributionDate paid or creditedCurrency Distribution to beneficiary Day Month Year Name of settlor or beneficiaryNature of the settlement or distributionAmount Settlement received OR Description of the settlement or distributionDate paid or creditedCurrency Distribution to beneficiary Day Month Year Name of settlor or beneficiaryNature of the settlement or distributionAmount Settlement received OR Description of the settlement or distributionDate paid or creditedCurrency Distribution to beneficiary Day Month Year Declaration Full name Designation or title (i.e. trustee, or director of trustee company) I declare that the information given on this form is true and correct. Signature Day/month/year Notes Purpose of the schedule Registration The contact trustee must provide details of historical settlements on the foreign exemption trust at the time of registration. If all the trustees of the trust (including non-resident trustees) are natural persons and not professional trustees, you only need to provide details of historical settlements for four years prior to when the New Zealand resident trustee was appointed. If any trustees of the trust are professional trustees, you must provide details of all settlements on the trust since establishment. Annual return The contact trustee must also provide details of any settlements on the trust or distributions out of the trust during a ‘return year’ as part of the annual return process. Full details of each person who is listed on this New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule - IR900A must be disclosed to us on a New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A. Settlements A settlement is any transaction, action or failure to act that makes a person a settlor. A settlor is a person who: (a) makes any disposition to a trust, or (b) makes any property available (including financial assistance) to a trust, or (c) provides any service for the benefit of a trust for less than market value. This includes any person who acquires the use of any property or services from the trust for greater than market value. However, you are not required to disclose details of settlements which are provisions to the trustee at less than market value of minor services incidental to the activities of the trust. If a settlement is made by a person: (a) as a nominee for any other person, or (b) at the request of any other person and is of a nominal amount, the other person is treated as the settlor. When a trust owes an amount to a beneficiary of the trust, the beneficiary does not become a settlor when either: (a) the trust pays the beneficiary a market interest rate equal to or greater than the prescribed rate of interest, or (b) the amount retained in the beneficiary’s current account at the end of the return year is not more than $25,000. Distributions Distributions made during a return year must be disclosed in that year’s annual return. Distributions of beneficiary income made in the period referred to in section HC 6(1)(b) of the Income Tax Act 2007 should be recorded in the year the distribution was actually paid. Describing settlements and distributions The contact trustee must disclose the nature of each settlement or distribution from the list below and provide a description. The table below gives some examples of the details we expect to see under “description”. NatureDescription Land• Legal description • Location Shares• Number • Type • Company name • Country Financial arrangements• Holder and issuer • Interest rate (if any) • Term Services• Nature of service • Consideration paid (if any) Cash• Method of transfer Other• Describe the nature of the settlement/distribution Changes If you become aware of any changes to the information disclosed, you will need to provide this information with the next annual return at the latest. This excludes where the change is to the contact trustee or their contact details, these changes will need to be provided within 30 days of the trustee becoming aware of the change. If you are not registered to use myIR, you should record any changes on a New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule – IR900A and send it to us. Where to send the schedule You can complete this schedule in myIR. You can also email this schedule to nzforeigntrusts@ird.govt.nz Alternatively, you can post it to: International Revenue Strategy Inland Revenue PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 More information For more information please visit ird.govt.nz/ international-tax/foreign-trusts-nz-resident-trustees