This annual return must be completed by the contact trustee of a foreign exemption trust with one or more New Zealand resident trustees. Please read the notes before completing the form. Remember to sign the declaration. The contact trustee may also need to complete a New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule – IR607A and a New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule – IR900A. This return is for the year ending 20 Day Month Year 1.Trust details a. Full name of the foreign exemption trust b.IRD number 2. Contact trustee details a. Have the contact trustee’s details changed? Yes - Please complete the contact trustee’s details below and attach an updated IR607A No - go to question 3 b.Full name of the contact trustee c. IRD number d. Address of the contact trustee Street address or PO Box number Suburb or RDTown or cityPostcode e.Phone number and email address ( ) Phone number Email address 3. Final return a. Has this trust ceased to be a New Zealand foreign trust in this return year? Yes - go to 3bNo - go to question 4 b.What was the cessation date? Day Month Year c. Tick the reason for the cessation below (see notes) Migrated Please also attach the deed of removal and appointment and provide the following details of the new trustee: Name Email address Physical address Terminated Please also include the deed of winding up or equivalent. Settlor residence Where a settlor becomes a New Zealand tax resident, or a New Zealand resident settlor has migrated offshore and the trust makes an election to become a complying trust. IR900 March 2023 New Zealand foreign trust annual return 4.Are all the trustees natural persons and not professional trustees? Yes - go to question 6No - go to question 5 5.Have you paid the annual fee to Inland Revenue? (See ‘Fees and how to pay’ in the notes) Ye sNo - payment is required to remain eligible for the exemption on foreign-sourced income Date paid or credited 20 Day Month Year 6.Did the trust receive any settlements or make any distributions to beneficiaries during the year? Yes - Please complete a New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule - IR900A No - go to question 8 7.Have the full details of the settlors or beneficiaries recorded on the completed New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule - IR900A been provided on a New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A and are these details up to date? Ye sNo - Please complete a New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A recording full and updated details of these settlors and beneficiaries. 8.Please ensure you have attached the financial statements for the trust for the return year These are required and must meet the minimum standards set out by the Tax Administration (Financial Statements - Foreign Trusts) Order 2017 Declaration Full name Designation or title (i.e. trustee, or director of trustee company) I declare that the information given on this form is true and correct. Signature Day/month/year Notes Purpose of the return Use this return to provide annual return details for a foreign trust. The contact trustee must provide details of any settlements on the trust or distributions out of the trust. This information is collected on the New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule - IR900A. The contact trustee must also provide details of any new settlors or beneficiaries. This information is collected on the New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A. Final return When a foreign exemption trust ceases to be a foreign exemption trust, the trustee must file a final return covering the last period where the trust was required to be registered. A foreign exemption trust can cease to be a New Zealand foreign trust if: • the New Zealand resident trustees are removed, and non-resident trustees remain or are appointed (Migrated). • the trust is terminated, and all assets are distributed to beneficiaries (Terminated). • the trust no longer makes use of the foreign sourced income exemption under Section HC 26 of the Income Tax Act 2007 or is excluded as an election under Section HC 33 of the Income Tax Act 2007 is in effect. Where a trust is terminated or has migrated, any documents prepared that supplement or amend the trust deed (e.g., a deed of winding up or a deed of removal and appointment) must be provided. For a migrating trust, details of the new trustee must be provided. Fees and how to pay If all trustees are natural persons and not professional trustees, you do not have to pay a fee for the annual return. If payment is required, fees must be paid into Inland Revenue’s account with Westpac - 03-0049-0001100-27. The fee for the annual return is NZ $50. Use the following details when making a direct credit payment to us: ParticularsYour IRD number. If you have an 8-digit IRD number put a 0 at the beginning Payee CodeFTR ReferenceLeave blank Go to ird.govt.nz/pay to find out about paying by: • direct debit • credit or debit card • internet banking. Financial statements The contact trustee is required to provide financial statements that meet the minimum standards set out by the Tax Administration (Financial Statements—Foreign Trusts) Order 2017. For guidance on these minimum standards, please visit ird.govt.nz/minimum-standards Changes If you become aware of any changes to the information disclosed, you will need to provide this information with the next annual return at the latest. This excludes where the change is to the contact trustee or their contact details, these changes will need to be provided within 30 days of the trustee becoming aware of the change. It may be necessary to complete a New Zealand foreign trust connected persons schedule - IR607A and/or a New Zealand foreign trust settlements and distributions schedule - IR900A. Where to send the return The annual return can be completed in myIR. You can also email the return and attachments to nzforeigntrusts@ird.govt.nz Alternatively, you can post the return and attachments to: International Revenue Strategy Inland Revenue PO Bo x 2198 W ellington 6140 More information For more information, please visit ird.govt.nz/international-tax/foreign-trusts-nz-resident-trustees