Tell us about yourself (fill in as much as you can) 1 Your IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 2 Your name (Tick one) Mr Mrs Miss Ms Date of birth Day Month Year First name(s) Surname If you are known by or have ever used any other names please give the details. First name(s) Surname 3 If you want the parents to know you by another name, please enter it here. Read the notes at the end of this form about "Alias names". First name(s) Surname 4 Are there any safety reasons why you do not want us to give the parents your name? Yes No (Please note: We do not ever give the parents your contact details.) If you answered "yes" we may be able to keep your name off correspondence sent to the parents. If you have documents supporting your safety concerns, attach a copy to this form. We will contact you if we need more information. Read the notes at the end of this form "Withholding your name for safety reasons." 5 Address Street address or PO BoxSuburb Town or cityPostcodeCountry 6 Your contact details ( ) ( ) ( ) DayEveningMobile Email 7 Your bank account Account name Bank Branch Account number Suffix 8 Do you receive, or have you applied to receive, a benefit?Ye sNo Work and Income number (if known) Child Support Page 1 ird.govt.nz/childsupport Application for child support by a non-parent carer IR954 November 2021 Child Support When to use this form •• use this form if you want to apply for child support for a child you are not the parent of and •• you care for the child at least 35% of the time. If you receive an unsupported child’s benefit you must apply. The child support goes to the government to help cover the cost of your benefit. Read the notes at the end before completing this form. Tell us about the child's parents (fill in as much information as you know) You must apply for child support from both parents. Parent 1 9 Their IRD numberTheir date of birthAge (if date of birth not known) Day Month Year 10 Their name (Tick one) Mr Mrs Miss Ms First name(s) Surname 11 Are they known by another name? Give the name they use now or have used in the past. First name(s) Surname 12 Are they a New Zealand citizen?Ye sNoDon't know Do they live overseas? Ye sNoDon't know 13 Their address Street address or PO BoxSuburb Town or cityPostcodeCountry 14 Their contact details ( ) ( ) ( ) DayEveningMobile Email Parent 2 15 If you do not know the name of the other parent, please tick here and go to Question 22 If Inland Revenue knows who the other parent is we may include them in your child support assessment. Assessing a second parent To assess child support fairly we need to include both parents however there are times when it is not appropriate to assess the other parent, (for example they are deceased). If you do not want to assess a second parent, give the reason in the space below. Read the notes pages at the end of this form to find out more about when we can complete a child support assessment with one-parent. We may contact you if we need more information. Even if you ask us not to assess a second parent you still need to complete the rest of the questions about this parent. For deceased parents we only need their name. 16 Their IRD numberTheir date of birthAge (if date of birth not known) Day Month Year 17 Their name (Tick one) Mr Mrs Miss Ms First name(s) Surname 18 Are they known by another name? Give the name they use now or have used in the past. First name(s) Surname Child Support Page 2 ird.govt.nz/childsupport 19 Are they a New Zealand citizen?Ye sNoDon't know Do they live overseas? Ye sNoDon't know 20 Their address Street address or PO BoxSuburb Town or cityPostcodeCountry 21 Their contact details ( ) ( ) ( ) DayEveningMobile Email Payment waiver 22 If you have applied for child support against both parents you can ask us not to collect the payments from one of these parents for a child. If you ask us not to collect your payments from one of the parents this will also apply to any payments they may already owe you. You cannot ask for a payment waiver if you receive an unsupported child’s benefit, or a benefit at the sole parent rate. Read the notes pages for more information about payment waivers. Complete this section if you choose to waive payments Name the parent you want to waive payment from: First name(s)Surname Name the children you do not want to receive child support for. The waiver will start from: the date we receive this formanother date (specify below) Day Month Year Tell us about the children (fill in as much as you know) All children must have an IRD number. If they don't have one, read the notes pages to find out how to get one. Qualifying children (These are the children you want child support for) Read the notes pages to find out about children who qualify for child support, and what we accept as proof of parentage and date of birth. 23 Child 1 First name(s)Surname Date of birth IRD number Day Month Year Was this child born while the parents were married to each other?Ye sNo If the child is 18 or turning 18 in the next 2 months are they still at school? Ye sNo What date did the child come into your care?From birth or from Day Month Year Is there a court order or agreement in place for the care of this child?Yes (attach copy)No Do you provide more than five nights per week (on average) of this child's care? Yes - go to next child No - continue Your amount of care Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Child Support Page 3 ird.govt.nz/childsupport Name of other carer First name(s) Surname Other carer's amount of care Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Note: If the care patterns for any child do not fit into one of the options provided, use the space at question 26 to provide the care details. 24 Child 2 First name(s)Surname Date of birth IRD number Day Month Year Was this child born while the parents were married to each other?Ye sNo If the child is 18 or turning 18 in the next 2 months are they still at school? Ye sNo What date did the child come into your care?From birth or from Day Month Year Is there a court order or agreement in place for the care of this child?Yes (attach copy)No Do you provide more than five nights per week (on average) of this child's care? Yes - go to next child No - continue Your amount of care Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Name of other carer First name(s) Surname Other carer's amount of care Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly 25 Child 3 First name(s)Surname Date of birth IRD number Day Month Year Was this child born while the parents were married to each other?Ye sNo If the child is 18 or turning 18 in the next 2 months are they still at school? Ye sNo What date did the child come into your care?From birth or from Day Month Year Is there a court order or agreement in place for the care of this child?Yes (attach copy)No Do you provide more than five nights per week (on average) of this child's care? Yes - go to Declaration No - continue Your amount of care Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Name of other carer First name(s) Surname Other carer's amount of care Number of nights How often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Note: If you want to apply for more children, include their details on a separate piece of paper, giving the same details as for the children above and attach it to this form. Please include your name and IRD number at the top of the page. Child Support Page 4 ird.govt.nz/childsupport 26 Use this space to tell us any additional information that may help us work out recognised care levels, for example, if the arrangements are different for school holidays. Declaration To the best of my knowledge, the information I have provided on this form is true and correct. Signature Date Please send this completed form to: Child Support, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045 Child Support Page 5 ird.govt.nz/childsupport What happens next? This is a request for an assessment of child support. Once we have completed the child support calculation we'll notify you of any amount you are entitled to receive. If you are receiving an unsupported child's benefit for any of the children, your payments will go to the government to help cover the cost of the benefit. Privacy Meeting your child support obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities and entitlements under the Child Support Act 1991. We may also exchange information about you with: • some government agencies • another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them • Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask for the personal information we hold about you, we will give it to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Call us on 0800 775 247 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to ird.govt.nz/privacy Notes to help you complete this form IRD numbers for children A child must have an IRD number for child support to be accepted. If a child does not have an IRD number then you will need to apply for one. You can do this by completing an IRD number application - resident individual - IR595 form. Qualifying children To qualify for child support, a child must be: • under 18 years of age or 18 years of age and enrolled at and attending a registered school in New Zealand or an overseas school, and • a New Zealand citizen or ordinarily resident in New Zealand. The child cannot be: • receiving a benefit or student allowance, or working 30 hours or more a week (on average), or • living with another person in a marriage, civil union or de facto relationship. Proof of date of birth The child’s IRD number is used for proof of their date of birth. Proof of parentage You will need to supply one of the following for proof of parentage: • the child’s full New Zealand birth certificate • the child’s full overseas birth certificate (with a certified English translation if necessary) • adoption order for the child • a paternity order for the child made by a New Zealand or overseas court • a document signed by the parent acknowledging they are the child’s parent • a copy of the Family Court’s declaration of step-parentage. Who is a parent for child support? A parent is a person who: • is the birth or legally adoptive parent of a child • was married to the other parent when the child was conceived or born • has acknowledged before a court, or in writing, that they are a parent of the child and a court has not overturned this • has been declared a legal step-parent by the Family Court • a court has made a paternity order against in respect of the child. When can Inland Revenue assess one-parent for child support? There are times when it is appropriate to complete a child support assessment against only one parent, for example: • a parent is deceased • a parent is unknown, or there is no proof they are a parent • a parent is not a New Zealand citizen or ordinarily resident in New Zealand • there are safety concerns for the child, or any carer of the child. Alias names You can ask to use an alias name when you need to protect your privacy. We will not accept a nickname. ird.govt.nz/childsupportChild Support Notes Withholding your name for safety reasons If you would like to apply for child support from a parent but you have concerns about your own or a child’s safety if we tell the parent you are the child’s carer we may be able to withhold your name from them. This means we do not name you when communicating with the parent. To support your safety concerns, remember to attach any relevant documents to this form. For example, a court order, police report, a letter from a social worker or Work & Income, or a letter from your doctor. Proof of parentage If the child's parents were married when the child was conceived or born then we do not require further proof of parentage. However we do still require proof of the child's date of birth. If there is no proof of parentage, we may tell the person that this application has been made naming them as a parent of the child/children. Recognised care The child support formula considers the costs of raising a child and shares these costs between the parents based on their income and the amount of care they have for a child. Care of a child is recognised for child support when: • a parent cares for the child at least 103 nights per year, or 2 nights per week (28% of the time) • a non-parent carer for example, a grandparent, has care of a child for at least 128 night per year, or 5 nights per fortnight (35% of the time). If a person provides more than 263 nights per year, or 5 nights a week on average of a child’s care, theirs is the only care we take into account in the child support formula calculation. Agreement or court order If you have an agreement or court order detailing the care arrangements for the child/children, we can use this to help work out the recognised care levels for a child. Paternity orders If the father is not named on the child’s birth certificate a paternity order may be sought. If you are aware a paternity order has been made, please send it to us. If we receive the order within two months of it being made we may be able to start child support from when this application is received. If you need more information about paternity orders, please go to the Ministry of Justice website www.justice.govt.nz (search keyword: paternity). Payment waiver A Non-parent carer can choose not to receive child support from one of the parents as long as they do not receive an unsupported child’s benefit for the child or a benefit at the sole parent rate. We must still assess the parent but we will tell them they do not need to make payments. If you choose to waive payment from a parent this includes any payments already owed to you by the parent for the children. A non-parent carer can cancel the waiver at any time by calling us or by cancelling in myIR. We will cancel a payment waiver if the non-parent carer starts to receive an unsupported child’s benefit for the child or a benefit paid at the sole parent rate. The parent will need to pay the child support from the date we cancel the waiver from. Child support from the Australian child support authorities We have an agreement with Australia for the assessment and collection of child support. The agreement allows both countries to enforce payments of child support owing in the other country, where payments are not being made. Only the country where the carer lives can make the assessment. If you have an assessment made in Australia but now live in New Zealand, contact the agency in Australia responsible for child support on 0800 440 953 to let them know. If you are a carer living in Australia you must apply for child support in Australia. Call us on 1800 504 042 if you live in Australia and you need any help. For more information about any of the above, please go to our website ird.govt.nz/childsupport ird.govt.nz/childsupportChild Support Notes