Tell us about yourself (fill in as much as you can) 1 Your IRD number (8 digit numbers start in the second box. ) 2 Your name (Tick one) Mr Mrs Miss Ms Date of birth Day Month Year First name(s) Surname If you are known by or have ever used any other names please give the details. First name(s) Surname 3 If you want the parents to know you by another name, please enter it here. Read the note about "Alias names". First name(s) Surname 4 Are there any safety reasons why you don't want the parents to know your name? Yes No (Please note: We don't give the parents your contact details.) If you answered "yes" we may be able to take your name off correspondence sent to the parents. If you have documents supporting your safety reasons, attach a copy to this form. If we need more information we'll contact you. Please make sure we have your correct contact details. Read the notes "Safety concerns about your name." 5 Your home address Street addressSuburb Town or cityPostcodeCountry 6 Your postal address (if different from above) Street address or PO BoxSuburb Town or cityPostcodeCountry Please tick if you prefer your child support mail to be sent to your postal address 7 Your contact details ( ) ( ) ( ) DayEveningMobile Email Child Supportwww.ird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 1 Application to assess child support by a non-parent carer IR954 April 2017 Child Support Complete this form if you want to apply for child support for children in your care that you are not a parent of. You must have at least 35% care to apply. If you receive an unsupported child's benefit for these children, you must apply for child support. If the care of the child is shared with someone else, use our online calculator to see if you meet the criteria for recognised care. Read the notes pages to help you understand this form. More information about child support can be found on our website www.ird.govt.nz/childsupport 8 Your bank account Account name Bank Branch Account number Suffix 9 Do you receive, or have you applied to receive, a benefit?Ye sNo Work and Income number (if known) Tell us about the child's parents (fill in as much information as you know) Non-parent carers must apply for child support from both parents. Parent 1 10 Their IRD numberTheir date of birthAge (if date of birth not known) Day Month Year 11 Their name (Tick one) Mr Mrs Miss Ms First name(s) Surname 12 Are they known by another name? Give the name they use now or have used in the past. First name(s) Surname 13 Are they a New Zealand citizen?Ye sNoDon't know Do they live overseas?Ye sNoDon't know Did they leave New Zealand in the last 12 months (excluding short-term holidays)?Ye sNo Don't know 14 Their home address Street addressSuburb Town or cityPostcodeCountry 15 Their postal address (if different from above) Street address or PO BoxSuburb Town or cityPostcodeCountry 16 Their contact details ( ) ( ) ( ) DayEveningMobile Email 17 Income Does this parent receive a benefit?Ye sNoDon't know If "yes", please specify benefit type. Work and Income number (if known) Child Supportwww.ird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 2 Does this parent have a job (including any self-employed work)? Ye sNoDon't know If "yes", write who they work for here ( ) Work namePhone Work address Town or cityPostcodeCountry Parent 2 18 If you do not know the name of the other parent, please tick here and go to Question 27 If you cannot name a second parent There are times when it is not appropriate to assess the other parent, or we cannot assess them (eg, they are deceased). Read the notes pages to find out more information about when we can complete a one-parent assessment. If you think you meet our criteria for a one-parent assessment, please give the reason in the space below. We may contact you if we need more information. You will still need to complete the rest of the questions about this parent. For deceased parents we only require their name. 19 Their IRD numberTheir date of birthAge (if date of birth not known) Day Month Year 20 Their name (Tick one) Mr Mrs Miss Ms First name(s) Surname 21 Are they known by another name? Give the name they use now or have used in the past. First name(s) Surname 22 Are they a New Zealand citizen?Ye sNoDon't know Do they live overseas?Ye sNoDon't know Did they leave New Zealand in the last 12 months (excluding short-term holidays)?Ye sNoDon't know 23 Their home address Street addressSuburb Town or cityPostcodeCountry 24 Their postal address (if different from above) Street address or PO BoxSuburb Town or cityPostcodeCountry 25 Their contact details ( ) ( ) ( ) DayEveningMobile Email Child Supportwww.ird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 3 26 Income Does this parent receive a benefit?Ye sNoDon't know If "yes", please specify benefit type Work and Income number (if known) Does this parent have a job (including any self-employed work)? Ye sNoDon't know If "yes", write who they work for here ( ) Work namePhone Work address Town or cityPostcodeCountry Payment waiver 27 If you're not receiving an unsupported child's benefit for the child you are applying for, or a sole parent benefit, and you have applied against both of the child's parents, you can ask us not to collect the payments from one of these parents. This does not apply if an assessment is only against one of the parents. Read the notes pages for more information about payment waivers. Which parent do you want to waive payment from?Parent 1 orParent 2 The waiver will start from:the date we receive this formanother date (specify below) Day Month Year Name the children you do not want to receive child support for from this parent. Note that this includes any payments that may already be owed to you by the liable parent for the children you have named. Tell us about the children (fill in as much as you know) All children must have an IRD number. If they don't have one, read the notes pages to find out how to get one. Recognised care We need to know if someone else cares for the child/children two nights per week (on average). Read the "Recognised care" notes pages for more information. Qualifying children (These are the children you want child support assessed for) Read the notes pages to find out about children who qualify for child support, and what we accept as proof of parentage and date of birth. 28 Child 1 First name(s) Surname Date of birthIRD number Day Month Year Was this child born while the parents were married to each other?Ye sNo If the father is not named on the birth certificate, is paternity action being taken? Ye sNo What date did the child come into your care?From birthor from Day Month Year Do you receive an unsupported child's benefit for this child?Ye sNo Is there a court order or agreement in place for the care of this child?Yes (attach copy)No Do you provide more than five nights per week (on average) of this child's care? Yes - go to next child No - continue Child Supportwww.ird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 4 Your amount of care Number of nightsHow often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Full name of other carer First name(s) Surname Other carer's amount of care Number of nightsHow often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Note: If your or the other carer's pattern of care for any child named in this form is not covered by the options above, please provide the care details at Question 31 on page 6. Be sure to include the same details as shown here. If there are additional carers for any child, please provide their details on a separate piece of paper and attach it to this form. Be sure to include the same details as shown here, and include your name and IRD number at the top of the page. 29 Child 2 First name(s) Surname Date of birthIRD number Day Month Year Was this child born while the parents were married to each other?Ye sNo If the father is not named on the birth certificate, is paternity action being taken? Ye sNo What date did the child come into your care?From birthor from Day Month Year Do you receive an unsupported child's benefit for this child?Ye sNo Is there a court order or agreement in place for the care of this child?Yes (attach copy)No Do you provide more than five nights per week (on average) of this child's care? Yes - go to next child No - continue Tick here if the care details for this child are the same as for the first child. If the care details for this child are different, enter them in the fields below before going to the next question. Your amount of care Number of nightsHow often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Full name of other carer First name(s) Surname Other carer's amount of care Number of nightsHow often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly 30 Child 3 First name(s) Surname Date of birthIRD number Day Month Year Was this child born while the parents were married to each other?Ye sNo If the father is not named on the birth certificate, is paternity action being taken? Ye sNo What date did the child come into your care?From birthor from Day Month Year Do you receive an unsupported child's benefit for this child?Ye sNo Is there a court order or agreement in place for the care of this child?Yes (attach copy)No Child Supportwww.ird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 5 Do you provide more than five nights per week (on average) of this child's care? Yes - go to Question 32 No - continue Tick here if the care details for this child are the same as for the first child. If the care details for this child are different, enter them in the fields below before going to the next question. Your amount of care Number of nightsHow often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Full name of other carer First name(s) Surname Other carer's amount of care Number of nightsHow often?WeeklyFortnightlyMonthlyYearly Note: If you need to tell us about more qualifying children, include their details on a separate piece of paper, giving the same details as for the children above, and attach it to this form. Please include your name and IRD number at the top of the page. 31 Please list any additional information that may help us work out recognised care levels, for example, if the arrangements are different for school holidays. 32 Please complete this question for children named in this application who are 18 or turn 18 within the next two months of filling out this form. Child’s full name Is the child enrolled at and attending a registered school in New Zealand or an overseas school? Ye s No Ye s No Ye s No Child support from the Australian Department of Human Services 33 Is anyone currently living in Australia claiming child support from the Australian Department of Human Services for the same children? Yes - read the notes pagesNo Declaration To the best of my knowledge, the information I have provided on this form is true and correct. By signing this declaration, I: •understand Inland Revenue will complete a calculation using the formula and let me know what I am entitled to receive in child support •agree to advise Inland Revenue of any changes that could affect my child support (eg, if the children leave my care) •understand that any changes in the parents’ circumstances or changes in the care of the children could affect the amount of child support I am entitled to. Signature Date Please send this completed form to: Child Support, PO Box 39010, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045 Work and Income use only 1.Has the receiving carer indicator SDT1A or SDT2A been set to “Y”?Ye sNo 2.Benefit start date Day Month Year 3.Benefit rate - weekly 4.Benefit type (code) Child Supportwww.ird.govt.nz/childsupport Page 6 What happens next? This form is a request for an assessment of child support. Once we have completed the child support calculation we'll notify you of any amount you are entitled to receive. Please note that if you are receiving an unsupported child's benefit for any of the children, your payments will go to the government to help cover the cost of the benefit. Privacy Meeting your child support obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities and entitlements under the Child Support Act 1991. We may also exchange information about you with: •some government agencies •another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them •Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask for the personal information we hold about you, we’ll give it to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Call us on 0800 775 247 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keyword: privacy). Notes to help you complete this form Who is a parent? A parent is a person who: •is the birth or legally adoptive parent of a child •was married to the other parent when the child was conceived or born •has acknowledged before a court, or in writing, that they are a parent of the child and a court has not overturned this •has been declared a legal step-parent by the Family Court •a court has made a paternity order against in respect of the child. When can Inland Revenue make a one-parent assessment? There are times when it is appropriate to complete a child support assessment against only one parent, for example: •a parent is deceased •a parent is unknown •a parent is not a New Zealand citizen or ordinarily resident in New Zealand •there are safety concerns for the child, or any carer of the child. Alias names You can ask to use an alias name when you need to protect your privacy. We won’t accept a nickname. Safety concerns about your name If you believe that using your real name will cause safety concerns for you, a carer, or your child, we may be able to leave your name out when communicating with the other parent. To support your safety reasons remember to attach any relevant documents to this form. For example a court order, police report, a letter from a social worker or Work & Income, or a letter from your doctor. Proof of date of birth You will need to supply one of the following for proof of date of birth: •full New Zealand birth certificate •overseas birth certificate •passport •certificate of New Zealand citizenship •certificate of identity •photo driver's licence •18+ card issued by the Hospitality Association. Proof of parentage You will need to supply one of the following for proof of parentage: •the child's full New Zealand birth certificate •the child's full overseas birth certificate (with a certified English translation if necessary) •adoption order for the child •a paternity order for the child made by a New Zealand or overseas court •a completed Acknowledgement of paternity for child support (IR106) form\* •a document signed by the parent acknowledging they are the child's parent\* •a copy of the Family Court’s declaration of step-parentage. Child Supportwww.ird.govt.nz/childsupport Notes \*These documents can't be used to prove the child's date of birth. You must also send in a copy of one of the documents in the list under "Proof of date of birth." If the child's parents were married when the child was conceived or born then we do not require further proof of parentage. However we do still require proof of the child's date of birth. If there is no proof of parentage, we may tell the person that this application has been made naming them as a parent of the child/children. Recognised care The child support formula recognises the costs of raising a child and shares these costs between the parents based on their income and care. Care is recognised in the following situations: •If a person provides more than 263 nights per year, or 5 nights a week on average (72% of the time) of a child's care, theirs is the only care we take into account in the child support formula calculation. •If a parent cares for the child at least 103 nights per year, or 2 nights per week (28% of the time) that care is taken into account in the child support formula calculation. •A non-parent carer eg, a grandparent, has care of a child for at least 128 night per year, or 5 nights per fortnight (35% of the time). Agreement or court order If you have an agreement or court order detailing the care arrangements for the child/children, we can use this to work out your recognised care level. Qualifying children To qualify for child support, a child must be: •under 18 years of age or 18 years of age and enrolled at and attending a registered school in New Zealand or an overseas school, and •a New Zealand citizen or ordinarily resident in New Zealand. The child cannot be: •receiving a benefit or student allowance, or working 30 hours or more a week (on average), or •living with another person in a marriage, civil union or de facto relationship. Paternity orders If the father isn't currently named on the child's birth certificate a paternity order may be sought. If you are aware of a paternity order being made, please send it to us: we may be able to start child support from when this application is received. If you need more information about paternity orders, please go to the Ministry of Justice website www.justice.govt.nz (search keyword: paternity). IRD numbers for children If your child doesn’t have an IRD number then you’ll need to apply for one before your child support application can be accepted. You can do this by completing an IRD number application - resident individual (IR595) form. However, if your child wasn’t born in New Zealand, doesn’t have an IRD number and isn’t a resident of New Zealand, you don’t need to apply for or provide an IRD number. Payment waiver Non-parent carers can choose not to receive child support from one of the parents if the non-parent carer is not receiving an unsupported child's benefit for the child or a sole parent benefit. We must still complete an assessment for that parent but we will tell them they are not required to make payments. Please note that if you choose to waive payment from a parent this will include any payments already owed to you by the parent for the children you wish to waive payment for. A non-parent carer can cancel the waiver at any time by sending us a completed Payment Waivers (IR959) form. Payment waivers will be cancelled if the non-parent carer starts to receive an unsupported child's benefit for the child or a sole parent benefit. Cancelling a waiver means that the parent will be required to pay the child support assessed from the date the cancellation of the waiver applies. Child support from the Australian Department of Human Services We have a reciprocal agreement with Australia for the assessment and collection of child support payments. The agreement allows both countries to enforce payments of child support owing in the other country, where payments are not being made. Only the country where the carer lives can make an assessment. If you have an assessment made in Australia but now live in New Zealand, contact the Australian Department of Human Services (DHS) on 0800 440 953 to let them know. If you are a carer living in Australia you must apply for child support through the Australian DHS. Call us on 1800 504 042 if you need any help. For more information about any of the above, please go to our website www.ird.govt.nz/childsupport Child Supportwww.ird.govt.nz/childsupport Notes