Read this guide to help you fill in your IR9 return. Complete and send us your IR9 return by 7 July 2018, unless you have an extension of time to file - see page 4. IR9G March 2018 Clubs or societies return guide 2018 CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 2 www.ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. •Log in or register for myIR to manage your tax and entitlements online. •Demonstrations – learn about our services by watching short videos. •Get it done online – complete forms and returns, make payments, give us feedback. •Work it out – use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. •Forms and guides – download our forms and guides. Forgotten your myIR user ID or password? Request a reminder of your user ID or reset your password online. You’ll need to know your IRD number and have access to the email address we hold for you. How to get our forms and guides You can get copies of all our forms and guides by going to www.ird.govt.nz and selecting “All forms and guides” from the right-hand menu, or by entering the shoulder number in the search box. You can also order copies by calling 0800 257 773. The information in this guide is based on current tax laws at the time of printing. www.ird.govt.nz 3 Contents Page Introduction 4 Who has to file a return 4 Return due date 4 Questions 5 Q 2 Club or society's name 5 Q 3 Postal address 5 Q 6 Bank account number 5 Q 8 Incorporation 5 Q 9 Has the club or society ceased? 6 Q 10 Friendly societies 6 Q 11 Exempt income 6 Q 12 All other clubs and societies 7 Types of income for organisations - Q11 and Q12 7 Q 14 Donations 12 Q 18 Tax calculation 13 Q 19 Refunds and/or transfers 14 Q 20 Initial provisional tax liability 17 Q 21 2019 provisional tax 18 Not taking reasonable care penalty 20 Interest 20 Election to be a provisional tax payer 21 Change in balance date 21 Tax pooling 21 Payment dates 22 How to make payments 23 Late payment 24 Self-assessment by taxpayers 24 Services you may need 25 0800 self-service numbers 25 Need to talk to us? 25 Privacy 26 If you have a complaint about our service 26 CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 4 Introduction The questions in this guide follow the same numbering as in your return. If you need more help after you've read this guide, these guides provide detailed information: •Charitable organisations (IR255) •Education centres (IR253) •Provisional tax (IR289). Who has to file a return? All New Zealand clubs and societies must file a tax return each year unless they derive only exempt income. If your organisation has a certificate of exemption from RWT (resident withholding tax) on interest and dividends this doesn't mean your income is exempt income. Call us on 0800 377 774 if you're not sure whether your club or society is required to file a tax return. If we've sent you a taxpack but your organisation is tax exempt, call us on 0800 377 774 so we can update our records. If your club or society's income is not exempt but the organisation did not have income that was liable for income tax during the tax year from 1 April 2017 to 31 March 2018, please just fill in: •page 1 of the return, and •the declaration on page 4. All other organisations must complete all parts of the return. Return due date If the club or society has a 31 March balance date, you have until 7 July 2018 to send in the return (unless you have been granted an extension of time). If you have a balance date other than 31 March the return date may be different. Call us on 0800 377 774 if you're not sure. If the club or society is the client of an agent, you may have until 31 March 2019 to file. Contact your agent for more information. www.ird.govt.nz 5 Questions Question 2 Club or society's name If the club or society has changed its name since the last time a return was filed, please provide proof of the name change details so we can update our records. Question 3 Postal address If you have a new postal address, write the details at Question 3. If your new postal address is a PO Box number, please show your box lobby, if you have one. If you're unsure of your box lobby please contact New Zealand Post. Leave this address panel blank if the club or society uses its agent's postal address. The agent will let us know of any change of address when updating their client list. Question 6 Bank account number Bank account number The fastest and safest way to get any refund is to have it direct credited to your club or society's New Zealand bank account or other deposit account eg, a building society account. If your club or society's bank account number isn't preprinted on the return form, please include it at Question 6. If your suffix has only two numbers, enter them in the first two squares of the suffix box. Question 8 Incorporation An organisation can be incorporated under New Zealand legislation, such as the Incorporated Societies Act 1908, Companies Act 1993 or the Charitable Trusts Act 1957, or it may be incorporated under foreign legislation. Make sure you complete this box as different tax rates apply for incorporated societies. See page 13 of this guide. CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 6 Question 9 Has the club or society ceased? If the club or society has ceased, include a set of accounts (if accounts are required) to the date the organisation ceased. If the organisation is registered for GST, or as an employer, you will need to complete a Business cessation (IR315) form to finalise your records. Question 10 Friendly societies An organisation is a friendly society if it's registered under the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act 1982. The net income to be shown in Box 10 is income from business transactions with people who aren't members of the society, less all allowable expenses related to deriving the taxable income from non-members. Any interest from investments that a friendly society earns is exempt income, providing it's not part of the income from a business the society runs. Where taxable activities cover both members and non-members, the income and expenses must be apportioned to calculate the taxable portion. Print the net profit from the business carried on with non-members in Box 10. If the figure is a loss, put a minus sign in the last box. Question 11 Exempt income The income of some types of club or society is exempt unless the funds can be used for the private benefit of any of the organisation's members. A list of these organisations is on the return. www.ird.govt.nz 7 Question 12 All other clubs and societies A club or society's taxable income is based on its net profit or loss from revenue sources only, including: •interest, dividends and rents •taxable Māori authority distributions (see page 8) •sponsorship and admission fees •advertising revenue from club journals, magazines or other printed material. Any membership subscriptions or levies are not income for tax purposes. Certain transactions the club or society does with its members may be liable for income tax. This includes the purchase of trading stock and the supply of services. Deduct any costs incurred in earning income from taxable sources when you calculate the club or society’s taxable income. Types of income for organisations - Q11 and Q12 Interest and dividends Show any gross net interest received in Box 11 or 12, and any dividends in Box 11A or 12A. Costs incurred in deriving the interest can be deducted before entering the amount in Box 11 or 12. This includes interest paid by Inland Revenue. Interest on broken term deposits If you have broken a term deposit during the year, there may be "negative interest" to account for. This is interest repaid on a term deposit. This may reduce the amount of interest to declare on the tax return. If the term deposit was broken in full, or it was business-related, deduct the negative interest from the gross interest shown on the RWT withholding certificate (IR15 or equivalent statement). Deduct the allowable negative interest component using the worksheet on page 8 before entering the gross amount at Question 11 or 12 of the return. In all other cases, the negative interest is deductible in a later return when the term deposit matures. CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 8 1 2 3 Copy your gross interest from your RWT withholding certificate to Box 1. Print any negative interest you have paid in Box 2. Subtract Box 2 from Box 1 and print the answer in Box 3. Copy this amount to Question 11 or 12 of your tax return. Worksheet Interest paid or charged by Inland Revenue Include any interest paid by Inland Revenue as income in the year it is received, if you paid interest to Inland Revenue for late payment of tax, it is allowed as a deduction in the tax year the interest is paid. If your overall interest is also a negative amount, put a minus sign in the last box. Taxable Māori authority distributions Māori authorities can make various types of distributions. You're only required to declare taxable Māori authority distributions made from gross income that Māori authorities earned during the 2004-05 income year or subsequent income years. Fill in Box 11B or 12B if you received any taxable Māori authority distributions between 1 April 2017 and 31 March 2018. The Māori authority that paid you the distribution sends you a Māori authority distribution statement. Credits attached to distributions The Māori authority may attach a credit to the distribution it makes to members. This credit will be classified as a "Māori authority credit" and is part of the tax the Māori authority has already paid on its profits so the distributions are not taxed twice. www.ird.govt.nz 9 What to show in your return Your Māori authority distribution statement shows: •the amount of the distribution made to you, including what portion is taxable and what portion is non-taxable •the amount of Māori authority credit. These amounts, not including any non-taxable distribution, will need to be transferred to the following boxes: •taxable Māori authority distributions should be shown in either Box 11B or 12B •Māori authority credits should be shown in "other tax credits" Box 18I. A Māori authority makes a pre-tax profit of $10,000. They pay tax of $1,750 on this profit (Māori authority tax rate of 17.5%) and distribute the entire profit to their 10 members, so each member will receive $825 as a cash distribution and $175 of Māori authority credits. Each member of the authority liable to file an IR9 return would show the following information: Box 11B or 12B - $1,000 (made up of $825 + $175) Box 18I - $175 Example Non-taxable distributions Any other distributions received from a Māori authority, which are not taxable in the hands of a Māori authority member don't need to be included in the IR9 return. These amounts are classed as non-taxable distributions and can't have credits attached. Other income Print the net profit in Box 11C or 12C. The net income is the gross income less expenses related to earning the income, if it is a negative amount, put a minus sign in the last box. CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 10 Overseas income You can convert all overseas income and tax credits to New Zealand dollars by: •using the rates table available on www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: overseas currencies) •contacting the overseas section of a trading bank and asking for the exchange rate for the day you received your overseas income. Australian dividends from non-foreign investment fund investments If you hold shares in an Australian company which has elected to maintain a New Zealand imputation account, you may see a "New Zealand imputation credit" on your dividend statement. It's possible for dividends to be paid with these credits attached. Show any Australian dividend income at Box 11A or 12A. Claim the New Zealand imputation credits in the dividend imputation credits box at Question 18C and include overseas tax credits at Question 18A. This does not mean Australian imputed or franking credits can now be claimed. Inland Revenue approval may be required for an exemption from income tax. Foreign-sourced dividends Under the foreign investment fund (FIF) rules, dividends received from overseas companies may no longer be separately taxable. Generally, clubs or societies would use the default FIF income calculation method, called the fair dividend rate (FDR), which does not tax dividends separately. However, the foreign tax deducted from the dividend can be claimed as a credit against the tax payable on the calculated FIF income. To learn more about FIF rules go to www.ird.govt.nz/toii/fif/ Foreign rights If you're calculating controlled foreign company (CFC) or FIF income you may be required to complete an additional disclosure form for that investment. The types of foreign investment that may not require an additional disclosure are investments in countries New Zealand www.ird.govt.nz 11 has a double tax agreement with as at 31 March 2017, which have used the comparative value (CV) or FDR method. If you need assistance making a CFC disclosure please call 0800 377 774 to get the appropriate disclosure form. Full details of the disclosure requirements are available in our Tax Information Bulletins (TIBs). The disclosure forms are available from www.ird.govt.nz Portfolio investment entities (PIEs) and attributed PIE income/loss Certain PIEs attribute their net income/loss, and tax credits they derive, across their investors. Clubs or societies that are investors include the attributed income or loss in their tax return. Each year, the PIE is required to provide an investor statement setting out the details of the income/loss attributed to the investor for the year. The statement also shows the various types of tax credits associated with the income attributed. These tax credits are subject to the tax credit limits calculated in relation to the tax on the attributed PIE income. The attributed PIE income/loss is included in the club or society's return for the period that includes the end of the PIE's income year. Generally, PIEs will have a 31 March balance date. Taxable property sales If the club or society invested in residential property on or after 1 October 2015 and sold/disposed of it within two years, any profit is taxable income, even if there was no intention to sell when it was purchased. Show the net profit as part of the income total in Box 11C or 12C. If there is a net loss it can only be offset against income from other property sales/disposals. Complete a Property sale information (IR833) form for each property sold/disposed of and include it with the return. The form explains how to calculate and correctly return the resulting profit or loss. You can download the form from our website www.ird.govt.nz (search keyword: IR833). Complete the form even if the details have been included in a Financial statements summary (IR10) or set of accounts. CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 12 Box 12E Income deduction for non-profit bodies A non-profit body can claim a deduction of up to $1,000. This deduction is the smaller of: •the amount at Box 12D, or •$1,000. If the organisation's income is less than $1,000 before the deduction, it will have no taxable income. This deduction is not available to organisations covered by Questions 10 and 11. If your organisation has an exemption from RWT as a non- profit body, it does not necessarily mean it has non-profit status and is exempt for income tax purposes. Question 14 Donations The following societies can claim a deduction for donations made to organisations with "donee organisation" status: •friendly societies •building societies •societies that have been registered under the Incorporated Societies Act 1908, or the Industrial and Provident Societies Act 1908. You can view the list of donee organisations at www.ird.govt.nz State-funded tertiary education institutions, state schools and state-integrated schools don't have to be approved to have donee organisation status. Note The deduction for donations can't be more than the society's income after expenses (before the donation deduction is taken into account). Calculate the society's donation deduction. •If the amount in Box 13 is a loss, print nil in Box 14. •If the donations made by the society exceed the amount in Box 13, copy the amount in Box 13 to Box 14. www.ird.govt.nz 13 •If the donations made by the society do not exceed the amount in Box 13, print the donations in Box 14. Question 18 Tax calculation Incorporated bodies: •are taxed at 28 cents in the dollar, and •may be provisional tax payers, and so may have to make provisional tax payments - see page 18. Unincorporated bodies: •are assessed at individual tax rates but are not entitled to independent earner tax credits, and •may be provisional tax payers, so may have to make provisional tax payments - see page 18. If your organisation is an unincorporated body, calculate the tax on its taxable income using these rates. Income thresholdsIncome tax rates for the 2018 income year $0 - $14,00010.5% $14,001 - $48,00017.5% $48,001 - $70,00030.0% $70,001 +33.0% Claim any tax deducted from income paid to the organisation in Box 18A, 18C, 18G or 18I as appropriate. Box 18D Excess imputation credits brought forward If your organisation is unincorporated and had unused imputation credits in the 2017 return, they were unable to be refunded and must be brought forward and claimed against this year's tax payable. You can find the amount of excess imputation credits to be brought forward to 2018 in the "Loss/excess imputation credits carried forward" letter we sent you after your 2017 income tax return was assessed. CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 14 Print the amount in Box 18D of your return. Add up your total imputation credits from Boxes 18C and 18D and print the total in Box 18E. Box 18E Imputation credits If the imputation credits at Box 18E are greater than the amount in Box 18B, the difference can't be refunded. If the organisation is an incorporated body, the excess imputation credits must be converted to a loss and carried forward. To do this, divide the difference between Boxes 18B and 18E by 0.28. We'll send you a letter confirming the amount of net loss carried forward to the 2019 return. If the organisation is an unincorporated body, the difference between Boxes 18B and 18E must be carried forward to the 2019 return and credited against the tax liability. We'll send you a letter confirming the amount of excess imputation credits carried forward. Box 18GG Residential land withholding tax (RLWT) credit If the organisation is an "offshore RLWT person" and has sold or transferred residential property located in New Zealand, RLWT may have been deducted from the sale price. The organisation should have received a statement on the completion of the sale process showing the amount of RLWT deducted. The organisation can claim a credit for any RLWT deducted. Show the amount of RLWT deducted, less any RLWT paid back to the organisation and/or transferred to outstanding amounts during the income year. If there was more than one amount of RLWT deducted, show the combined amount, less any RLWT paid back to the organisation and/or transferred to outstanding amounts during the income year. Question 19 Refunds and/or transfers If you're entitled to a refund you can: •transfer it to arrears that are being paid off •transfer all or part of it to your 2019 provisional tax www.ird.govt.nz 15 •have any balance direct credited to your club or society's bank account or other deposit account eg, a building society account shown at Question 6. If you've made payments towards your 2019 provisional tax and, after completing this return, find you have less or no provisional tax to pay, the overpayment can be included in the amount we refund or transfer. Print the overpaid amount in Box 19A. Direct credit See page 5 for more information on how to have your refund direct credited to your bank account. Refunds of less than $5 If your refund is less than $5 it will be carried forward to your next tax assessment. We'll offset it against any amount you may owe us or add it to any refund. If you don't want it carried forward, please call us on 0800 377 774. Transfers If you'd like your refund ("the credit") transferred to another account or to arrears you're paying off by an instalment arrangement, you'll need to tell us what date you'd like it transferred. The date you choose depends on what tax has been overpaid and whose account you want the credit transferred to. If the transfer is to arrears being paid off through an instalment arrangement, you'll need to include a note with your return authorising the transfer. Please state clearly: •that the transfer is to arrears currently under an instalment arrangement •the name and IRD number of the taxpayer the transfer should be made to •whether the taxpayer is an "associated taxpayer" •the tax type and period •the date you'd like the transfer to take place. CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 16 Associated taxpayers When transferring overpaid tax, associated taxpayers are: •a company you're a shareholder-employee in •a partner in the same partnership •a trustee of a family trust you're a beneficiary of. You can ask for your credit to be transferred at any date as long as it's not before the relevant date shown below. Future transfer dates If you'd like your credit transferred at a date in the future, attach a note to the front of your return with details of: •the amount you want transferred •the account you want it transferred to, and if it's the account of an associated taxpayer •the date you'd like it transferred. If you don't tell us the date you'd like your credit transferred, we'll transfer it at a date we think gives you the greatest advantage. Contact us if you'd like to change the transfer date and tell us if this transfer is to cover a debt. Requesting transfers on the return form Fill out the boxes on page 3 of your return if you'd like to transfer a credit to another account. Transfer date For credit transferred to your account or an associated person's account: •If the credit is from excess tax deducted (eg, PAYE deducted) it's the day after your balance date (or 1 April if your balance date is before 31 March). •If the credit is from overpaid provisional tax it's the day you overpaid it. For credit transferred to a non-associated person's account, it's the later of the day you requested the transfer, or the day after you file your return. Contact us if you'd like to change the transfer date. Include the account details you want the credit to be transferred to. If it's going to another person, tell us the transfer date. www.ird.govt.nz 17 Question 20 Initial provisional tax liability An organisation has an initial provisional tax liability for a tax year if it: •starts to derive income from a taxable activity in the tax year, and •had not derived income from a taxable activity within the preceding four years, and •had a residual income tax of $60,000 or more in the current year. Generally, organisations aren't liable to pay provisional tax in their first year of operation. If you meet the criteria to have an initial provisional tax liability you may have to pay interest. The interest cost may be reduced by making voluntary provisional tax payments. Print the date the organisation started to derive income from taxable activity in Box 20. Interest rules for an initial provisional tax liability Special rules apply when interest may be charged if your club or society has an initial provisional tax liability. It may be charged interest from the first, second or third instalment date, which is determined by the business start date. For most organisations with a balance date of 31 March, the start date for interest will be: •29 August, if the taxable activity started before 30 July of the same year •16 January, if the taxable activity started between 30 July and 16 December of the previous year •8 May, if the taxable activity started on or after 17 December of the previous year. CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 18 For organisations with a balance date of 31 March, and registered for six-monthly GST filing, the start date for interest will be: •29 October, if the taxable activity started before 30 September of the same year •8 May, if the taxable activity started on or after 30 September of the previous year. If the organisation has a balance date other than 31 March, the provisional tax payment dates will generally be the 28th day of the 5th, 9th and 13th months following the balance date. There are special rules about how interest is calculated when a club or society has an initial provisional tax liability and has changed its balance date. For further information refer to our Provisional tax (IR289) guide. Question 21 2019 provisional tax 2019 provisional tax is charged for income the organisation will earn in the 2019 income year. It's payable in instalments. If the organisation's 2018 residual income tax (RIT) is: •$2,500 or less, it doesn't have to pay provisional tax, but it can make voluntary payments •more than $2,500 but expected to be $2,500 or less for 2019, it may estimate 2019 provisional tax at nil •more than $2,500 and expected to be more than $2,500 for 2019, it must pay 2019 provisional tax using one of the payment options. If you anticipate your RIT will exceed $2,500 for the 2019 year, read the notes on interest - see page 20. You may be liable for interest from your first provisional tax instalment date. All clubs or societies may choose one of the following three options to work out their provisional tax: www.ird.govt.nz 19 Standard option If you use this option, write S in Box 21 of the return and the amount of 2019 provisional tax in Box 21A. •For unincorporated organisations, 2019 provisional tax is the 2018 RIT plus 5%. If 2018 return has not been filed it will be 2017 RIT plus 10%. •For incorporated organisations, 2019 provisional tax is the 2018 RIT plus 5%. If 2018 return has not been filed it will be 2017 RIT plus 10%. Estimation option An organisation can estimate its 2019 provisional tax as many times as it wants to up to and including its final instalment date. If the 2019 RIT is expected to be lower than its 2018 RIT, estimating may stop it from paying more provisional tax than it has to. If the organisation estimates its provisional tax, write E in Box 21 on the return and the amount of 2019 provisional tax in Box 21A. An estimate must be "fair and reasonable" at each instalment it applies to if you use the estimation option. Read the notes on the not taking reasonable care penalty and interest on page 20. Note Remember, when making your estimate, that incorporated and unincorporated bodies have different tax rates. Incorporated bodies use the tax rate of 28% from 1 April 2011 (previously this was 30%). For unincorporated bodies, see the tax rates on page 13. CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 20 Ratio option If you're using the ratio option and select E at Box 21, you're electing to stop using this option. Note If the club or society is GST registered, you may qualify to use the ratio option to calculate your provisional tax. Only enter R at Box 21 if you've already elected to use the ratio option. You must apply in writing to use the ratio option before the beginning of the income year you want to use it in. If you've already elected to use the ratio option and want to continue using it, enter R at Box 21. You'll find more information about the ratio option in our guide Provisional tax (IR289). Not taking reasonable care penalty When you estimate the organistation's 2019 provisional tax, your estimate must be fair and reasonable. If the 2019 RIT is greater than the provisional tax paid, the organisation may be liable for not taking reasonable care and a penalty of 20% of the underpaid provisional tax will apply. Interest If the organisation has paid too much provisional tax, we pay interest, or if it hasn't paid enough provisional tax, we charge interest. Interest the organisation pays is tax deductible, while interest we pay is taxable income. For more information about interest and penalties, read our guide Penalties and interest (IR240). www.ird.govt.nz 21 Election to be a provisional tax payer A club or society is a provisional tax payer for the 2018 year if its RIT for that year is more than $2,500. If the 2018 RIT is $2,500 or less, but the club or society paid provisional tax for the year, it may elect to be a provisional tax payer for 2018. This may affect the interest the organisation may be entitled to for 2018. To elect to be a provisional tax payer for the 2018 year, attach a note to the front of the 2018 return. Change in balance date There are special rules about when provisional tax is due and how interest is calculated if there has been a change in balance date. You'll find more information about these rules in our guide Provisional tax (IR289). Tax pooling Tax pooling allows provisional tax payers to pool provisional tax payments, offsetting underpayments by overpayments within the same pool, reducing possible exposure to late payment penalties and use-of-money interest. The pooling arrangement is made through a commercial intermediary, who arranges for participating taxpayers to be charged or compensated for the offset. For more information about tax pooling, including a list of intermediaries, go to www.ird.govt.nz CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 22 Payment dates 2019 provisional tax Generally, a club or society with a 31 March balance date pays provisional tax by the following due dates: •First instalment 28 August 2018 •Second instalment 15 January 2019 •Third instalment 7 May 2019 A club or society with a balance date other than 31 March pays provisional tax on the 28th day of the 5th, 9th and 13th months after the balance date. There are two exceptions: •An instalment due on 28 December will be due on 15 January •An instalment due on 28 April will be due on 7 May. These dates will alter if: •the club or society is registered for GST and the GST is filed six-monthly, or •provisional tax is paid through the ratio option. If one of these situations applies to you, please read our guide Provisional tax (IR289). 2018 end-of-year income tax Clubs or societies with an agent and an extension of time may have until 7 April 2019 to pay their tax. If you think this applies, contact your agent for more information. Otherwise, a club or society with a balance date between 1 March and 30 September must pay its end-of-year income tax and any interest by 7 February 2019. A club or society with a balance date between 1 October and 28 February must pay its end-of-year income tax by the seventh day of the month before the following year's balance date. www.ird.govt.nz 23 How to make payments You can make payments: •electronically •by credit or debit card •by posting a cheque. We recommend making electronic payments because it’s the most accurate and reliable method. These electronic options are available through your bank: •online banking •automatic payment •direct credit. When making electronic payments, include: •your IRD number •a tax type code •the period the payment relates to. Go to www.ird.govt.nz/pay for full details of our payment options. CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 24 Late payment We may charge you a late payment penalty if you miss a payment or it’s late. We’ll also charge you interest if you don’t make your tax payment by the due date. If you can’t pay your tax by the due date, please call us. We’ll look at your payment options, which may include an instalment arrangement, depending on your circumstances. Go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keywords: managing penalties) for more information. Arrangements If you're unable to pay your tax by the due date, please call us. We'll look at your payment options, which may include an instalment arrangement, depending on your circumstances. Arrangements can be agreed on, before or after the due date for payment. There are greater reductions in the penalties charged if the arrangement is made before the due date. You can send us an instalment arrangement proposal online. Go to www.ird.govt.nz (keyword: arrangement). Self-assessment by taxpayers Taxpayers have to assess their own liability as part of their return filing obligations. We may amend your assessment if a correction is required. If you dispute our assessment please read our factsheet If you disagree with an assessment (IR778). The four-month period for you to issue a notice of proposed adjustment (NOPA) to your self-assessment will start on the date Inland Revenue receives your return. www.ird.govt.nz 25 Services you may need 0800 self-service numbers This service is available to callers seven days a week except between 5am and 6am each day. Just make sure you have your IRD number ready when you call. For access to your account-specific information, you’ll need to be enrolled with voice ID or have a PIN. Registering for voice ID is easy and only takes a few minutes. Call 0800 257 843 to enrol. Order publications and taxpacks 0800 257 773 Request a summary of earnings 0800 257 778 Request a personal tax summary 0800 257 444 Confirm a personal tax summary 0800 257 771 All other services 0800 257 777 When you call, just confirm what you want from the options given. If you need to talk with us, we’ll re-direct your call to someone who can help you. Need to speak with us? Have your IRD number ready and call us on one of these numbers: General tax, tax credits and refunds 0800 775 247 Employer enquiries 0800 377 772 General business tax 0800 377 774 Overdue returns and payments 0800 377 771 Our contact centre hours are 8am to 8pm Monday to Friday, and Saturday between 9am and 1pm. We record all calls. Our self-service lines are open at all times and offer a range of automated options, especially if you’re enrolled with voice ID. For more information go to www.ird.govt.nz/contact-us CLUBS OR SOCIETIES TAX RETURN GUIDE 26 Privacy Meeting your tax obligations means giving us accurate information so we can assess your liabilities or your entitlements under the Acts we administer. We may charge penalties if you don’t. We may also exchange information about you with: •some government agencies •another country, if we have an information supply agreement with them •Statistics New Zealand (for statistical purposes only). If you ask for the personal information we hold about you, we’ll give it to you and correct any errors, unless we have a lawful reason not to. Call us on 0800 377 774 for more information. For full details of our privacy policy go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keyword: privacy). If you have a complaint about our service We’re committed to providing you with a quality service. If there’s a problem, we’d like to know about it and have the chance to fix it. You can call the staff member you’ve been dealing with or, if you’re not satisfied, ask to speak with their team leader/manager. If your complaint is still unresolved, you can contact our Complaints Management Service. For more information, go to www.ird.govt.nz (search keyword: complaints) or call us on 0800 274 138 between 8am and 5pm weekdays. If you disagree with how we’ve assessed your tax, you may need to follow a formal disputes process. For more information, read our factsheet If you disagree with an assessment (IR778). www.ird.govt.nz 27