INTER INCOM ACT 19 Legislat Act 199 this Int Summary W Su Analysis What What Se Se Se Could Ar Do Ho Do W Concl Referenc Appendi x Incom Comp Summ T1. 2.     T3.    RPRETATIO ME TAX – W 993 COULD tive referen 93 (CA 199 terpretation y ................. Why is this issu ummary of re ................... are “voting in rights in the ection 36(1) – ection 107 – u ection 117 – a d ss 107 and 1 re rights arisin o ss 107 and ow should the oes the inclus Which interpret usion ........... es ............... x – Legislation me Tax Act 20 panies Act 199 mary This Interp conferred b under s YA Under s YC the percen over share carried by company)  divid e  the c  varia t  the a The Comm that Act th of the CA 1  a vot  an e q  an eq ON STATEM WHETHER D GIVE RI nces are to 3). Releva n Statemen ................... ue relevant? .. asoning ........ ................... nterests” and Companies Ac – rights and po unanimous ass alteration of s 117 give rise t ng under ss 1 117 confer a e definition of sion of rights u tation best acc ................... ................... n .................. 007 ............... 93 ................ pretation St by the CA 1 A 1 of the IT C 2 of the IT tage of sha s held by th a share iss to vote or p ends or dis onstitution tions in cap ppointmen issioner co at gives ri s 1993 sets o e in any re qual share i qual share i MENT: IS 1 CERTAIN ISE TO A “ the Incom ant legislativ nt. .................. .................. .................. .................. “shareholder ct 1993 could owers attachi sent to certain hareholder rig to a “sharehol 07 and 117 “c right to vote o “shareholder under ss 107 a cords with the .................. .................. .................. .................. .................. tatement co 1993 could TA 2007. TA 2007, a areholder d he person. ued by a co participate tributions t ; pital; and t of direct o nsiders tha se to any sh out the righ solution; in dividend in the surp 1 13/02 RIGHTS C SHAREHO e Tax Act 2 ve provisio Contents ................... ................... ................... ................... decision-mak be a shareho ng to shares . n types of act ghts ............. lder decision- carried by” a s or participate decision-mak and 117 lead e legislative in ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... onsiders wh give rise to person's “v ecision-ma A “shareh ompany (o in any dec to be paid; ors. at s 36(1) o hareholder ts attached s; and lus assets o CONFERRE OLDER DEC 2007 (ITA 2 ons are repr ................... ................... ................... ................... king rights”? .. older decision- ................... tion .............. ................... making right ” share? .......... in any decisio king right” be to absurdity? ntent? ........... ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... hether cert o a “shareh voting inte aking rights holder decis r an option ision-maki n of the CA 19 decision-m d to shares of the comp ED BY THE CISION-MA 2007) and t roduced in ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... -making right? ................... ................... ................... ”? ................ ................... on-making? .. interpreted? . .................. ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... ................... ain protect holder decis rest” in a c s carried by sion-making over a sha ng concern 993 is the o making right . These ar pany. COMPAN I AKING RIG the Compa the Appen d .............. 1  .............. 2  .............. 2  .............. 3  .............. 3  ? ............ 4  .............. 4  .............. 5  .............. 7  .............. 8  .............. 8  ............ 10  ............ 11  ............ 16  ............ 17  ............ 17  ............ 18  ............ 19  ............ 19  ............ 19  ive rights sion-making company eq y shares or g right” is a are issued b ing: only provis ts. Section e the rights IES GHT” nies dix to g right” quals options a right by a ion in n 36(1) s to: 4. T5. T6. “ T7. Why is 8. T9. Summa T10. T11. Section 36 the constit some clas s is of particu provisions irrespectiv e whether th Two provis shareholde company to requiremen shareholde the rights a The Comm to a share h conferred b “voting inte This Interp However, p provided in shares or i Statement s this issue Several pri relevant fo issued to p The calcula the continu exists). Th combined v levels over carry forwa offset losse CA 1993 w shareholde concerning ary of rea The definit carried by Commissi o are carried The definit decision- m rights arisi with an ab i conferred b a contingen company. that includ be limited t (2) provide ution or the ses of share ular releva in the CA 1 e of their v hose types o sions in the er decision- o undertak nts of the C ers with the attached to issioner co holder decis by those se erest” in a pretation St protective r n a compan n the NZX would app e relevant vate bindin r sharehold provide cert ation of a p uity provisio he continuit voting inter r a period. ard losses, es with othe were voting er continuity consolidat soning ion of a “sh a share or oner conside by all shar ion further making” con ng under s ility to “par by ss 107 a nt nature, a The issue es these co to substant es that thes e terms of es may carr nce to thos 1993 confer oting rights of rights co CA 1993 w making rig e various a CA 1993 if a e right to vo o their shar nsiders th a sion-makin ections are company u tatement fo rights of a s ny constitut listing rules ly equally t t? ng ruling ap der continu tainty for a erson's vo t ons in the I ty provision rests in a c The contin memorand er compani interests, t y requirem tion, contro hareholder an option o ers that rig res issued b requires th cerning fou s 107 and rticipate” in and 117 are and arise te is whether ontingent “p tive rights. 2 se rights m issue of th e ry no voting se non-votin r certain pr s or the com ould be a sh were identif ht for tax p actions with all shareho ote on an a es. at ss 107 an g right und not include under s YC ocuses on r similar natu tion, the ter s. The con to those sim pplications ity purpos e ll taxpayers ting interes ITA 2007 (u ns generally ompany or uity provis dum accoun ies. If righ this might i ents. Prob olled foreign decision-m over a shar hts arising by a compa hat the righ ur types of 117 of the n any decisi e not substa emporarily the definiti protective” ay be neg a e shares. T g rights. T ng classes rotective rig mpany’s co hareholder fied as pote purposes. hout adheri lders agre e action taken nd 117 of t der s YA 1 o ed in the ca 2 of the ITA ights confe ure to those rms of issu clusions re milar rights identified t es. This Int s. st in a comp unless a ma y require th r companies ions govern nt credits o ts arising u impact on a blems could n companie making right re issued by under ss 1 any. ht is to “vot decisions. CA 1993 co ion-making antive votin on certain ion is to be rights or w ated, altere The CA 199 This Interpr of shares. ghts to all s onstitution. decision-m entially givi Section 10 7 ng to proce e. Section n by a com the CA 1993 of the ITA 2 alculation o A 2007. erred by the e in s 117 m e of a shar ached in th s. his issue a s terpretatio pany is rele arket value hat a group s exceeds c n a compan r excess ta under ss 10 a company similarly a es and asso t” requires y a compan 107 and 11 te or partic It is certai ould provid g. However ng rights. actions be e interprete whether the d or added 93 anticipat retation Sta This is bec shareholder The quest making right ng rise to a 7 allows a edural 117 provid pany that a 3 do not giv 2007. Any f a person’s e CA 1993. may also b re, options his Interpre s being pot n Statemen evant for ap e circumsta p of persons certain min ny’s ability x credits a 07 and 117 ’s ability to arise for the ociated pers that the rig ny. The 7 of the C A ipate in any inly arguab de a shareh r, the rights They are ri ing propose d in a broa e definition to by tes that atement cause rs, tion is t. a es affects ve rise rights s e over etation tentially nt is pplying nce s’ imum to nd to of the o satisfy e rules sons. ght is A 1993 y ble that older s ights of ed by a ad way should T12. T13. T14. Analys T15. “ T 16. “ What a 17. 18. 19. The definit enacted a s company’s applies in s person’s in The Comm nature we r interest in calculating making the Therefore, ss 107 and right. This those in s 1 options ove sis This Interp affect the p the purpos who holds might see m options cou However, t “sharehold because it persons, c o This Interp “sharehold arising un d tax purpos whether a n are “votin A person’s ITA 2007. shareholde Section YA voting i (a) m p (w Section YC YC 2 V Percenta (1) A d When de (2) D c d v ions of “vot s a means o decisions a some situat terests in a issioner co re not inten a company a person’s e calculatio the Comm d 117 of the s conclusion 117 that ar er shares o pretation St percentage es of the IT non-voting m counter-i uld someho the questio er decision could affe c ontrolled fo pretation St er decision der ss 107 a es. The sta n interpreta g interest voting inte These prov er continuity 1 of the IT interest – means, for a p person is treat which relate t 2 of the IT Voting intere age of shareho A person’s vot decision-makin ecision-making Despite subsec ompany carrie decision-makin voting interest ting interes of measurin and resourc tions where a company nsiders th a nded to be y. A broad s voting inte ns unworka issioner co e CA 1993 d n equally ap re in a com or the NZX tatement co of voting i TA 2007. T g shares or ntuitive tha ow be said t n arises du -making rig ct rules rela oreign comp tatement fir -making rig and 117 of atement th ation can be ts” and “sh erest in a co visions incl y, controlle TA 2007 de person and a c ted as holding to the measur TA 2007 pro ests older decision ing interest in ng rights for t g rights vary ction (1), if th ed by shares ng listed in the t in the compa 3 st” and “sha ng a shareh ces. A defi e voting int . at protectiv included in interpretat erest in a c able. nsiders th a do not give pplies to pr pany const listing rules onsiders wh nterests he The issue is options ov at a shareh to have a v ue to the br ght” in the ating to sha panies and rst sets out ght” in the the CA 199 hen conside e reached t hareholde ompany is ude rules r ed foreign c fines a vot company and in the comp a rement of com ovides: -making right n a company e he company c he percentage or options hel e definition of any equals the areholder d holder’s lev inition of “m terests may e rights of the calcula tion includin company co at the prefe e rise to a s rotective rig titution, the s. hether cert eld by a sha s particular er shares i s holder holdi voting inter road definit ITA 2007. areholder co consolidate t the definit ITA 2007. 93 could fa ers the purp that is cons er decision referred to relating to a companies a ing interest a time, the pe any at the tim mpany owners ts equals the per carried by sha of shareholde ld by any pers f shareholder e average of t decision-ma el of contro market valu y not accura a continge ation of a p ng these ty ould lead to erred interp shareholder ghts of a si e terms of i ain protect areholder o ly relevant ssued by a ing non-vot rest in the c ions of “vo The issue ontinuity, a ed groups. tions of “vo It then ex ll within th pose of the sistent with n-making r in various associated and consol t as follows ercentage vot e under sectio hip): rcentage of th ares or options er decision-ma son differs as decision-mak those differing aking right” ol over the ue interest” ately reflec nt and tem person’s vot ypes of righ o absurdity pretation is r decision-m milar natur issue of sha ive rights c of a compan for a share company. ting shares company. ting intere s is importan associated oting intere xplains why ose definit i definitions h this purpo rights”? provisions persons, idation. s: ting interest th ons YC 2 to YC e total shareh s held by the aking rights fo between the ing right, the g percentages ” were ” ct a mporary ting hts in by that making re to ares, could ny for eholder It s or st” and nt est” and rights ions for s and ose. in the hat the C 20 holder person. or a types of person’s . 20. 21. T22.    What r right? Section 23. 24. A person’s shareholde shares or o limited to c making rig Section YA follows: s c d (a ( ( c (d The definit  be “c  be a  relate distri the a rights in th n 36(1) – Section 36 36 R (1) S (a ( ( c (2) S a s c Section 36 vote at a m the right to rights woul fall within t voting inte er decision- options the considering ht. 1 of the IT shareholder d ompany or an decision-makin a) a divide liquidat directo r b) the con c) a variat d) the app ion contain arried by” a right to “vo e to one of bution to b ppointmen he Compa rights and of the CA Rights and po Subject to sub a) the righ includin (i) a (ii) a (iii) a (iv) a (v) a (vi) p b) the righ c) the righ Subject to sect dded to by th hare is issued ase may be. (1) provide meeting on o an equal s ld give rise the four list erest in a co making rig person hol the types TA 2007 de decision-ma n option over ng concerning end or other d ion of the com rs acting only stitution of th tion in the cap pointment of a ns three req a share or ote or parti the four lis be paid, the t of a direc nies Act 1 d powers a 1993 provi owers attach section (2), a ht to 1 vote on ng any resolut appoint or rem adopt a consti alter the comp approve a maj approve an am put the compa ht to an equal ht to an equal tion 53, the ri he constitution d under sectio es that the any resolut share in th to a shar e ted types o 4 ompany eq hts for the lds. The sc of rights th fines a sha king right m a share issue d — distribution to mpany or othe in their capac he company; o pital of the com a director of th quirements an option o cipate in an sted types o e company’s ctor). 1993 could attaching des: hing to share share in a co n a poll at a m tion to— move a directo tution: pany's constitu jor transaction malgamation o any into liquid share in divid share in the d ights specified n of the compa n 41(b) or sec rights conf tion, the rig e distributi eholder dec of decision c uals the pe company t cope of this hat might b areholder de eans a right, d by a compa be paid or ma erwise, exclud city as directo or mpany; or he company . The relev over a shar ny decision of decision- s constituti d be a sha to shares es ompany confe meeting of the or or auditor: ution, if it has n: of the compan ation: dends authoris distribution of d in subsection any or in acco ction 42 or se ferred by a ght to an e on of surpl ision-maki n contained i ercentage o that are car s Interpreta be a shareh ecision-ma carried by a s ny, to vote or ade by the co ing decision- m rs; or vant right m re; -making”; -making (ie on, a varia reholder d s rs on the hold company on s one: ny under secti sed by the bo f the surplus a n (1) may be ordance with t ection 44 or se share are t qual share us assets. ng right to n the defin of the total rried by the ation Statem older decis king right a share issued b r participate in mpany, wheth making under must: and e, a dividen tion in cap decision-m der— any resolutio on 221: ard: assets of the c negated, alte the terms on w ection 107(2), the right to in dividend Some of th the extent ition. e ment is sion- as by a n any her on a taken by nd or ital, or making n, company. red, or which the , as the o one ds and hese they 25. T26.      T27. 28. T29. Section 30. Section 36 altered or a share. Con that confer may offer t voting righ sharehold e the CA 199 shares, reg issue of the These iden  partic  comm meet  vote right s  exerc again s 117  receiv s 120 The above or the com Although t h right to att those prov otherwise p sections wo constitution provisions particular a major tran always be a issue of a s resolutions Taking this potentially the CA 199 non-voting n 107 – un Section 10 concur, ce r CA 1993. T 107 (1) (2) provide added to by nsistent wit r no voting the holder a ts. Therefo er decision- 93 confer a gardless of e share can tified rights cipate as an ment on the ing under s as part of a s attached cise buy-ou nst an actio 7; and ve notice o 0(1). rights are pany cons t he holder o tend (s 120 isions do n participate ould not giv n cannot ne include the actions to b sactions, a a special re share can li s, as provid s all into ac give rise to 93. Both of shares, to nanimous 7 of the CA rtain action The section Unanimous Notwithstand agreed or co (a) a divi d (b) a disc sectio (c) share 59 to es that the y the comp th this, s 37 rights. Ce a preferent ore, it wou making rig right to pa voting righ nnot negate s include th n “entitled e managem s 109(1); an interest to that sha t rights un on approved f and atten present in titution. of a class of 0(1)) and co ot give the in any dec ve rise to a egate seve e requireme be undertak malgamatio esolution on imit the cla ed in s 36( count, only o sharehold f these prov o participate assent to A 1993 prov ns can take n relevantly assent to ce ding section 5 ncur,— dend may be count scheme on 55: s in a compa n 65: 5 rights spec pany’s cons 7 anticipate rtain classe tial claim to ld seem tha hts on the articipate in hts. The co e these righ he right to: person” u n ment of the group und areholder’s der s 118, d by that sh nd an annua all classes f share that omment (s holder of s isions made a sharehold ral other p r ent for a sp ken regardi ons or liqui n such actio asses of sha (2). y two provis der decision visions per e in particu o certain ty vides that, place othe y states: ertain types 2 but subject authorised ot may be appro ny may be acq cified in s 3 titution or es that a co es of share o a dividend at such sha holder. Ho n certain ma ompany con hts. nder any s 1 company a er s 117 on shares; where tha t hareholder’ al sharehol of shares, t confers no 109(1)) at such a shar e at that m er decision rovisions in pecial resolu ing alteratio idation. Ho ons, the co areholder e sions were n-making r mit shareh lar compa n ypes of ac if all entitle erwise than of action to section 10 therwise than oved otherwis quired otherw 6(1) may b the terms o ompany ma s (eg, prefe d but confe ares would owever, som atters on a nstitution o 107 agreem at an annua n any issue t sharehold ’s interest g ders’ meet irrespectiv e o voting rig t a shareho re any abili meeting. Th -making rig n the CA 19 ution of sha ons to the c owever, wh onstitution o entitled to v identified t ights – ss 1 olders, incl ny decisions ction ed persons in accorda 8, if all entitle in accordance se than in acco ise than in ac be negated of issue of ay issue sha erence sha er no, or lim not confer me provisio ll classes o r the terms ment; al sharehold affecting t er has vote group unde ing under e of voting ghts may h olders’ meet ty to vote o herefore, th ght. The 993. These areholders constitution hile there m or the term vote on tho that could 107 and 11 uding hold s. have agree nce with th ed persons ha e with section ordance with cordance wit h , a ares res) mited, any ons in of s of ders’ the ed er rights ave a ting, or hese e for n, must ms of se 17 of ers of ed or he ve 53: h sections 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. (2) (3) ... Section 2 o entitled (a) (b) Section 10 bypassed f definition o entitled to of the term voting shar agreement Section 10 small com p Company L Wellington, Unan Secti subm impo share to be they 6 \[Es able the s Andrew Be LexisNexis ) The by th bein or co but w comp may stand perso stand s 107 Section 10 procedure s writing. If formalities (d) share secti o (e) financ purch (f) any o f than i If all entitled accordance w If all entitled in which a di to that trans a of the CA 19 d person, in r a shareholde a person upo shareholder: 7 allows so for the liste of entitled p vote on a p m “entitled p reholders) t or concurr 7 was enac panies wou Law Reform , 1990), th nimous asse ion 78A \[now missions made osed excessive eholder) comp e a problem y concur in th ssential rights to issue share shareholders a ck and oth ) state at \[ Act provides he Act where ng taken. All e oncurrence mu will also includ pany confers r either be a se ding agreeme on can at any ding unanimo 7 will no longe 7 enables c s in the CA unanimous and proced s in a compan ons 69 to 72: cial assistance ase of shares f the matters n accordance persons have with section 42 persons have rector is inter action. 993 defines relation to a c er; and on whom the c ome of the f ed actions if person does particular a person” sho must agree rence must cted followi ld face in c m: Transitio e Law Com ent to compa s 107\] is a ve e by a number e formalities o panies. This to be disreg he informal a s and powers\] es, or repurch agree to or co ers in Moris 16.10\]: s for suspens e all those af entitled perso ust be in writi de any person rights which w eparate “one o nt to the exer time by notic us shareholde er apply. ... \[E companies 1993, if all s assent is dures in the 6 ny may be red e may be give otherwise tha referred to in with that sec e agreed or co 2 or section 4 e agreed to or rested, nothing s an “entitl ompany, mea constitution co formal requ f all entitled s not distin action, and ows that al e or concur t be in writi ng submis s complying w on and Revi mmission sta any action ery important r of bodies an on the day-to- section perm garded comp action taken rights and po hase shares, fo oncur in the is son’s Comp sion of some ffected agre ons must agre ng. The entitl n other than a would otherwi off” agreemen rcise of the po ce in writing to er agreement, Emphasis adde to suspend l entitled pe not obtaine e CA 1993. deemed otherw n for the purp an in accordan n section 161( ction. oncur, shares 44 or section 4 r concur in a c g in sections ed person” ans— onfers any of uirements o d persons a nguish betw those who l sharehold r to the acti ng. sions about with the dra ision (NZLC ated at \[45 new provision d individuals t -day operation mits the form letely, if all e n. In a norma owers are atta or example, w sue or repurc pany and S e of the form e to the rele e to or concur ed persons w shareholder u se be enjoyed nt to a particu ower generally o the compan , and in the ab ed\] d some of t ersons hav ed, the com . wise than in a pose of, or in c nce with secti 1) may be au may be issue 45. company ente 140 and 141 s ” as: the rights and of the CA 1 agree or co ween shareh are not. T ders of the ion being ta t the costs aft Compan C R16, Law 5\]: n. The Law C that the 1990 n of small (an malities whic entitled pers l company, in ached to share without any fo hase. \[Emph ecurities La malities and p evant action, r in the action ill normally be upon whom th d by sharehold ular exercise o y or from time y withdraw fr bsence of con he formalit e agreed to mpany mus accordance wi connection wi ons 76 to 80: thorised othe ed otherwise t ering into a tra shall apply in d powers of a 1993 to be ncur. The holders who Therefore, t company ( aken. The and formal nies Act 199 Commissio Commission ac 0 \[draft Compa d, in particula ch were cons sons agree, o n which all the es, a company ormalities at a asis added\] aw (loosele procedures r or concur in n, and the agr e all the share he constitution ders. The agre of a power, or e to time. An e rom a general tinuing unanim ties and o the action st adhere to th th, the rwise han in ansaction relation o are the use not just lities 90. In on, ccepts the anies\] Act ar, one- sidered or if e section y will be ll, where eaf ed, required n it reement eholders, n of the eement a entitled or mity n in o all the Section 36. 37. “ 38. 39. 40. T41. n 117 – al Section 11 117 A (1) A a (2) F (a ( ( c (d (3) F p a ( a ( A company that action “interest gr identical rig Section 11 shares con action that to a share ” limitations constitution pre-emptiv rank in prio class of sha Section 11 the assent special reso the action require th e Section 11 attached t o was not ap affected int prejudicial The rights are contin g a special re undertake to vote in a lteration o 7 of the CA Alteration of A company mu ction has bee For the purpos a) the righ or the c b) pre-em c) the righ required the com d) the righ alteratio For the purpos priority to, exis ction affecting a) the con ranking b) the iss u section y must not has been a roup” is de ghts who w 7 provides fer voting r would affe ” are define and condit n. This spe ve rights. T ority to, or are. 7 requires of 75 perce olution is p or did not s e company 9 provides o shares, th pproved in a terest grou conduct un conferred o gent on the esolution of the action) a special re of shareho A 1993 prov shareholder ust not take a en approved b ses of subsect hts, privileges constitution, in ptive rights ar ht to have the d by the const mpany: ht that a proce on of rights no ses of subsect sting shares, g the rights at stitution of th equally with, ue is made in 45 or under t take action approved b fined in the will be affec the membe rights) with ect the righ ed non-exha tions attach ecifically inc The section equal with that the a p ent of affec passed and sign the res to purchas that when hat action i accordance up could tak nder s 174 on shareho e company’s f the affect ). Once thi esolution to 7 older right vides: r rights ction that aff e y a special res ion (1), the ri , limitations, a ncluding votin rising under s procedure se titution for the edure required ot be amende ion (1), the is whether as to ttached to the he company ex , or in priority accordance w the constitutio n that affec by a special e CA 1993 a cted by the ers of an in h the ability ts attached austively to hed to the s cludes voti also clarif i , the class pproval is m cted shareh a particula solution, s e their sha a company s not invali e with s 117 ke action ag of the CA 1 lders unde s actions. T ed interest s happens, approve o ts ects the rights solution of ea ghts attache d and conditions ng rights and r section 45: et out in this s e amendment d by the const ed or altered. ssue of further o voting rights e existing sha xpressly perm to, those sha with the pre-em on of the comp ts the right l resolution as a group company’s nterest grou y to approv d to their sh o include th share by th ng rights, t ies that the of share is made by spe holders in t r sharehol d 118 provid res under s y takes acti idated by re 7. Howeve gainst the c 1993. r s 117 ar e They arise t group (or , s 117 allo or not appro s attached to s ch interest gr d to a share in s attached to rights to distr section, and a t or alteration titution for the r shares ranki s or distributio res, unless— mits the issue o ares; or mptive rights pany. ts attached of each in t of shareho s action or p up (whethe ve or not ap hares. The he rights, p he CA 1993 the right to e issue of fu an action a ecial resolu hat interes der voted a es that the s 111. ion that aff eason only r, in such c company fo e of a prote when the c otherwise d ws an affec ove the act shares unless roup. nclude— the share by ibutions: ny further pr o of rights, obs e amendment ing equally wi ons, is deemed of further sha of shareholde to shares, terest grou olders with proposal. er or not th pprove a pa e rights “att privileges, or the distributi o urther shar affecting th ution (requi t group). I against app e sharehold fects the rig that the ac circumstanc or unfair ctive natu r company ca decides to cted shareh ion. that this Act ocedure served by t or th, or in d to be ares ers under unless up. An eir articular tached ons and es that hat iring If a roving er may ghts ction ces, the re, and alls for holder Could T42.   T43.   44. T 45. T46. 47. Are rig T48. ss 107 an Two questi CA 1993 a n  Is the makin  Could trigge affect The Comm give rise t o does not or any decisio must first t  reque can b (s 10  callin right s Also, the d listed type s distribution variation o The action s concern oth decision-m obtain una rights atta c Further, th and the ab the existe n making rig interests. provisions all shareh o The more r shareholde shareholde question is that time b participate As noted a requires t h rights must concerning in the cont ghts arisin The first qu said to be “ constitution d 117 give ons arise a nd the defin e existence ng right at d ss 107 an ered (ie, wh ted interest issioner co o sharehold rdinarily pr on-making trigger the esting the u be undertak 7); or g for a res o s attached efinition o f s of decisio ns to be pa f capital. S s could con her things t making right nimous ass ched to sha e company ility to use nce of these ht for tax p The Comm in the CA 1 olders. relevant qu er decision- ers to provid s whether th be a right ca in any dec t \[22\] abov hat the righ t also be a the four li ext of ss 1 0 ng under s uestion is w “carried by n or share e rise to a about the re nition of a e of ss 107 all times? nd 117 give hen unanim t group is c nsiders tha der decision rovide share regarding t rights by: unanimous ken otherw olution to a to a particu f a shareho on. These a id, the cons Sections 10 ncern the fo that are no t. It is also sent to an a ares under y constitutio the s 107 e rights in t purposes, e missioner co 1993 does n uestion is w making rig de their ass he right to arried by a cision-maki ve, the defi ts are carr i right to vo sted types 07 and 117 ss 107 and whether the y” a share is issue terms 8 “shareho elationship shareholde and 117 in e rise to a s mous assen called by a at the mere n-making ri eholders w the four list written ass ise than in approve a p ular class o lder decisio are any dec stitution, th 07 and 117 our listed ty ot relevant o possible t action unde s 117. on cannot n procedure. the CA 199 every share onsiders tha not confer a whether ss 1 ht when inv sent or to v assent or v share (or ng concer n nition of a ied by a sh ote or partic of decision 7 of the CA d 117 “carr e rights aris ssued by a s may inclu older decis between s er decision- the CA 19 shareholder t is sought company)? e existence ghts. The ith any rig h ted types o sent of all s accordance proposed ac of share (s on-making cision conce he appointm concern a ypes of dec to the defi n hat a comp er s 107 or negate the If an inte 3 could be e a compan at the mere a sharehold 107 and 11 voked. The vote in a sp vote on tha an option o ning the fou shareholde are or an o cipate in an n. These cr 1993. ried by” a sing under company. ude similar sion-makin s 107 and making rig 93 a share r decision-m or a specia ? of ss 107 a existence o hts to vote of decision. shareholder e with certa ction that w 117). right is lim erning divid ment of a d broader va ision, but t nition of a s pany might take an ac protective rpretation w a sharehol y issued w o e existence der decision 7 could giv e provision pecial resol at particular over a shar ur listed typ er decision- option over ny decision- riteria will n share? ss 107 an d Although t rights, the ng right”? 117 of the ht: holder deci making righ al resolutio and 117 ca of those pro or participa The comp rs so an ac ain procedu will affect th ited to the dends or director, an ariety of act they could a shareholde never prop ction that af right unde were taken der decisio ould confer of those n-making r ve rise to a s require ution. The r decision c re) to vote o pes of decis -making rig a share. T -making now be disc d 117 could the compan constitutio sion- ht when n of an nnot ovisions ate in pany tion ures he four d a tions. also r pose to ffects r s 117 n that on- r voting right on could at or sion. ght The cussed be ny on or T49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. T55. “ T56. 57. share issue the CA 199 The Concis New York, consequen Case law d be “carrie d 66, Lord Ru A shar by Far intere s by the A share con Steel Broth constitution It is consid share will b will be carr In terms of out the righ conferred b constitution the constit even if the s 117, thos issues. Also, s 11 7 a right “att similar to t Cumbrian N Newspaper interchang nature to s I turn attach ... If a other s purpos that rig Therefore, “carried by The Comm every shar Section 10 persons b e are not sha be carried right). Ho w assent to a e terms can 93. se Oxford E 2011) relev ce”. iscussing t d by” a shar ussell desc re in a limited well J. in Borl st being comp memorandum nsists of a hers & Co L n define the dered that r be carried b ried by that f rights and hts that ca by statute, n. Howeve ution or the constitutio se rights wo 7(2)(c) spec tached to a the referenc Newspaper r and Printin eably with s 117. The to the critical ed to a class o rticles provide shares, it is ea se both of sec ghts falling in a right tha y” that shar issioner co e a compa n 7 permits a efore under areholders. by shares ( wever, for an action un nnot negate English Dicti vantly defin he nature o re. For inst ribed a sha company is a land’s Trustee posed of rights m and articles “bundle of Ltd \[1901\] 1 ese rights a rights in the by the shar t option. d obligation n make up similar righ er, unlike ot e terms of on or terms ould be an cifically pro share”. T ce to rights rs Group Ltd ng Co Ltd \[ “attached t court state question: are of shares? e that particu asy to conclud tion 125 of th to this catego t is “attach re. nsiders th a ny issues, a a company taking cert For such (in terms o shareholde nder s 107 9 e or alter ri ionary (12t nes the wo of shares a tance, in IR are as: a property the e v Steel. It is s and obligatio s of associatio rights and 1 Ch 279). and obligat e company res. Simila ns defined b a share. A hts are also ther rights issue of sh s of issue of attribute o ovides that he referenc s that are “ d v Cumber \[1987\] Ch to”. That c ed at 15: e the plaintiff’s lar shares car de that the rig he Act of 1985 ory are rights hed to” a sh at s 117 rig and so all s to obtain t ain actions persons, th of the defini ers, it is cer is carried b ghts arising th ed, Oxfo rd “carry” a ssists in de RC v Crossm nature of wh s the interest ons which are n of the com p obligations The CA 19 tions. constitutio rly, any rig by the CA 1 Although rig o sometime arising und ares canno f a share do or a feature the proced ce to rights carried by” rland and W 1 used the case concer s rights under rry particular r ghts are attac 5 and of article attached to a hare could a hts are a fe shares carry the unanim s. This grou he ability to ition of a sh rtainly argu by a share. g under ss rd Universi as “have as etermining man \[1937 ich has been of a person i n defined by th pany. s” (see Borl 993 and the on or the te ghts contain 1993, s 36 ghts arising es referred der s 36(1) ot negate s o not explic of all shar dure set out s “attached ” shares. T Westmorlan words “car rned a UK p r articles 5,7,9 rights not enjo hed to a class e 4 of Table A class of share also be reg eature or c y such righ ous assent up may inc o assent to hareholder uable that t 107 and 1 ity Press, s a feature what rights \] AC 26 (H accurately ex n the Company he Companies land’s Trus e company erms of issu ned in an o of that Act g under s 1 to in the co of the CA 117. Ther citly refer t es a compa t in that se to” shares The UK case nd Herald rried by” provision si 9 and 12, righ oyed by the h s of shares, fo A. It is commo es for those p garded as b onsequenc ts. of all enti t lude person an action c decision-m he ability to 17 of or s might L) at pounded y, that s Act and tee v ue of a ption sets 17 are ompany 1993, refore, to any ction is is e milar in hts holders of or the on ground urposes. being e of tled ns who cannot making o T58. Do ss 1 T59. 60. Section 61. 62. 63. T 64. T65. Therefore, under s 11 Similar rig h be carried carried by 107 and 1 The next q vote in an y (Concise O 2011)) are particip of (a qu vote n. express indicat e A sharehold over a shar or to be inv right seem ss 107 an d making”. n 107 Some of t h definition o as authoris For examp opportunit y be paid. S dividend m CA 1993. sharehold e However, s in accordan company to Therefore, of unequal dividend to shareholde company to Also, if una follow the p would not b under s 11 certain pr o section doe undertake CA 1993. Therefore, shareholde undertake particular p the ability 7 of the CA hts in the c by that sha that option 17 confer uestion is w y decision-m Oxford Engli : pate v. 1 (oft uality). a formal indic ed typically th e a choice in a der decisio re) for a sh volved or ta s broad. It d 107 could he actions i of a shareho sing dividen le, an argu y for share ection 107 may be auth Decisions c ers under a s 107(1)(a) nce with s 5 o pay equa s 107(1)(a dividends o be paid re ers with a ri o bypass th animous as procedural be involved 7). As not ocedural req es not confe certain act the Comm er decision- certain act provisions i to assent t A 1993 wou company co are. Simila n. r a right to whether ss making. Th ish Dictiona ten participate cation of a ch hrough a ballo n election.... n-making r hareholder t ake part in t is arguabl give rise t n s 107 rel a older decis nds and acq ment could holders to (1)(a) pro v horised othe concerning ny other p r ) refers only 53 of the C al dividends a) allows th if all entitle emains with ight to part he procedu sent is not requireme d in that de ed above, s quirements er any righ ions in a w issioner co making rig ions or pro n the CA 1 10 to an action uld be “carr onstitution o arly, any rig o vote or p 107 and 1 he ordinary ary (12th e e in) be involv oice between ot or a show o right is a rig to choose b any of the le from this o an ability ate to the t ion-making quiring the d be made t participate vides that, erwise than the payme rovisions of y to the au CA 1993. S s to all of th e company ed persons h the direct ticipate in t ral requirem achieved, nts of the C ecision (unle s 107 opera s in the CA ts on the s ay that mig nsiders tha ht. The se cedures ot 993, if the n under s 1 ried by” sha or terms of ghts in an o participate 17 give rise y meanings d, Oxford U ved; take part two or more of hands. An a ght (carried between tw listed type s ordinary m y to “vote o types of de g right. Sec company’s that s 107( in a decisio if unanimo n in accorda ent of divide f the CA 19 thorising o ection 53 r he sharehol y’s directors have agree tors. Sectio that decisio ments in th the compa CA 1993. A ess their rig ates to allo 1993 if all shareholder ght otherw at s 107 doe ction simpl herwise tha company’s 07 and the ares held b f issue of a option over e in any de e to rights of “particip University P t . 2 (participa candidates or act of voting. ( d by a shar wo or more es of decisio meaning th or participat ecision refer ction 107 li s own share (1)(a) prov on concern us assent w ance with s ends are no 993. f a dividen d requires the lders in a p s to author ed. The de on 107 doe on. It simp he CA 1993 ny would b Any non-vo ghts were a ow compani shareholde rs, but allow ise not be a es not give ly allows a an in accor s sharehold e rights aris y a person share wou a share wo ecision-ma to participa pate” and “ Press, New ate of) archaic r courses of ac (the vote) the re or an opt courses of ons. This t hat the righ te in any de rred to in th ists actions es. ides an ing divide n were obtain s 53 of the ot conferred d otherwise e directors particular cl ise the pa y ecision abou es not provi ly allows th . be required oting shareh also affecte ies to bypa ers agree. T ws the com allowed und e rise to a company t dance with ers agree. sing . uld also ould be aking? ate or “vote” York, c partake ction, e right to tion action type of ts in ecision- he s such nds to ned, a d on e than of a ass. yment ut the ide he to holders ed ss The mpany to der the o 66. Section 67. 68. T69. How sh interpr 70. 71. T72. “ 73. Despite thi making rig would be c n 117 In respect proposing t shareholde be seen to relevant de However, i taking par t read in a li rather tha n proposes to The Comm right” is ca interpretat arguably t h restricts th which of t h hould the reted? Section 5 o enactment Supreme C Commerce \[2007\] 3 N meaning of purpose. T legislative also CIR v Harbour Bo However, a provision. \[2012\] NZS purpose of But, in mos the provisio in their “m The courts unworkabil Beverages Commissio CIR \[2010\] “commonse to \[29\]. J LexisNexis , Moreove thoroug natural, Burrows an s conclusio ht will be d onsistent w of s 117, o to take act ers can vote be a right ecision-mak t could be a t in the dec mited way, n to conting o take a ce issioner co pable of b e ion which w he more na e definition hese interpr definition of the Inter must be d Court suppo Commissio NZLR 767 at f text appe This include context and Alcan NZ L oard (2001 any purpos This is sup SC 106, \[20 a provision st cases, th on. His Ho ost natural will seek to lity where p Ltd \[2001\] on \[2007\] N \] NZSC 136 ense and p F Burrows , Wellington er, if the most hly impractica which is prac nd Carter st on, the poss discussed la with the pur once the rel ion affecti n e in a speci to “vote o r king). argued tha cision-makin , as relating gent rights ertain action nsiders tha eing given a would inclu atural mean n to substa retations be n of “share rpretation A etermined orted a purp on v Fonter t \[22\] to \[2 ars plain, it es cross-ch d any socia Ltd \[1994\] 3 ) 20 NZTC ive interpre pported by 013\] 1 NZL n may be a he only evid onour consid sense”. o interpret possible (se \] 2 NZLR 60 NZCA 407, 6, \[2011\] 1 practical app and R I Ca n, 2009) st t natural gram al, the court m ctical and sens tate furthe 11 sible inclus ater with s rpose of th evant reso ng the right al resolutio r participate t the affect ng. The ph g to substa that only a n. at the defin a broad or de any rig h ning. Howe ntive rights est accords eholder de Act 1999 pr from its tex posive app rra Co-oper 24\]. Tippin t should alw ecking aga al, commerc 3 NZLR 439 17,008 (PC etation mus comments LR 453. Bla a guide to it dence of th dered that legislation ee Alcan at 04 (CA) an \[2008\] 2 N NZLR 302 proach” to rter, Statu t tate at 329 mmatical inter may strive to f sible. Words r at 332: ion of s 10 7 117 to dete e definition lution is ca ts attached on on that p e” in that a ted shareho hrase “vote ntive votin arise tempo ition of a “s a narrow m hts (ie, incl ever, a narr s is also ava s with Parlia ecision-ma rovides that xt and in th roach to sta rative Grou ng J noted a ways be cro inst the im cial or othe 9 (CA) at 4 C) at \[14\] a st be availa made by B anchard J n ts meaning at purpose the safest in a way th 446; Fruco d Skycity A ZLR 182). the Suprem the interpr te Law in N : rpretation of t find an interp may thus be 7 as a shar ermine whe n. lled for by to shares, particular a ction (if it olders are n e or particip g or partici orarily when shareholde meaning. T uding prote rower mean ailable. Th ament’s pu aking righ t the mean he light of i atutory inte up Ltd \[200 at \[22\] that oss-checke mediate a n er objective 44 and CIR and \[15\]. able on the Blanchard J noted at \[2 and inten d is in the d method is hat avoids or Beverage Auckland Lt And in Con me Court u retation of l New Zealan he text leads retation, eve n strained to th reholder de ether includ a company the affecte action. This relates to t not involve pate” could ipation righ n a compan r decision- The broader ective right ning which he question rpose. t” be ing of an its purpose erpretation 7\] NZSC 3 6 t even if th d against nd general e of the Act R v Aucklan words use in Stiassny 3\] that the ded applica etailed wo r to read the absurdity o es Ltd v Rio td v Gambli ntract Pacif undertook a legislation a d (4th ed, to a result tha n if not the mo is end ... . ecision- ding it y ed s could the d or be hts, ny making r ts) is is . The in 6, e . See nd d in the y v CIR tion. rding of e words or o ing fic Ltd v a at \[24\] at is ost 74. “ T75. 76.    What is 77. 78. ... there meaning inconve questio n alternat extreme prepare In Frucor B legislation and “unwo the legisla t to a nullity “intractable this approa The concep which are “ futile or po (per Thoma courts will purpose m frustrate t h must be sa words used It was earl the words the above analysis c o  the le right;  wheth CA 19  which s the purpo Section YA company is interests” a YC 2 V Percenta (1) A d When de (2) D c d v Section YC YC 3 M Percenta (1) A v a is only so far g, the accepte nient or unjus n whether tha tive constructi e cases where d to do actua Beverages T in that case rkable or in tive purpos by a litera e”. The sub ach. pt of “absur “unworkabl ointless, art as J in Fruc strive to in ust be clea hat purpose atisfied that d must be c ier conclud used in th e approach t onsiders: egislative p ; her an absu 993 are inc h interpreta ose of the d 1 of the IT s determine as follows: Voting intere age of shareho A person’s vot decision-makin ecision-making Despite subsec ompany carrie decision-makin voting interest 3 defines “ Market value age of market A person’s ma value of shares nd options ov r words will st ed doctrine is st. However, at “plain” mea ion may be fo e the natural m l violence to t Thomas J h e would ha nconvenien e of the st a l adherence bsequent Su rdity” has a le or impra tificial, or p cor). Howe nterpret leg r. The co u e. And, bef t the statut capable of i ed that bot e definition o statutory urpose of t urdity arise cluded in th ation best a definition of TA 2007 pro ed under ss ests older decision ing interest in ng rights for t g rights vary ction (1), if th ed by shares ng listed in the t in the compa “market va interests t value rket value inte s and options ver shares in t 12 retch. If the that a court m the more und ning is the on und. It is all meaning of th the words to a held at \[29\] ve led to “a t conseque atute is clea e to the lan upreme Co a wide mea cticable, in roductive o ever, there islation to a urt must be fore the co tory langua including th th a broade of a shareh y interpreta the definitio es if the rig he definition accords wit f a shareho ovides that s YC 2 to YC -making right n a company e he company c he percentage or options hel e definition of any equals the alue interes erest in a com over shares i the company h words of the A must simply a desirable the r nly possible on a question of e text leads to avoid it. \] that a lite anomalous ences”. He ar, the prov nguage, un urt decisio n aning. The convenient of a disprop are other r avoid absu satisfied t h urt could se ge is not “i he preferre er and narr holder deci tion taken on of a sha hts under s n; and h Parliame n lder decisio t a person’s C 20. Sect ts equals the per carried by sha of shareholde ld by any pers f shareholder e average of t ts” as follo mpany equals n the compa n held by the pe Act are plain a pply them eve result, the mo ne, and wheth degree: there o a result so a ral interpre , illogical a stated at \[ vision shou less the lan ns referred concept inc t, anomalou portionate c requiremen rdity. The hat the abs eek to avoi intractable” d meaning ower mea n sion-makin by the cou reholder d e ss 107 and nt’s purpos on-making s “voting in tion YC 2 de rcentage of th ares or options er decision-ma son differs as decision-mak those differing ws: the percentag ny that the ma erson represe and can have en if the resul ore the interpr her an accepta e may indeed absurd that a etation of th nd futile” r \[29\] that, w uld not be r nguage is to above s cludes resu us or illogic counter-mis nts before t legislative surdity wou id absurdity ”. The legis . ning is avai ng right. G rts, the fol ecision-mak 117 of the se. right? terest” in a efines “voti e total shareh s held by the aking rights fo between the ing right, the g percentages ge of the total arket value of nts. only one lt is reter will able be court is he esults where reduced support ults cal, schief” he uld y, it slative lable on iven lowing king a ing holder person. or a types of person’s . l market f shares 79. “ T80. T81. T82. “ T83. 84.   85. 86. I87. Adjustm (2) F s At first glan company r calculation options ov e “market va The calcula interest in For presen in certain s and option two tests i s relates to t options a p The meanin determinin market val There is n o “sharehold enacted or However, t in a wider s shareholde The origin control int e s 245C of t making rig inserted b y the enactm Under s 24 fewer perso  a con  the p maki n condu Determinin s 245C(4). highest per rights to vo As noted a had the po making rig conducted and 2007 I to refer to rights for t Internatio n Committee ments for optio For the purpos ubject to an o nce it seem elates to th , concernin er shares in alue interes ation of ma a compan y t purposes, situations, f s in the com s that one r the proport person hold ng of a “sh g how a p e ue interest o pre-legisla er decision when any the purpose sense, in te er decision- of the defi n erest test in the Income hts” was th y s 7 of the ment of the 45C(1), a fo ons residen ntrol interes ower to co ng rights “a ucted in acc ng a person A person’ rcentage he ote or parti bove, s 24 5 wer to cont hts “and th in accordan Income Tax those who he compan nal Tax Refo e on Full Im ons ses of subsect option is calcu ms that the heir substan ng the perce n the comp st” definitio rket value y is not acc , it is suffic focuses on mpany that relates to w tion of the t ds. areholder d erson’s “vot t) is determ ative or oth -making rig subsequen e of the def erms of the making rig nition of “sh n the contro e Tax Act 19 hen contain Income Ta CA 1993. oreign comp nt in New Z st in the co ntrol the e x and thereby cordance w n’s direct co ’s direct con eld in term cipate in d e 5C(1) of th trol the exe hereby to en nce with th x Acts the e can contro ny and, as a form Full Im mputation a 13 ion (1), the m ulated having calculation ntive voting entage of t any that t h n. interests g urately refl cient to note the percen t the perso what is esse total marke decision-ma ting interes mined. her comme ght”, either nt minor wo finition can e relevant p hts. hareholder olled foreig 976). The ned in s 8B ax Amendm pany was a Zealand had mpany tha xercise of t y to ensure with the wis ontrol intere ntrol intere s of severa ecision-ma e Income T ercise of th nsure that he wishes o equivalent w ol the exerc a result, “co mputation P nd Internat market value o regard to the n of a perso g rights in t he total ma he person h enerally ar ected by m e that this ntage of the n holds. T entially vot et value of t aking right” st” in a com ntary on th r from whe ording alter be determ provisions i decision-m gn company definition o of that Act ment Act (N a CFC if (re d: t was grea t the compan e that the a shes of that est was init est in a fore al factors (in king). Tax Act 197 e company the affairs f that group wording wa cise of the s ontrol the c Part 2 (Repo tional Tax R of any share in terms of the on’s voting the compan arket value holds, is ma ises where measuring v alternate te e market va he differen ting power the compan ” is importa mpany (rath he definition n the defin rations were mined by co n the ITA 2 making righ y (CFC) rule of “shareho t. Sections No 2) 1992, levantly) a ter than 50 ny’s shareh affairs of th t group”. tially provid eign compa ncluding sh 76 referred y’s shareho of the com p”. Similar as amended shareholder company’s ort of the C Reform, Jul n a company t option. interest in ny. A diffe e of shares ade under t a person’s voting inter est, which alue of the ce between and the oth ny’s shares ant for her than the n of a ition was f i e made. nsidering t 2007 that re t” was the es (original older decisio 8A to 8F w which was group of fi 0%; or older decis e compan y ded for in ny was th e hares held a to persons lder decisio mpany are rly, in the 2 d in s EX 1( r decision-m affairs”. Consultative ly 1988) sta that is a rent and the s rests. applies shares n these her s and eir irst he Act efer to direct lly on- were s before ive or ion- y are e and s who on- 2004 (1)(c) making e ates: T88. T89. 90. T91. 3.2.1 T income contro l powers shares sufficie The referen reflected th on shareho capital. As had the po making rig conducted These refer that the co group indic substantive contingent company p In Taxation Policy Advi proposed c explained. Measur To the e would a • the lo s • the cr eligibili t credits a • rules t consolid • the los hereafte In the li a comp a credits w that pe interes measur and it w shareh appro p \[Empha The paper interests m Where v decision percenta percenta types of continui measure giving a credits. The attributes interests are l the disposit attach to sha may, howev ent to focus o nces to “sh he desire fo olders to re s set out ab wer to cont hts “and th in accordan rences to c ompany’s af cate that sh e rights to v on particu proposes a n Policy – B ce Division changes to That pape ring an inter extent practica pply for the p ss carry-forwa edit continuity ty to carry-for and are discus that govern e dation option o ss-offset rules er referred to ght of the pro any, from the will be measu erson in relat st by referen re of a share will often be older can pr priate access sis added\] referred to might be tak voting rights i n-making desc age it represe age of voting f decisions, ea ity threshold w e based on m an unreliable i of a company the rights or tion of the co res and are h ver, have a w on the perce areholder d or a control ceive or co bove, the re trol the exe hereby to en nce with th controlling t ffairs are co hareholder vote. This lar events a particular a Business Ta of Inland R the rules fo er stated: est in a com able, a comm purposes of: ard rules in se y rules under rward imputat ssed in Chapt ligibility for t w outlined in Ch s in section 19 jointly in this oblems associ 1992/93 inco red primarily tion to decis ce to marke t eholder’s ben relatively si otect its pos s to the earni o situations ken into acc n relation to a cribed in the p ents of the ma power. Becau ach measure o would have to arket value be ndication of a 14 y which are cr r powers whi ompany’s in eld by the sh a wide variety entage of the decision-ma l test to ref ontrol the d elevant pro ercise of th nsure that he wishes o the compan onducted in decision-m would not and only te action. ax Policy (A Revenue an or measurin pany under on measure o ection 188 of t the imputatio ion, brand eq er 9 wo or more co hapter 5 91 of the Act ( Chapter as “c ated with exis ome year a sh by reference ion making b t value, votin neficial inter imple to app sition relativ ings of the c where bot count: a shareholder previous parag arket value of use the percen of voting powe o be satisfied i ecause the dif shareholder’s ritical for the p ich give the come or cap areholders of of rights att e shares held aking rights fer to the ri isposition o ovisions refe e company the affairs f that group ny’s income n accordanc making right include pro emporarily A statement nd The Trea ng an inter the new rule of a sharehold the Act on and associa uivalent tax a ompanies to be (this and the commonality” sting rules to hareholder’s in e to the perc by the comp ng power is rest in the lo ply. By exerci e to other sh company whe h voting int ’s interest diff graph, the int all interests i ntage of votin er would be a in relation to e ffering voting s economic in purposes of ca holders the pital. In gener the company. ached to the d by a person s” and othe ights and p of the comp erred to sh y’s shareho of the com p”. e and capita ce with the ts were inte otective rig give rise t o t on Govern asury, July est in a com es er’s economi c ated regimes. and dividend w e treated as o rules in relatio ” rules). measure a sh nterest in a co centage of vo any. Apart f seen as the sses or cred ising voting hareholders en they are d terests and fer as between erest would b n the compan g power diffe pplied indepe each measure rights may re terest in a co alculating cont ability to rec ral, these righ . Different cl em so that it n. ... \[Emphas er control in powers conf pany’s inco areholders lder decisio mpany are al and ensu e wishes of ended to be hts that are o rights whe nment Tax 1991) the mpany are c interest in a These rules g withholding pa one taxpayer u on to consolid areholder’s in ompany’s tax oting power rom measur best proxy f its of a comp power, a and can ens distributed. d market va n the differen be determined ny, as well as rs between di ndently and t e. Resort is ma esult in voting mpany’s losse trol and ceive or ts or lasses of is not sis added\] nterests ferred me or who on- uring that e e en a Policy, (then) company govern ayment under the dation are nterest in losses or held by ing an for a pany ure alue t types of as the fferent he ade to a g power es or T92. 93. “ There w shareho compute purpose the min satisfie d Broadly voting p • a shar ascertai • the co compan shareho • the co are gua • the s h intent a consoli d Where a taken in share or The above company w a market v of the mark regardless Further sup in the mea governme n arrangeme “voting inte ownership Document Committee states at \[4 An equit limited i debt/eq assets. a man a are em b shar of a bu s risk man i ii t These c holders return w busines on the decisio prior cl will be other ci olders’ interest ed by referenc es of applying imum continu d, eligibility fo , a shareholde power where: reholder has a ned is differe ompany or its ny shares, opt olders without ompany has is ranteed by a hares have bee nd application dation provisio any of the abo nto account in r option holde comments was intende value circum ket value o of voting p pport for a surement o nt discussio ents rules. erests”, it p of a compa on Accrual e on Accrua 4.2\]: ty instrument in the sense t uity distinctio Ownership h agement con ployed; and e in the risk siness is limite nifests itself in the return to i if the resour he residual af riteria can be of equity inst which varies w s after the cla other hand, on-making; a laim over eq rcumstances ts. In these ci ce to both the the loss and uity or commo or loss carry-fo er’s interest w an entitlement nt from its vo shareholders, ions to acquir the company ssued shares ( third party en subject to n of the credit ons. ove tests is tri determining er. all indicate ed to focus mstance aro of shares in power. conclusion of a person on documen Although t provides so any in term Treatment l Tax Treat t carries with i that it constitu on thus rests o has two key ntrol - owne of the enter ed to the resid n two ways: owners varie rces are sold a fter all payme used to draw truments have with the busine aims of all oth generally ha a return whic uity holders 15 where voting ircumstances e market value credit carry-fo onality of owne orward and/or would be meas t to a certain ting power a n , have issued re shares at th y’s knowledge (other than fix an arrangeme t and loss carr iggered, the in the percentag e that dete on the voti ose, referen the compa that prote ’s “voting i nt relating t hat docume ome helpful ms of the de t of Income tment of In it elements of utes evidence on the presenc features: rs exercise p rprise - the c dual return aft s with the pro and the busin nts to credito w a distinction e some contro ess’s profitabi er creditors h ave no forma ch does not v on its asset power is unlik a shareholder e of that inter orward provis ership thresho r offset would sured by refer proportion of nd can veto an options, othe heir market va xed rate divide ent with the p ry-forward rul nterests descr ge of the mark rmining a s ing power h nce was the any that are ctive contin nterest” is to the intro ent does no comments ebt/equity b e and Expen come and f ownership w of a loan, adv ce or absence power over t laim of owner ter all paymen ofits derived fr ess or investm rs have been between debt ol over the affa ility; and a res ave been met al rights to p vary with the ts. kely to give an r’s interest in rest and its vo ions and the c old under eith be forfeited. rence to its m company pro ny alteration i r than certai n alue, or option end shares) t purpose or effe es or the loss ribed (such as ket value of a shareholder held by tha en made to e held by th ngent right found in co oduction of ot concern s on measu boundary. nditure (Co Expenditur hereas a debt vance or cred e of ownership the way reso rs to the retur nts to creditor rom employin ment is wound met. t and equity. T airs of the bus sidual claim o t. Holders of participate in e business’s n accurate me a company w oting power fo commonality her measure is arket value a fits which it c n that entitle m n options over ns issued by he returns on ect of defeatin s offset and s options) wou company hel r’s interest at sharehold o the perce he person – s are not in omments in the financi the meanin uring a pers The Consu onsultative e, October t instrument is it facility. The p of the under ources of a b rn from the re rs have been g resources; d up, owners Thus, in gene siness concer on the assets o f debt instrum n the busines profitability easure of would be or the rules. If s not nd its an be ment r listed which ng the uld be d by any in a der. If ntage – ncluded n a al ng of son’s ultative 1986) s more e rlying usiness sources met. This and receive eral, ned; a of the ments, ss’s y; and a 94. 95. Summa T96. Does t 97. 98. 99. 100. “  While th instrum other. S debent vary. S provid e Some equit characteris likely to ha profits of a with the p r resources a types of sh certain act sharehold e Consistent security” a (other tha n for the pur instrument security is decision- m option inclu shareholde ary The Comm right” and “ held by the rights for t company’s be included market val specificall y the inclusi If an interp decision-m this would action oth e be the calli Any rights contingent actions), a proposed a In such unc voting inte Questions c “sharehold  When affect partic those hese distinguis ents can be v Some debt in tures with an imilarly, som e a constant ty instrume stics that ar ave a prefer company. rofits of the are employ hares. Sect ions that a ers any con with this v nd an “exc n in circums rposes of th ts that conf a security t making right udes an opt er decision- issioner co “voting inte e owners of he relevant decisions r d in a calcu ue interest y provided f ion of righ pretation w making right be the req erwise than ing of the r to vote or on the com nd only tem action. certain circ rests held b could arise er decision n the releva ted shareho cipate in th e sharehold shing characte virtually interc nstruments h n associated me equity ins return (eg p ents (for ex re more in rential fixed The holde e company yed. Sectio tion 117 pr company m trol over th view, s YC 6 luded optio stances inv he credit co fer no subst that provid ts on the ho tion issued making rig nsiders th a erest” were f a compan t types of d regarding it ulation of ow ts are calcu for in the IT hts under s ere taken t t”, this wou uest for sha n in accorda resolution t participate mpany takin mporarily a cumstances by the shar if continge -making rig ant resoluti olders have at particula ers all the 16 eristics serve hangeable. Ea have an elem trust deed) struments ca preference s xample, pre the nature d return bu ers of such or exercise on 117 of th ovides thos may take. he company 6 specificall on” from th volving the ontinuity pro tantive vot des a fixed older, othe on arm’s l hts, other t at the defin e intended t y. Shareho decision-ma ts capital a wnership an lated, rath TA 2007). ss 107 and that s 107 o uld occur at areholder a ance with th o vote on t under s 10 ng particula rise for the s, difficultie reholders o ent and tem ght” when on or una n e 100 perce ar decision? voting inte as a general g ach can have ment of mana and the retu arry negligib hares). \[Em eference sh of debt tha ut have no i shares do e any powe he CA 1993 se shareho However, t y, in terms ly excludes e voting in t calculation ovisions). ting rights. rate return r than prot ength ter m than protec itions of “s to relate to olders who aking can s nd resourc nd control er than vo t d 117 lead or s 117 rig t particular approval fo he CA 1993 the compan 07 and s 11 ar actions ( e duration o s arise in c of that com mporary pro invoked, in nimous asse ent of the r ? If so, this erests on th guide, in prac some of the c agement con urn on debt i ble managem phasis added\] hares) may an equity. interest in t not obtain r over the w 3 would still lders with p this does n of substan an “exclud terest calcu of market Essentially An exclud and confe ective righ t ms that carr ctive rights hareholde r o substantiv hold subst share in the es. Non-vo in circumst ting interes d to absurd ghts could b points in ti r a compan 3. Under s ny’s propos 17 of the CA (or proposin of the vote calculating t pany at a p otective rig ncluding: ent is reque rights to vo s could tem hat decision ctice, debt and characteristics ntrol (eg secu instruments ment control \] exhibit Such share the losses returns th a way in whic l apply to t protection a ot give tho ntive voting ded fixed ra ulations in s value inter y, these are ed fixed ra rs no shar e ts. An excl ries no . r decision-m ve voting ri tantive voti e control ov oting share tances whe sts (which a dity? be a “share ime. Unde ny to take a 117, this w ed action. A 1993 are ng to take on that pa the percent point in tim hts were a ested, do th te on or porarily gi v n. d equity s of the ured can and/or es are or at vary ch hese against ose rights. ate s YC 2 rests e te eholder luded making ghts ng ver the es may re are eholder r s 107, an would e such rticular tage of e. he ve  T101.     T102. Which T103. 104. “ T105. T Conclu T106.  At tha includ share comp The questio hold betwe calculating an extreme  Assoc if the  Share contin  Conso purpo  CFC r reside The rights cannot be be include d Commissio definition o consequen interest at regimes in interpreta The definit as “substa n certain dec definition. As conclud “voting inte shareholde control the interest in contingent Commissio types of rig the narrow that this in Therefore, decision-m such as tho under ss 10 shareholde The same c contained i share or th usion The Comm to a share h at time, wo ded in calcu eholders? I pany for all ons raised een them de the percen e, it might ciated perso person ha eholder con nue to hold olidation pr oses if a gr rules – the ents hold 5 in ss 107 a negated by d in an opti oner conside of a shareho ces. That i some point the ITA 20 ation best ion of a “sh ntive” when cisions. The ed at \[96\] erest” and ers’ substan y have ove a company and tempo oner conside ghts are inc wer interpre terpretatio the Comm making right ose arising 07 or 117 o er decision- conclusion in a compa he NZX rule issioner co holder decis ould the aff ulating the If so, this c shareholde could mean ecision-ma ntage of vo affect the f ons provisi s a voting ntinuity pro d aggregate rovisions – oup of pers CFC regim 50 percent o and 117 are y a compan on, the co m ers that inc older decis is, every sh t in time, p 007. t accords w hareholder n referring e issue was above, the “sharehold ntive voting er the comp y was not in orary in nat ers that the cluded as a etation shou n is availab issioner co t” does not when a com of the CA 1 making rig also applie ny constit u es. nsiders th a sion-makin 17 fected share percentage could alter t ers. n that non- king rights ting interes following pa ons – s YB interest in ovisions – s e minimum a group of sons holds e is invoke of the cont e provided y constitut mpany cons cluding thes ion-making hare issued potentially a with the le decision-m to shareho s whether a Commissio er decision g rights in a pany’s decis ntended to ture, and w e unworkab shareholde uld be prefe ble on the w nsiders tha include co mpany pro 993. The C ht is a subs s to rights ution, the te at ss 107 an g right. eholders’ te e of the tot the calculat -voting sha in the com sts held by arts of the 5 associate the compa OA 8(7) r e voting inte f companies all of the co d if five or rol interest to all share ion. Simila stitution or se types of g right coul d by a comp affecting th egislative making right olders’ right a limitation oner consid -making rig a company, sions and r include pro which might bility and ab er decision erred. The words used at the defin ntingent ri g poses to un Commissio stantive vo of a similar erms of iss nd 117 of t emporary r tal rights he tion of votin reholders m mpany that all shareho ITA 2007: es a compa ny of 25 pe equires a g erests of at s can conso ommon vot fewer New ts of a forei eholders of ar rights to r share issu f protective d lead to u pany could he calculatio intent? t” does not ts to vote o can be rea ders that th ght” were i , in terms o resources. otective rig t never aris bsurdity th -making ri g Commissio d in the defi ition of a “s ghts of a pr ndertake a ner conside oting or par r nature to ue of a sha the CA 1993 rights then eld by all vo ng interest may, at tim are include olders. Tak any and a p ercent or m roup of per t least 66 p olidate for t ting interes w Zealand gn compa n a company s 117 migh ue terms. T rights in th nworkable carry a vot ons in the a use words or participat ad into the he definition ntended to of the level A person’s hts that ar e se. The at arises if ght means oner consid inition. shareholde rotective na certain act ers that a rticipation r s 117 that are, option 3 do not giv be oting s in the mes, ed in ken to person more. rsons to ercent. tax sts. ny. y and ht also The he ting above s such te in ns of o reflect of voting e these that ders r ature, tion right. t are over a ve rise 107. Refere Subject Income T Sharehol Voting in Legislat Income T Income T Compani Case re f Borland’s 1 Ch CIR v Alc (CA) CIR v Au 17,00 Commerc Group Contract \[2011 Cumbrian and W Printin Frucor Be NZLR IRC v Cro Skycity A \[2007 Stiassny 453 Other r e Andrew B Secur Company (NZLC 1990) Concise O Unive Consultat Incom Comm Incom Internatio (Repo Impu 1988 ) J F Burro Zeala Taxation on Go Divisi July 1 Although ri right to vot accord with including th outcomes w conclusion voting righ persons h o control ove rights temp ences references Tax der decision- m terest ive referenc e Tax Act 2007 Tax Act 1976 es Act 1993 – ferences s Trustee v St 279 can New Zeala ckland Harbou 08 (PC) ce Commissio p Ltd \[2007\] N Pacific Ltd v C 1\] 1 NZLR 302 n Newspapers Westmorland H ng Co Ltd \[19 everages Ltd v R 604 (CA) ossman \[1937 Auckland Ltd v 7\] NZCA 407, v CIR \[2012\] eferences Beck and othe rities Law (loo y Law Reform: C R16, Law Co ) Oxford English ersity Press, N tive Documen me and Expen mittee on Accr me and Expen onal Tax Refo ort of the Con tation and In t ) ows and R I Ca and (4th ed, Le Policy – Busin overnment Ta on of Inland R 1991) ights arisin te or partic h Parliamen hese contin when calcu that the re ts is consid olding the v er the comp porarily. making right es – ss YA 1, YC – s 245C – ss 36, 107, 1 teel Brothers & and Ltd \[1994 ur Board (200 n v Fonterra C NZSC 36, \[200 CIR \[2010\] NZ 2 s Group Ltd v Herald Newsp 987\] Ch 1 v Rio Beverag 7\] AC 26 (HL) v The Gamblin \[2008\] 2 NZL NZSC 106, \[2 ers Morison’s C oseleaf ed, Lex : Transition an ommission, W h Dictionary ( New York, 201 nt on Accrual T diture (Consu rual Tax Treat diture, Octobe orm Full Imput sultative Com ternational Ta arter Statute L exisNexis, We ness Tax Polic x Policy, Polic Revenue and T g under tho cipate in som nt’s purpose ngent and t lating a pe elevant righ dered to be voting intere pany’s decis 2, YC 3 117 & Co Ltd \[190 4\] 3 NZLR 439 01) 20 NZTC Co-operative 07\] 3 NZLR 7 ZSC 136, Cumberland aper and ges Ltd \[2001\] ng Commission LR 182. 2013\] 1 NZLR Company and xisNexis) nd Revision Wellington, Jun 12th ed, Oxfo 1) Treatment of ultative tment of er 1986) tation Part 2 mmittee on Ful x Reform, Jul Law in New ellington, 2009 cy (A stateme cy Advice The Treasury, 18 ose provisio me decision e in enactin temporary r rson’s votin hts to vote e consistent ests in a co sions, and 1\] 9 67 \] 2 n R d ne ord ll y 9) nt , ons could b ns, such an ng the defin rights could ng interests or participa t with Parlia ompany are not those w be interpret n interpreta nition. An d lead to un s in some s ate should ament’s pu e those tha who may o ted as bein ation does n interpretat nworkable situations. be substan rpose that t have a d e btain prote g a not ion The tive the egree of ective 19 Appendix – Legislation Income Tax Act 2007 1. “Voting interest” is defined in s YA 1 as follows: voting interest – (a) means, for a person and a company and a time, the percentage voting interest that the person is treated as holding in the company at the time under sections YC 2 to YC 20 (which relate to the measurement of company ownership): 2. Section YC 2 provides: YC 2 Voting interests Percentage of shareholder decision-making rights (1) A person’s voting interest in a company equals the percentage of the total shareholder decision-making rights for the company carried by shares or options held by the person. When decision-making rights vary (2) Despite subsection (1), if the percentage of shareholder decision-making rights for a company carried by shares or options held by any person differs as between the types of decision-making listed in the definition of shareholder decision-making right, the person’s voting interest in the company equals the average of those differing percentages. 3. Section YC 3 provides: YC 3 Market value interests Percentage of market value (1) A person’s market value interest in a company equals the percentage of the total market value of shares and options over shares in the company that the market value of shares and options over shares in the company held by the person represents. Adjustments for options (2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the market value of any share in a company that is subject to an option is calculated having regard to the terms of the option. 4. A “shareholder decision-making right” is defined in s YA 1 as follows: shareholder decision-making right - means a right, carried by a share issued by a company or an option over a share issued by a company, to vote or participate in any decision-making concerning— (a) a dividend or other distribution to be paid or made by the company, whether on a liquidation of the company or otherwise, excluding decision-making undertaken by directors acting only in their capacity as directors; or (b) the constitution of the company; or (c) a variation in the capital of the company; or (d) the appointment of a director of the company Companies Act 1993 5. Section 2 sets out the definition of “entitled persons” as follows: entitled person, in relation to a company, means— (a) a shareholder; and (b) a person upon whom the constitution confers any of the rights and powers of a shareholder: 6. Section 36 provides: 36 Rights and powers attaching to shares (1) Subject to subsection (2), a share in a company confers on the holder— 20 (a) the right to 1 vote on a poll at a meeting of the company on any resolution, including any resolution to— (i) appoint or remove a director or auditor: (ii) adopt a constitution: (iii) alter the company's constitution, if it has one: (iv) approve a major transaction: (v) approve an amalgamation of the company under section 221: (vi) put the company into liquidation: (b) the right to an equal share in dividends authorised by the board: (c) the right to an equal share in the distribution of the surplus assets of the company. (2) Subject to section 53, the rights specified in subsection (1) may be negated, altered, or added to by the constitution of the company or in accordance with the terms on which the share is issued under section 41(b) or section 42 or section 44 or section 107(2), as the case may be. 7. Section 107 provides: 107 Unanimous assent to certain types of action (1) Notwithstanding section 52 but subject to section 108, if all entitled persons have agreed or concur,— (a) a dividend may be authorised otherwise than in accordance with section 53: (b) a discount scheme may be approved otherwise than in accordance with section 55: (c) shares in a company may be acquired otherwise than in accordance with sections 59 to 65: (d) shares in a company may be redeemed otherwise than in accordance with sections 69 to 72: (e) financial assistance may be given for the purpose of, or in connection with, the purchase of shares otherwise than in accordance with sections 76 to 80: (f) any of the matters referred to in section 161(1) may be authorised otherwise than in accordance with that section. (2) If all entitled persons have agreed or concur, shares may be issued otherwise than in accordance with section 42 or section 44 or section 45. (3) If all entitled persons have agreed to or concur in a company entering into a transaction in which a director is interested, nothing in sections 140 and 141 shall apply in relation to that transaction. (4) For the purposes of this section, no agreement or concurrence of the entitled persons is valid or enforceable unless the agreement or concurrence is in writing. (5) An agreement or concurrence may be— (a) a separate agreement to, or concurrence in, the particular exercise of the power referred to; or (b) an agreement to, or concurrence in, the exercise of the power generally or from time to time. (6) An entitled person may at any time, by notice in writing to the company, withdraw from any agreement or concurrence referred to in subsection (5)(b) and any such notice shall have effect accordingly. (7) Where a power is exercised pursuant to an agreement or concurrence referred to in subsection (5)(b), the board of the company must, within 10 working days of the exercise of the power, send to every entitled person a notice in writing containing details of the exercise of the power. (8) If the board of a company fails to comply with subsection (7), every director of the company commits an offence and is liable on conviction to the penalty set out in section 374(1). 21 8. Section 117 provides: 117 Alteration of shareholder rights (1) A company must not take action that affects the rights attached to shares unless that action has been approved by a special resolution of each interest group. (2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the rights attached to a share include— (a) the rights, privileges, limitations, and conditions attached to the share by this Act or the constitution, including voting rights and rights to distributions: (b) pre-emptive rights arising under section 45: (c) the right to have the procedure set out in this section, and any further procedure required by the constitution for the amendment or alteration of rights, observed by the company: (d) the right that a procedure required by the constitution for the amendment or alteration of rights not be amended or altered. (3) For the purposes of subsection (1), the issue of further shares ranking equally with, or in priority to, existing shares, whether as to voting rights or distributions, is deemed to be action affecting the rights attached to the existing shares, unless— (a) the constitution of the company expressly permits the issue of further shares ranking equally with, or in priority to, those shares; or (b) the issue is made in accordance with the pre-emptive rights of shareholders under section 45 or under the constitution of the company.