1 INTERPRETATION STATEMENT: IS 14/02 INCOME TAX – FOREIGN TAX CREDITS – WHAT IS A TAX OF SUBSTANTIALLY THE SAME NATURE AS INCOME TAX IMPOSED UNDER S BB 1? All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 unless otherwise stated. Relevant legislative provisions are reproduced in the Appendix to this Interpretation Statement. Contents Scope of this statement ........................................................................................................ 2  Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 2  Part 1 - the section YA 2(5) test ............................................................................................. 3  Foreign tax refunds ......................................................................................................... 5  Part 2 - Analysis ................................................................................................................... 5  Legislative framework – subpart LJ .................................................................................... 5  Meaning of “tax” ............................................................................................................. 7  Introduction ............................................................................................................... 7  Legislation ................................................................................................................. 7  Ordinary meaning ....................................................................................................... 7  Case Law .................................................................................................................. 7  Conclusion on meaning of “tax” .................................................................................. 11  Meaning of “income tax imposed under section BB 1" ........................................................ 12  Introduction ............................................................................................................. 12  Legislation ............................................................................................................... 12  Conclusion on the meaning of “income tax imposed under section BB 1” ......................... 13  Section YA 2(5): Meaning of “of substantially the same nature” .......................................... 14  Introduction ............................................................................................................. 14  Legislation ............................................................................................................... 14  Ordinary Meaning ..................................................................................................... 14  Case Law ................................................................................................................ 15  Conclusion on the meaning of “substantially the same nature” ....................................... 17  Case law comparing foreign taxes to income tax ............................................................... 18  New Zealand ............................................................................................................ 18  Australia ................................................................................................................. 20  United Kingdom ....................................................................................................... 22  Canada ................................................................................................................... 23  Conclusion on the case law comparing taxes to income tax ............................................ 25  Part 3 - Examples ............................................................................................................... 26  Introduction ................................................................................................................. 26  Example 1 – Solomon Islands PAYE ................................................................................. 26  Facts ...................................................................................................................... 26  Application of the s YA 2(5) Test ................................................................................ 26  Conclusion ............................................................................................................... 29  Example 2 – United States of America Federal Insurance Contributions ................................ 29  Facts ...................................................................................................................... 29  What is FICA? .......................................................................................................... 29  Who is FICA imposed on? .......................................................................................... 30  Eligibility and benefits ............................................................................................... 30  Trust Funds ............................................................................................................. 31  Application of the s YA 2(5) Test ................................................................................ 31  Conclusion on FICA ................................................................................................... 33  Example 3 – United Kingdom National Insurance Contributions ........................................... 34  Facts ...................................................................................................................... 34  What is National Insurance? ...................................................................................... 34  Application of the s YA 2(5) Test ................................................................................ 36  Conclusion on NI contributions ................................................................................... 39  References ........................................................................................................................ 40  Appendix – Legislation ....................................................................................................... 41  Income Tax Act 2007 ..................................................................................................... 41  Scope o Th1. fo pa   A 2. ta id c r un th ha w A 3.   Thi s4. DTA Introdu If 5. be en s   T h 6. s   of this sta here are tw oreign tax c aid:   if the credit DTA; if the allowe tax is cove axes covere entical or s redit is allow nder subpa here will be ave DTAs w ww.ird.gov foreign tax New Z the ta there foreig s Interpreta A. uction a taxpayer e entitled to ntitlement i YA 2(5). T a tax s BB a tax earn tax ( N that i s BB his Interpre YA 2(5) sh Part 1 applie foreig incom natur Part 2 exam atement wo circumst credit again foreign tax t may be al or   foreign tax ed directly ered by a D ed, or if the substantiall wed under rt LJ of the no foreign with New Ze vt.nz/intern x is not cov Zealand do ax; or is a DTA b gn tax is no ation Statem r pays a for o a tax cred is that the This means of substan 1, or of substan (PAYE), res NRWT) and s of subst a 1. etation Stat ould be int 1 – sets out ed. It ident gn tax to ha me tax impo re as provis 2 – contain mines the re tances whe nst their Ne x is covered llowed unde x is not cov under subp DTA if the ta e DTA applie y similar to the DTA, t e Act. If a c tax credit ealand can ational/res vered by a oes not hav between Ne ot a tax tha ment only a reign tax th dit under s foreign ta x the foreign ntially the s ntially the s sident withh imposed a antially the tement sets erpreted an t the test o tifies the ch ave to be a osed under sional tax, P s the analy elevant legis 2 re a taxpay w Zealand d by a Dou er, and in a vered by a parts LJ or ax is expre es to subse o one of the he amount credit is no relief. A li be found o sidency/dta DTA if: e a DTA wi w Zealand t the DTA a applies to t hat is not c ubpart LJ. x must be “ n tax must ame nature ame nature holding tax as a collecti same natu s out the C nd applied. of how s YA haracteristi tax of sub s BB 1 or a PAYE, RWT ysis that un slation and 2 yer may be income tax ble Taxatio accordance DTA, a fore LK. ssly listed equently en e taxes exp of that cre ot available st of count on the Inlan /.  th the fore and the fo applies to. taxes that a overed by One of the income tax be: e as income e as provisi x (RWT) or ion mechan re as incom Commission It has thr A 2(5) shou ics the Com stantially t a tax of sub or NRWT. derpins the case law. entitled to x liability fo on Agreeme with, the t eign tax cre in the DTA nacted taxe pressly cove edit will be under the ries or terr nd Revenue ign jurisdic reign jurisd are not cov a DTA the t e requireme x” as define e tax impos ional tax, p non-reside nism for a f me tax impo ner’s view o ree parts: ld be inter p mmissioner he same na bstantially e test. This o claim a or foreign ta ent (DTA), a terms of th edit may be as one of t es that are ered. If a calculated DTA, then itories tha t e website a ction impos diction but vered by a taxpayer m ents for ed in sed under pay-as-you- nt withhold foreign tax osed under of how preted and expects a ature as the same s part ax a at e the t t ing the may - ding r  Th7. fo re at in Part 1 - To8. fo de co Se ar Se th N s n a im Th9. qu lik ca es co as Ca10. su im sa fo m in f o to Th11. de fe th A 12. co Th   Part 3 Comm - - - he interpret oreign tax c elevant to o ttributed co this item r - the sect o qualify fo oreign incom efines “fore ountry”. Th ection YA 2 re of substa ection YA 2 hat are of s RWT and a YA 2(5)(b) ature as inc mposed by s he ordinary ualities or c ke the qual ase of s YA ssentially li ollection me s income ta ase law sug ubstance or mposed mu ame as New oreign tax is must be betw come tax i oreign tax t o the nature he Commis etermined a eatures of N he nature o foreign tax onditions ar he foreign be co be i m 3 – applies missioner w Solomon United St United Ki tation of s credit under other subpa ontrolled fo regarding s tion YA 2 r a foreign me tax on a eign income he meaning 2(5)(a) exte antially the 2(5)(b) furt ubstantiall y re imposed , the foreig come tax im state or loc y meaning o characterist ities or cha 2(5)(b), th ke provisio echanism fo ax imposed ggests that r effect but st be “in t h w Zealand i s to be judg ween the n mposed u n hat has bee e of New Ze sioner’s vie at a high le New Zealan f New Zeal x is likely to re met: n tax must mpulsory a mposed by, the test to will apply s Y Islands PA tates of Am ngdom Nat YA 2(5) is r subpart L arts of Part reign comp s YA 2(5) ap (5) test tax credit a segment e tax” to m g of “incom ends the de same natu her extend y the same d as a collec gn tax being mposed und cal governm of “substan tics of the f aracteristics his means t onal tax, PA or a foreign under s BB t “substanti not neces s he main, for ncome tax ged. The C ature of th nder s BB 1 en paid, inc ealand inco ew is that t evel. It req nd income t and income o satisfy th t: and enforce and payabl 3 three fore YA 2(5). T AYE; merica Fede tional Insur considered LJ. Howeve L, such as pany incom pply equall under sub p of foreign-s ean “an am e tax” in th efinition of ure as incom s the defin e nature as ction mech g collected der s BB 1. ment, in add ntially the s foreign tax s of income the tax imp AYE, RWT o n tax that is B 1. ally the sa m sarily in for r the greate . This is th Commission e foreign ta . This mea cluding how ome tax. the nature o quires an un tax rather t e tax has b e requirem eable by law le to, a cen ign taxes t The three fo ral Insuran rance contr in the con er, the inter subpart LK e). To this y to all rele part LJ, a ta sourced inc mount of inc his context income tax me tax imp ition of inco provisiona anism for a must be of Section Y dition to ce ame nature must be si e tax impos posed must r NRWT an s of substa me” require rm. It mea est part an he standard ner’s view i ax imposed ans focusing w it is calcu of New Zea nderstandin than the de been define ments of s Y w; ntral, state, o illustrate oreign taxe nce contribu ributions. text of a cl rpretation w K (Tax cred s extent, th evant subpa axpayer mu come. Sect come tax o is varied b x to include posed unde ome tax to l tax, PAYE a foreign ta f substantia YA 2(5) app entrally imp e” suggests ignificantly sed under s be signific d be impo s ntially the es samenes ans the fore d in substa d against w s that the c d and the n g on the am ulated, and aland incom ng of the fu etail. For th d in paragr YA 2(5) if th or local go how the s are: utions; and aim for a will also be its relating he conclusio arts of Part ust have pa tion LJ 3 of a foreign y s YA 2(5) e taxes that r s BB 1. include ta x , RWT or ax. Under ally the sam plies to taxe posed taxes s that the or essentia BB 1. In t antly or sed as a same natu ss in eign tax ance” the hich the comparison ature of mount of comparing me tax is undamenta his purpose raph 12 bel he following overnment; to ons t L. aid ). t xes me es s. ally the re n g it l e, ow. g ; 4  be intended for a public purpose (although it is generally irrelevant whether it is tagged for a specific public purpose);  tax “income” as defined under the Act; - This condition will be satisfied even though there are minor differences between income taxed under s BB 1 and income taxed under the foreign tax.  be calculated as a proportion of income; - The rate of the tax is not important. - Whether the tax is payable at a fixed rate or at graduated rates is not important. - This condition will still generally be satisfied even if the tax is not payable until a minimum income threshold is reached, or if the applicable income is capped at a certain threshold.  be imposed on net income (gross income minus deductions) or taxable income (net income minus losses). - A taxing method designed to produce a reasonable approximation of actual net/taxable income may be acceptable. - Where a tax is imposed as a collection mechanism for income tax and is of substantially the same nature as provisional tax, PAYE, RWT or NRWT, then the requirement that the tax be imposed on taxable or net income does not need to be satisfied. The foreign tax must not be:  A penalty.  A payment of interest.  A service charge or licence fee.  A payment into a fund or scheme where the entitlement to the benefit is limited to those who contribute (or persons associated with contributors). The following factors are not determinative:  Whether the tax rate is set by an annual taxing Act.  Whether the tax is imposed under separate legislation from the principal taxing legislation.  The name given to the tax. Taxes that do not satisfy the s YA 2(5) test:  The following are examples of taxes that are not of the same nature as income tax imposed under s BB 1. Accordingly, they do not satisfy the s YA 2(5) test: - Goods and services taxes and value added taxes. - Customs or import duties. - Insurance levies. - Gift taxes. - Property rates. - Asset taxes. Th13. fo Foreign A 14. ta If 15. th or ca If 16. m am un da   Part 2 - Th17. th    Legislat A 18. Ne ta Su19. ta di f o (s sc Cr20. av in in “s - - - he onus is o oreign tax c tax refun person mu ax. the person he foreign t r the amou alculated un the person must pay to mount of N nder s LJ 5 ays after th the da the da (s LJ - Analysis his part of t he test outl the l e the fo - - - case tive framew New Zeala ew Zealand ax paid on t ubpart LJ s ax has been viding fore oreign incom s LJ 1). No ch 27 (s LJ redits are c vailable for come. (Th terest in a segment of Wealth ta Inheritan Excise ta on the taxp credit. ds ust make an n receives t tax credit w nt of New Z nder s LJ 5 n receives t the Comm ew Zealan d (s LJ 7(3)) he later of: ate the per ate of the n 7(4)). s the Interpr ined in Part egislative fr ollowing key “tax”; “income t “of subst law that c o work – su and residen d income ta that income ets out the n paid. It d ign-source me tax paid credit will 1(2)(b) (th calculated o foreign inc here are spe foreign inv foreign-so axes. nce taxes an xes and du payer to de n adjustme the refund will be reduc Zealand tax (s LJ 7(2)) the refund issioner th e d tax payab ). In these rson receive notice of as retation Sta t 1. This P ramework o y terms an tax impose antially the ompares a f ubpart LJ t who deriv ax may be e e (ss LJ 1(2 e process fo does this in d income i n d on each s be allowed here are cu on the basis come tax p ecial rules f vestment fu urced incom 5 nd estate d uties. monstrate ent if they r before they ced by the x payable o ). after they h e lesser of ble on the f e circumstan ed the refu ssessment atement pro art conside of subpart L d phrases: ed under se e same natu foreign tax ves foreign- entitled to 2) and LJ 2 or claiming two steps. nto segmen segment of d for any un rrently non s of income aid on each for amount und – ss LJ me” as follo duties. that the fo receive a re y have self- lesser of th on the forei have self-a the amou n foreign-sou nces, the d nd, or in which t h ovides the a ers: LJ; ection BB 1” ure”; and to income -sourced in a tax credit (1)). tax credits . First, it p nts. It then that foreig nrecognised ne listed)). e segments h segment ts derived f 2(6) and ( ows: oreign tax is efund of for -assessed, he amount gn-sourced ssessed, th nt of the ref urced incom date for pay he person u analysis th ”; and tax. ncome that t for any fo s where fore provides the n allows a t n-sourced d taxes spe s. A tax cre of foreign-s from an att 7).) Secti o s eligible fo reign incom the amoun of the refu d income he person fund, or the me calculate yment is 30 sed the cre at supports is subject t oreign incom eign incom e method fo tax credit fo income ecified in edit is sourced ributing on LJ 4 defi or a me nt of nd e ed 0 edit s to me e or or ines Th21. co LJ To22. se to de (I m m pr Se23. pa ne in Th24.    Fu25. in t h N is Th26. Co th ca fo Ce27. un in w P e It 28. in s al For the to an a source he number ountries an J 4). o attract a egment of f o mean “an efined in s Y mposition o meaning und modifies the rovides: Tax of (5) ection LJ 5 ayable on e ecessary be come tax p herefore, to be res have have urther, the come tax i hat is of sub RWT, provi of substan he focus of ommissione he foreign t alculated, a ocusing on t ertain taxe nder s BB 1 clude taxes ithdrawal t enalties and is the mea come tax” YA 2(5)(b) so conside e purposes of amount of ass or is of 1 nat of credits a d the sourc foreign tax foreign-sou amount of YA 1 to me of income t der section meaning o other countrie The term in country, wh (a) me un (b) in c tha ea ta x explains ho each segme ecause the payable on o qualify fo sident in N derived ass paid foreig foreign tax mposed un bstantially t ded it is im ntially the s the inquiry er’s view, s tax imposed and the nat the charact s are not o 1” for comp s such as fr ax) is not i d interest a aning of the that is the , and how red. this Part, a pe essable incom ture. a taxpayer ces or the n x credit, for urced incom f income ta ean “...incom tax) except YA 2 (Mea of “income es ncome tax, w hether impose eans a tax of der section B cludes a tax, i at is of substa rn (PAYE), res x (NRWT).  ow to calcu ent of foreig credit cann that segme r a tax cred ew Zealand sessable in n tax on t h x paid must nder s BB 1 the same n mposed as a same nature y is on the s YA 2(5) re d on the am ure of inco teristics of f substanti a parative pur ringe benef ncluded be are also exc e phrase “a subject of it extends t 6 erson has a se me derived fro gets will de nature of th eign incom me. Section x of a forei me tax imp t to the ext ning of inco tax” when when specifica ed by a centra substantially t B 1 (Impositio mposed as a antially the sa sident withho ulate the am gn-sourced not be more ent of forei dit, a taxpa d; come sour c hat income. t be a tax o . Alternativ nature as p a collection e as income nature of t equires a co mount of in me tax im p the foreign ally the sam rposes. “A fit tax, qua ecause it is cluded from a tax of sub the followi the meanin egment of fo om 1 foreign c epend on t he income d me tax must n LJ 3 defin ign country osed under tent to whic ome tax va it is used in ally used in rel al, state, or loc the same natu on of income t collection mec me nature as lding tax (RW mount of Ne d income. T e than the gn-source d ayer must: ced from o . of substanti vely, the fo rovisional t mechanism e tax impos he foreign omparison come, inclu posed unde n tax paid. me nature a Ancillary tax lifying com not impose m the defini bstantially t ng analysis ng of incom oreign-sourc country that co he number derived (ss t have been es “foreign y”. “Income r section BB ch it has a d aried)”. Se n this conte lation to tax o cal governme ure as income tax); and chanism for th provisional ta T), or non-res ew Zealand This calcula amount of d income (s utside New ially the sa oreign tax c tax, PAYE, R m for a fore sed under s tax paid. I between th uding how i er s BB 1. T as “income x” (defined mpany electi ed on taxab ition of “inc the same na s. The effe me tax in s Y ced income e omes from 1 r of foreign LJ 2(1) an n paid on th n income ta e tax” is B 1 different ction YA 2 ( ext. It of another nt,— e tax imposed he foreign tax ax, pay-as-yo sident withhol d income ta ation is New Zeala s LJ 2(2)). w Zealand; a me nature could be a t RWT or eign tax tha s BB 1. In the he nature o it is This means e tax impos in s YA 1 to ion tax and ble income. come tax”. ature as ct of YA 2(5)(a), equal nd he x” (5) x, u- lding ax and and as tax at of s ed o d . , is Meaning Introduc To29. se na m pr Th30. no m “t Legislat Se31. a m se sa Se32. Th33. fo Ordinary “T34. Un Th35. Case La New Zea In36. fr fr T h w o f de pa g of “tax” ction o satisfy s Y egment of f ature as inc mechanism f rovisional t he first step ot some oth must first be tax”. tion ection LJ 3 foreign cou mean “a tax ection BB 1 atisfies that ection YA 1 tax me extend his definitio or a charge y meaning Tax” is defin niversity Pr Tax  n person transa c his definitio w land n Case 37 ( om the Un i om the pen he taxpaye as equival e f Review (th ecision of L ara \[53\]). The ou “that it from, t individ YA 2(5), a t foreign-sou come tax im for a foreig ax, PAYE, R p in this an her form of e a “tax”. T defines “fo untry”. Inc x of substan ”. Section t subparagr 1 defines “ta eans income t ded or limited on is not he to be a “ta g ned in the C ress, New Y n. 1 a compu al income an d ctions. on is consis 1967) 3 NZ ited Kingdo nsion as “In r argued th ent to New he board) a Leake v C o At 447: utstanding cha t is a compuls the general bo uals”. taxpayer m urced incom mposed und n tax that RWT or NRW alysis is to f payment o The paragra oreign incom come tax in ntially the s YA 2(5)(b) raph. ax” as follo tax, but in the meaning, “tax elpful in det ax”. Concise Ox York, 2011) lsory contribu d business pro stent with th ZTBR 442, om Governm ndian Milita his deductio Zealand so applied the f T (1934) aracteristic of sory contributi ody of subject 7 must prove me is either der s BB 1 is of substa WT. establish t or charge. aphs below me tax” to n this conte same natur ) extends t ows: e provisions in x” has a corre termining w xford Englis ), to mean: ution to state r ofits or added he case law a taxpayer ment. Each ary Widows’ on should b ocial securit definition 36 WALR 6 a tax is, as D ion, imposed b ts or citizens, that the fo a tax of su or a tax im antially the that the for By definiti w discuss th mean “an a xt is varied re as incom he meaning n which the te esponding mea what charac sh Dictionar : revenue, levie to the cost of w discussed r received a h year, an a ’ and Orpha be allowed a ty income t of “tax” fro 66 (WASC) wyer J. obser by the sovere as distinguish reign tax p ubstantially mposed as a same natu reign tax is on, all “inc e meaning amount of d by s YA 2 me tax impo g to include rm “income ta aning cteristics ar ry (12th ed ed by the gove f some goods d below. an Indian a amount wa ans’ Fund s as a credit tax. The Ta om the Aust (discussed rved in Leake’s eign authority hed from isola paid on a y the same a collection ure as a “tax” an ome tax” of the wor income tax (5)(a) to osed under e “a tax” th ax” has an re necessar , Oxford ernment on , services, an d rmy pensio as deducted subscription because it axation Boa tralian d below at ’s case (supra) on, and requi ated levies on d rd x of hat ry d on d ns”. ard ), ired Th37. Th pr so In38. Co s f o ap im of Th39.      Th40. s ( S 78 (H Australia M41. ar co ta co ul Constitu t In42. de on to Th43. st D44. au Cl (H he board he he contribu rovide pens overeign au n Haliburton ourt of App 22 of the C or the Crow ppellants ar mposed by t f Parliamen he court sa a co m to sup made made not a he court as 22 and con See also: C 87 (HC) an HC).) any of the rise in the c ontext is qu ax?” or “wh onstitutiona timately ab tional case n R v Barge ecide wheth n those goo o their work he court he tated (at 99 Is the illegali t penalty It is no federal include objecti espite Isaa uthority for lyne (1958 HCA).) eld that no ution was im sions for wi uthority and n & Ors v B peal conside Constitution wn to levy a rgued that the Broadc t. id that a t a mpulsory co pport gove e under stat e for a publ service cha ssumed the ncluded tha Carter Holt H d Warnock key Austra context of A uite differen at is a law al meaning bout the or law er (1908) 6 her a partic ods manufa kers. eld that the 9) that the money deman ty in the circu y for an unlaw ot sufficient to l taxing autho es the power “ on to the exe cs J’s judgm r the propos ) 100 CLR 2 credit was mposed by idows and d d required f Broadcastin ered wheth n Act 1986. tax, exce p the broadc asting Com ax is: ontribution, rnment, te authority ic purpose, arge or a li public broa at the fee w Harvey Ltd v Director- alian decisio Australian c nt from the imposing t that might dinary mea CLR 41 (H cular excise actured by tariff was true test o nded as a con mstances up o wful act or om o say the effec ority to drive t “to embarrass rcise of the po ment being sition that 246 (HCA) 8 permitted a private m dependants from the ge g Commiss er the publ Section 2 pt by or und casting fee mmission it y, , and cence fee. adcasting f was imposed v North Sh -General of ons on whe constitution e taxation c taxation?” - t limit their aning of the CA), the Au e tariff was companies a tax. Isaa f whether a tribution to re on which the l ission, other t ct is the same the taxed obje s or to destroy ower. g a dissenti a penalty c and MacCo as the con mutual insu s. It was n eneral body sion (CA 14 lic broadca 22 states th der an Act was a tax a was not lev fee was a ta d by or und hore City Co f Social We ther a part nal law. W ontext, th e - do not ap application e word “tax ustralian H a tax. The that did no acs J, in a d an Act is a evenue irrespe iability depen than non-paym e. It may even ect out of exis y,” neither the ng one, Ba cannot be a ormick v FC ntribution w rance instit not imposed y of citizens 4-99, 15 Jul sting fee co hat it shall n of Parliame and becaus vied by or u ax within th der an Act o ouncil \[200 elfare \[2004 ticular paym hile the con e questions pear to hav n. The inqu x”. igh Court w e tariff was ot pay reas dissenting j taxing Act ective of any nds, or is it cla ment of or inc n be the very stence; but as e purpose nor rger is con a tax. (See CT (1984) 1 was not a ta tution to d by the s. ly 1999), th ontravened not be lawf ent. The se it was under an A he meaning of Parliame 06\] 2 NZLR 4\] NZAR 27 ment is a ta nstitutional - “what is ve any spec uiry is was asked t imposed o sonable wag judgment, is: legality or aimed as solel cidental to a t purpose of th the power to the effect is a sidered e also FCT v 158 CLR 62 ax. he d ful Act g of ent. 74 ax a cial to only ges y a ax? he tax an v 22 M45. co Au ra m ta Th46. 16 a Ho ex to pu Th47. Th is ac w ( S \[2 In48. (1 ta so (T w t a no au th Th le Th49. AT ta su in e m re Th50. co pu General c In51. ca In52. Co br Matthews v C onsidered t ustralian H ate of £1 fo minority judg ax, at 276: The lev author render he issue in 65 CLR 462 tax. The c owever, the xhaustive d o be a comp urpose. he court als he court ex compulsor cquired. Th as a tax. T See for exa 2009\] NZCA n Australian 1993) 176 C apes was a ociety woul This was an idespread p apes.) The ot essentia uthority. T han into the his is becau vy a tax. he issue in TC ¶20,282 ax. If an em uperannuat centive to mployees. evenue fund he court he onsolidated urpose. cases n addition t ases that ha n Morris Lev ouncil was ridge tax w Chicory Ma he leading igh Court h or every ½ gment, set vy is, in my op ity for public p ed. Air Caledon 2 (HCA) wa court’s start e court stat definition of pulsory exa so consider xplained tha ry and ther he court the This case ha mple, Air N A 259, \[200 n Tape Man CLR 480 (H tax. The r d then dist n attempt b problem of Australian l to the con The court al e consolidat use Parliam Roy Morga 2 was whet mployer fai tion, then a employers The revenu d. eld that the revenue f u o the const ave conside venthal & O asked to d was imposed arketing Boa Australian held that a acre of chi c out what i pinion, plainly purposes, enf nie Interna s whether ting point w ted that Ch f tax. For e action of mo red the rela at a payme e is no dis c en went on as been ref New Zealan 09\] 3 NZLR nufacturers HCA) the iss royalty was ribute the f by the Austr unauthoris High Court ncept of a t so decided ted fund di ment has the an Research ther a supe led to pro v any shortfal to make su ue raised b SGC was a und establi titutional ca ered the m Ors v David etermine w d on the un 9 ard (VIC) ( authority o levy, impos cory plante s now cons y a tax. It is a forceable by la ational v Co a fee impos was the def hicory shou example, it oney, by a ationship be nt is unlike cernible rela n to hold th ferred to in nd Ltd v We R 713 and W Association sue was wh paid to a c funds by w ralian Gove sed copying t held the l ax that th e the fact th d not stop e power to h Pty Ltd v rannuation vide all emp ll became t uperannuat by the SGC a tax. The shed that t ases, there eaning of t d Jones Ltd whether a “ nimproved v 1938) 60 C on the mea sed on chic ed, was a ta sidered the a compulsory aw, and is not ommonweal sed for imm finition of ta ld not be s t might not public auth etween a ta ely to be a f ationship w at the imm n several Ne ellington Int Warnock.) n v Commo hether a roy collecting s ay of a ro y ernment to g of sound evy was a e exaction s he levy was it from bei authorise a FCT & Anor guarantee ployees wit the SGC. T tion contrib was paid in fact that th the SGC wa are also so tax. (1930) AC bridge tax” value of lan CLR 263 (H ning of “ta x cory produc ax. Latham “classic” d exaction of m t a payment fo lth of Austr migration c ax from Ch een as prov be necessa hority, for a ax and a fe fee for serv with the val migration cle ew Zealand ternational onwealth of yalty impos ociety. The yalty to cop deal with t recordings tax. It ass should be b s paid to a s ng for a pu a statutory r \[2011\] HC e charge (S h a minim u The SGC wa butions for t nto the con he SGC wa as imposed ome genera 259 (PC), ” was a land nd in Sydne CA) is x”. The cers at the m CJ, in a efinition o f money by a pu or services ralia (1988) learance w hicory. viding an ary for a ta a public e for servi c vices where ue of what earance fee d decisions. Airport Ltd f Australia sed on blan e collecting yright own the onto blank serted that by a public society rath ublic purpos y authority t CA 35, \[20 GC) was a um level of as to act as their nsolidated s paid into for a publi al Australia the Privy d tax. The ey and used f a blic ) as ax ces. e it is e d nk g ers. k it is her se. to 11\] s an the c an d to fu ch pe In53. co Ta in w Th54. sp ge Th55. ch di     Th56. no in Canada As57. pa ch ar Th th In58. gi v e fe ch fo     O59. So60. em au und the buil harge will b ersons, and n Leake v C ontribution axation and come, sala ere then us he Commis pecial purpo eneral reve he court he harge can b stinguishin A tax A tax A tax A tax he court als ot taxes. F to the cons s with the A articular pa hallenges to rea is Laws he Attorney he Australia n Lawson, t ven exclus egetables u ees and levi harged wer our criteria The c The c The c The c n the issue The lev powers are con o even thou mpowered utomatically lding of the be a tax eve d even if it C of T, the S was a tax. d paid into ary or wage sed to fund sioner argu ose: to sup enue of the eld that the be a tax eve ng features is a compu is imposed is imposed can be dis so confirme Furthermore solidated re Australian a ayment is a o the legali son v Interio y General o an cases of the Interior ive power t under the P ies to recov re taxes. D are met: charge is en charge is im charge is lev charge is m e of “public vy is also mad s are vested in nclusively pre ugh it was by the legi s y considere e Sydney H en if it is im is imposed Supreme Co This contr an account es was requ d public hos ued the lev pport the ho Crown. contributi o en if it is no of a tax: ulsory cont d by the sov d on, and re tinguished ed that part e, the court evenue fund authorities, tax have a ty of partic or Tree Fru of Canada \[ Chicory an r Tree Fruit to control a roduce Mar ver their co Duff J said t nforceable b mposed und vied by a p ade for a p purpose”, de for a public n such a body sumed to be p the Commi slature. Th ed to be for 10 arbour Brid mposed on a for a spec ourt confirm ribution wa t at the Tre uired to pay spitals. y was not a ospital fund on was a ta ot called a ribution. vereign aut equired fro from isolat ticular fees t noted the d for it to b , the leadin arisen in th cular charge uit and Vege 1931\] SCR nd Roy Morg and Veget and regulat rketing Act osts. The S hat a charg by law. der authorit public body public purpo Duff J note c purpose. Wh y by the legisla public purpose ittee impos herefore, th r a public p dge. The P a specified ific purpose med that a as collected easury. Eve y it. The co a tax becau d. It was n ax. The cou tax. It ide thority. m, the ge n ted levies o s, local asse e charge did be a tax. ng Canadian e context o es. The lea etable Com R 357. This gan. able Com m e the mark . The Com Supreme Co ge is prope ty of the leg . ose. ed at 363: hen such com ature, the pur es. sing the tax he purpose purpose. rivy Counc class of pr e. hospital fu by the Com ery person ontributions use it was r ot raised a urt confirm ntified the neral body o on individua essments a d not need n cases on of constitut ading autho mmittee of D s case was mittee of Dir keting of all mmittee imp ourt held th rly classifie gislature. mpulsory, not t rposes for whi x, it did so b of the tax il held that roperty or und mmissioner who earne s collected raised for a s part of t h ed that a key of citizens. als. nd tolls ar e to be paid whether a ional ority in this Direction & referred to rection was l tree fruit a posed licenc he fees ed as a tax to say dictator ich they are g because it w is a r of d he e s in s and ce if rial, iven was Th61. w m (S Ad W 3 Conclus Th62. re ad M63.       A 64.    Th65. he Supreme hen it held made the fol In dete precise betwee eviden grants Facts c with th relation estate. which i See also: th djustment Westbank Fir SCR 134.) ion on me he ordinary evenue, lev dded to the ore specific a com impos levied - levied - - levied Lawso - - enfor charge ma impos impos not ca he following e Court in E that Ontar llowing dist ermining whet ely to the cost en the cost of ce in this app of letters pro clearly shows he value of the n to the value . The result is indicates that he Privy Co Committe e rst Nation v eaning of “ y meaning o vied by the e cost of go cally, a tax mpulsory co sed on and d to suppor but an im fund for i Manufact d for a publ there is s authority if an imp will esta b d under gov on); this mig h tax has b Tape Man includes been aut ceable by l ay also be a sed on a sp sed for a sp alled a tax g are not ta Eurig Estat rio’s probat tinction bet ther that nexu t of the releva the service p eal fails to di s bate and the that the proc e e estate. Alth e of an estate, s the absence the levy is a uncil decisi e v Crystal D v British Co “tax” of tax is a c governmen oods, servic is: ontribution required fr rt governme mpost need it to be a ta turers); lic purpose some overla y (Australian ost is paid blish a publ vernment/C ht not be es been given nufacturers being levie horised by aw (Chicor a tax even pecified clas pecific purp (Leake). axes: 11 te (Re) \[199 te levy was tween a ser us exists, cour ant service. A rovided and t sclose any cor cost of provid edures involve hough the cost , the probate of a nexus be tax and not a ion in Lowe Dairy Limite olumbia Hy compulsory nt on a pers ces or trans or exaction rom the ge ent (Halibu not be paid ax (Leake, (Haliburton ap between n Tape Man into the co ic purpose Crown auth ssential – a the power s, Lawson); d by a pub the govern ry, Lawson) if it is: ss of prope pose (Morris 98\] 2 SCR a tax and rvice fee an rts will not ins As long as a re he amount ch rrelation betw ding that servi ed in granting t of granting l levy varies di r etween the lev a fee. er Mainland ed \[1933\] A ydro and Po y contributi son’s incom sactions. n (Haliburto neral body urton, Barge d into the c Eurig, Aust n, Chicory, n public pur nufacturers nsolidated (Roy Morg hority (Halib s long as t to do so b y lic body w h nment to le ). rty or pers s Leventha 565 applie d not a fee. nd a tax, at sist that fees c easonable con harged, that w een the amou ice. The Agre g letters proba etters probate rectly with the vy and the co d Dairy Prod AC 168 (PC wer Author on to gove me or busin on, Chicory, of citizens er); consolidate tralian Tape Lawson); rpose and S s); revenue fu an); burton, Chi he body im y Parliamen here that pu vy the tax ons (Morris l), d Lawson The court t 579: correspond nection is sh o will suffice. Th unt charged fo eed Statement ate do not var e bears no e value of the ost of the serv ducts Sales C), and rity \[1999\] rnment ess profits y, Leake); (Leake); d revenue e State und then th icory, Leake mposing the nt (Australia ublic body (Lawson); s Leventhal own he or t of y vice, s or is e, e an has l),   In66. w o f or As67. sa na fo un Meaning Introduc Se68. sa th na co as w c o de Legislat Th69. pr Se70. Se71.   A serv - - - A pay n conclusion ill be a “tax f these feat r a licence f s well as be ame nature ature as pr or a foreign nder s BB 1 g of “incom ction ection YA 2 ame nature he meaning ature as pr ollection me s income ta hat is mea onsider how efinition of tion here is no e rovides a b Incom except income ection BB 1 BB 1 Income taxing 1994. ection BB 1 Incom Incom taxing vice charge A tax can (Leake). A payme correlati o providing However, services o relationsh tax (Air C yment impo n, a foreign x” for the p tures may a fee or if it i eing a “tax” e as income ovisional ta tax that is 1. This fact me tax im 2(5)(a) requ e as income g of foreign ovisional ta echanism fo ax imposed nt by “inco w the phras “income ta exhaustive road definit me tax means to the extent e tax varied) 1 is the key Imposition o e tax is impos Act, and is pa 1 therefore me tax is im me tax is im g Act. e or licence n be disting nt will not b on between g the servic , if a perso or the amo hip with the Caledonie). osed as a p n charge th purposes of also be a “t s imposed ”, the foreig e tax impos ax, PAYE, R s of substan tor is consi posed un d uires that t e tax impos tax to inclu ax, PAYE, R or a foreign under s BB me tax imp se “of subst ax”, at para definition o tion of inco income tax im t to which it h y charging p of income tax sed on taxable ayable to the identifies t mposed on t mposed at t 12 fee (Halibu guished from be a servic n the amoun ce (Eurig). n has no ch ount of the e value of w enalty (Bar at bears al f s YA 2(5). tax”. If the as a penalt gn charge p sed under s RWT or NRW ntially the s dered next der section he foreign sed under s ude a tax t RWT, or NRW n tax that is B 1. The fo posed unde tantially the as \[83\]–\[10 of income t ome tax. S mposed under as a different provision in x e income, at t Crown under three key c taxable inc the rate or urton, Chic m isolated e charge w nt charged hoice wheth charge has what is acq rger). l the featu r A foreign e foreign ch ty, then it w paid must b s BB 1 or of WT and be a same natur . n BB 1" tax must b s BB 1. Sec hat is of su WT provide s of substa ollowing pa er section B e same nat 08\]. tax in the A Section YA 1 r section BB 1 meaning und n the Act. I he rate or rat this Act and t haracterist ome. rates of ta x cory). levies on i n where there and the co her to acqu s no discern uired, then res at para charge tha harge is a s will not be be of subst f substantia a collection e as incom be of substa ction YA 2(5 ubstantially ed it is impo ntially the ragraphs w BB 1”. The ture” modif Act. Howev 1 states: 1 (Imposition o der section YA It provides es of tax fixed the Tax Admin ics of incom x fixed by a ndividuals is no ost of uire the nible n it may be \[63\] above at bears som service char a “tax”. tantially the ally the sam n mechanis e tax impo antially the 5)(b) exten the same osed as a same natu will consider item will th fies the s BB ver, s YA 1 of income tax A 2 (Meaning o that: d by an annua nistration Act me tax: an annual a e me rge e me m sed nds re r hen B 1 x) of al  Imposed Se72. th Yo Th73. “T74. ca Th 75. th ta lo It 76. de (s ci t a su Th77. Se in Th78. in Rate or r Se79. ra Th80. at ta at Payable t Se81. Ne pa in Conclus Se82.   Incom d on taxable ection BB 1 he Concise ork, 2011) Impos his shows t Taxable inco alculated un BC 5 T A perso loss th he requirem hat taxes gr ax must be osses). could be a eductions a s DA 2(4)). rcumstance ax, imposed ubstantially he tax mus ection CA 1 Part C or i he Act taxe vestment ( rates fixed b ection BB 1 ate or rates he use of th t different r ax rate or p t a flat rate to the Crow ection BB 1 ew Zealand aid to a priv come tax i ion on the ection BB 1 Incom Incom me tax is pa e income 1 “imposes” Oxford Eng to mean: se  v. 1 force that income ome” is def nder sectio Taxable inco on’s taxable at the person ment that in ross income imposed o argued that are general Similar ar es. Howev d as a colle y the same st also tax “ 1 states tha if it is incom es income f (eg dividen by an annu 1 provides t s of tax fixe he words “r rates depen personal tax e or at grad wn 1 states tha d context, t vate compa mposed un e meaning 1 identifies me tax is co me tax is im ayable to th ” income ta glish Diction e to be accept e tax is a co fined in s Y n BC 5 (Ta ome income for a has from the ncome tax e will not fa n taxable in t PAYE is es ly allowed b rguments c er, s YA 2( ction mec h nature as p “income”. at an amou me under o rom both la ds and inte ual taxing A that income ed by an an rate or rate nding on th x rate). Th uated rates at income ta the Crown i any or orga nder s BB 1 g of “incom the followin ompulsory. mposed on t 13 he Crown. ax on “taxa nary (12th ted, done, or c ompulsory YA 1 to mea xable incom tax year is d ir net income be imposed all within th ncome (gro ssentially a because of ould be ma 5)(b) expre hanism for t provisional Part C of th nt is “incom ordinary con abour (eg s erest). Act e tax is imp nnual taxing es” indicate e entity or he words als s. ax is payab is the New anisation, fo . me tax imp ng characte taxable inc ble income ed, Oxford complied with payment. an: “taxable me)”. Sect etermined by under Part I d on taxabl he definitio oss income tax on gro the employ ade for RWT essly includ the foreign tax, PAYE, he Act defin me” if it is i ncepts. salary and w posed on ta g Act”. es that inco person bei so allow inc ble to the C Zealand go or example posed und eristics of N ome, not g ”. “Impose University h. e income fo tion BC 5 st subtracting a (Treatment of e income s n of income less deduc oss income yment limit T and NRW des as “inco tax, that is , RWT, or N nes income ncome un d wages) and axable inco me tax ca n ing taxed ( come tax to Crown. In t overnment. e, then it wi der section New Zealan gross incom e” is define Press, Ne w or a tax yea tates: any available t f tax losses). suggests a t e tax. Inco ctions and as no tation WT in some ome tax” a s of NRWT. . der a provis d capital me “at the n be impose eg corpora o be impos the . If a tax is ill not be n BB 1” nd income t me. d in w ar tax tax ome sion ed te ed s tax:      Section Introduc Ha83. fo in Legisla t Se84. ex m ta th “t Imposed Se85. lo s t e im Of substa Se86. “s Se is pr Co re s m PA in It 87. sa ju Ordinary Of substa As88. sp m Incom Incom Incom or ent The r Inco m YA 2(5): M ction aving deter ollowing par come tax. tion ection YA 1 xcept to the means that, ax” in s BB he s BB 1 d tax of anoth d by a centr ection YA 2 ocal governm BB 1, whic erm “incom mposed by a antially the ection YA 2 substantiall ection YA 2 of “substa rovided the ommissione efers back t YA 2(5)(b) mechanism t AYE, RWT o come tax i is therefor ame nature udged. y Meaning antially the s the phras pecific lega meaning. me tax only me tax can me tax can tity being t ate of incom me tax is pa Meaning o rmined the ragraphs co 1 defines “in e extent to in certain c 1. Of relev efinition of her country ral, state or 2(5) applies ment. This h requires e tax” is u s a central, s e same natu 2(5)(a) exte y the same 2(5)(b) also ntially the e tax is imp er consider to the tax d the foreign taxes (that or NRWT) m mposed un re importan e”. This is t g e same natu se “of subst l or technic y taxes “inc be imposed be imposed taxed. me tax is fi ayable to th of “of subs characteris onsider how ncome tax” which it ha circumstan vance in th “income ta y”. r local gove s where the s therefore that incom sed in relat state or loca ure ends the co e nature” as o extends th same natu posed as a c rs that the described in n tax being t is of subst must itself b nder s BB 1 nt to unders the standar ure tantially the cal meaning 14 ome” as de d at either d at differe ixed by an he Crown. stantially t stics of inco w s YA 2(5) ” to mean in as a differe ces, s YA 2 e current c ax” when th ernment e tax has be modifies th e tax be “p ion to tax o al governm oncept of in s income ta he concept re” as prov collection m reference t n s YA 2(5) g collected b tantially the be a tax of . stand what rd against w e same nat g, it is usefu efined in Pa a flat or gr ent rates de Act on an a the same ome tax im ) modifies t ncome tax ent meaning 2 modifies t context is s hat phrase een impose he definitio payable to t of another ment. ncome tax t ax imposed of income visional tax, mechanism to “the fore (a). This m by one of t e same nat “substantia t is meant b which the f ture” does n ul to consid art C. raduated ra epending on annual basi nature” mposed und the s BB 1 d imposed u g under s Y the definitio YA 2(5), w is used in r ed by a cen n of income the Crown” country, it to a foreign d under s B tax to a fo , PAYE, RW for the fore ign tax” in means that he listed co ure as prov ally the sam by “of subs foreign tax not appear der the ord ate. n the perso is. er s BB 1, definition o nder s BB 1 YA 2. This on of “incom which modif relation to tral, state e tax unde ”. When th includes ta n tax of B 1. reign tax t h WT or NRWT eign tax. T s YA 2(5)( under ollection visional tax me nature” tantially th must be to have an inary on the of 1, me fies or r e axes hat T, The b) x, as e ny Th89. Co 20 Co90. im fo ch s f o or Case La Of subst a Th91. s In92. pe de su cr eq Ze “s na w Th93. th to co co fo Th94. Ne Th95. of Au he terms “s oncise Oxfo 011), to me Substa Same Nature ombining th mposed und oreign tax m haracteristi YA 2(5)(b) oreign tax m r NRWT. w antially the here are on YA 2(5). n Case 37 ( ension from educted fro ubscriptions redit under quivalent), ealand soci substantiall ature”.) At ithin the de he board he his country’ o be that Ne onsolidated ontrast, the or the provi he board al ew Zealand Counse Fund to them b was ne provide pensio a cont r was no provide the Ru the Ne he board co f the word, ustralian de substantiall ord English ean: antially  ad  adj. 1 ide e  2. the ba hese definit der section must be sig cs of inco m , this mean must be sig e same natu nly two New discussed a m the Unite om the pens s”. The tax s 170 of th as this ded al security y of the sa t the releva efinition of eld that the ’s social sec ew Zealand revenue a e Fund was sion of pen lso had reg d social sec el for the resp o which the a being: that wh either a taxpay ed for contribu ns to be paid ributor to the ot relieved eve ed for subscri les of the Fu n w Zealand soc onsidered w by looking ecision in L y”, “same ” Dictionary dv. 1 to a grea entical; uncha asic or inheren tions, “of s BB 1” mea nificantly o me tax impo ns that a ta nificantly o ure w Zealand c above at pa d Kingdom sion as “Ind xpayer argu he Land and duction was income tax me nature” ant time, Ne income tax e Fund did curity schem d social sec ccount fro m a private m nsions for w ard to othe curity. At 44 pondent, in co ppellant cont r hereas, in this yer nor a dep utions and pa to beneficiarie Fund to make en if he was n ptions to be r nd discloses m cial security le whether the to the ord eake. The 15 ” and “natu y (12 th ed, O at or significa anged. nt features, q ubstantially ans that the or essential osed under ax imposed or essential cases that c ara \[36\]), a Governme dian Militar ued this de d Income T s substantia x. (The ea ” rather tha ew Zealand x in s 170. not “bear a me”. The m urity benef m money a mutual insu widows and er differenc 47: mparing the N ributed, referr s country, ben endant of a ta yments to be es claiming th e payments th ot in receipt o efunded unde many more diff egislation. e contributi inary mea n board conc re” are rele Oxford Univ nt extent. 2. ualities, or ch y the same e qualities o ly like the q s BB 1. In as a collec ly like prov consider th a taxpayer ent. Each y ry Widows’ duction sho Tax Act 195 ally of the s rlier Acts p an “of subst d social sec any compar main reaso fits were pa ppropriated urance insti orphans. ces between New Zealand s red to various nefits might be axpayer, the r made by a lim hrough those p hereto was a c of pay (R 8); a er certain circu ferences betw on was a ta ning and ca cluded that evantly def versity Pres for the most aracteristics e nature as or characte qualities or n the case o ction mecha visional tax e applicati o received a year, an am and Orpha ould be allo 54 (the s YA same natur hrased the tantially th curity incom rable relatio n for this fi aid out of th d by Parliam itution that n the Fund social security points of dist ecome payabl rules of the Fu mited class of persons; that continuing one and that the r umstances (R ween them and ax, in the g ase law, inc t the contri ined in the ss, New Yor part; essentia income tax ristics of th r of anism for th , PAYE, RW on of n Indian a r mount was ns’ Fund owed as a A 2(5)(a) re as New test e same me tax fell onship with inding appe he ment. By t existed so and y scheme with tinction, amon e to a person und expressly f persons and the obligation e from which rules of the Fu 13). A study d the provisio general sen cluding the bution to th rk, ally. x he he WT rmy h ears olely h the ng who for n of he und y of ns of nse he Fu pr Ca96. th s t h an pa Un au na Th97. Ne se se in Th98. no ha na ar pr is Substant Th99. Co 12 to th Se100. of te em ef Th101. te ag ag qu Th102. su m in a th Th103. und was no rovision of ase F11 (19 he same na YA 2(5) eq he United K nd made na ayments de nited Kingd uthority wa ature as Ne he taxpaye ew Zealand ervices. Th ervices. Th come tax a he authority ot discharg ave been a ature of inc rgued befor roposition t considered tially the sa he meaning ourt in Nati 20 (EmpC) o determine his basis, th ection 59B f the duty o erm that is mployment ffect of und he Union ar erm that wa greement w greement. uestion for he court ac ubstance or might mean come tax u different w he form or m he Employm \[97\] M us to t phras e person ot a tax bec pensions to 983) 6 NZT ture as inc uivalent). Kingdom. D ational insu educted at dom income as whether ew Zealand r argued t h d imposes a he United K he taxpayer and not the y found for ed the onu ble to in a n come tax. re him in a that NI is n d in more d ame g of “substa ional Distrib . While the e the ordina he analysis of the Emp of good fait the same o t agreemen dermining t rgued that as substant with the int It was acc the court w ccepted tha r effect but that a fore under s BB way or using method of t ment Court r Langton add he 2005 Supp e in Australia “ ”. The text no cause it was o a restricte TC 59,613 a ome tax” in In Case F1 During that urance (NI) source. T h e tax, but n the NI cont income ta hat NI was a single tax Kingdom im r submitted e other was r the Comm s of proof. ny event, a (Although h ny detail.) ot “substa n detail in exa antially the bution Unio e context w ary meanin is potentia ployment R th for an em or substant t, unless th he collectiv the employ tially the sa ention and epted that was whethe t “substant not necess eign tax is s 1 if it taxe g a differen taxing is di t also said: dressed judicia plement to Wo “including a ch otes: 16 s a private ed class of also conside n s 293 of t 11, the taxp time, she p contributio he taxpayer not for the tributions w x. just anoth e x to fund bo poses a sep d that to reg s semantics missioner. J However, s the natur he did ackn Therefore, ntially of th ample 3, at same” was on Inc v Ge was quite di g of the p h lly useful. Relations Ac mployer to tially the sa he employe ve agreeme yer, Genera ame as a pa effect of u the pay ris er the pay r tially the sa sarily in for still a tax of s an amoun nt method. ifferent. al interpretati ords and Phras hild who is be institution persons. ers the me the Income payer had s paid United ons. Both w r was grant NI contribu were substa er way of c oth general parate tax gard one m s and not in Judge Barb he noted t re of NI wa nowledge th , Case F11 he same nat t para \[214 s considere eneral Distr fferent, the hrase “subs ct 2000 stat pass on to ame as a te er does so w ent. al Distributo ay rise term ndermining se was not rise was “su ame” requir rm. In the f “substant nt also taxe The taxing ons of the wo ses Legally De ing wholly or that existe aning of “s e Tax Act 19 spent a yea d Kingdom were comp ted a tax cr utions. The antially of t ollecting in l and social to fund so c method of c n the intere ber held the the taxpaye s far narrow hat the issu is authority ture as inco 4\] below.) ed by the E ributors Ltd e Employm stantially th tes that it i a non-unio erm in the c with the int ors, passed m in the col g the collec exactly the ubstantially res samene current co tially the sa ed under th g effect is t ord substantia efined and, in substantially ed for the ubstantiall y 976 (the ar working income ta x ulsory redit for e issue for t the same come tax. security cial security ollection as sts of justic e taxpayer er would no wer than th ue was not y for the ome tax”. mployment d \[2007\] ER ent Court h he same”. O s not a bre on employe collective tention and d on a pay llective ctive e same, so y the same ess in ntext, this ame” nature he Act, but the same, b lly, and referr relation to th maintained by y of in x the y s ce. had ot he (NI t RNZ had On each ee a d rise the ”. e as in but red he y a Th104. “s Ap105. Ze ex “in in c o su su Conclus W106. m   Th107. un m th \[98\] So the wa the de f ... \[102\] M on how have in similar “same” \[103\] O submis non-un the sam of the simila r precise adjecti conten he court de substantiall pplying this ealand inco xamined, n n the main come tax. omparing a ubstance or ubstance” l ion on th e When the te modified by Inco m and Inco m - - he ordinary nder s BB 1 must be sign he case of s In the prese “wholly” bu something the word “ w here to the less than “w appropriate o, Mr Langton ge increases finition of “sub Mr Langton ac w the Court int ntended it to b r”, otherwise it ” has been de On the issue o ssions to Mr F nion employee me. It seems collective and r. But, as Mr L e standard of s ve “substantia ds for and the ecided that y similar”. s decision t ome tax it i ot the for m , for the gr This analy tax impose r effect of t ike provisio e meaning rm “income s YA 2(5) i me tax may me tax mea a tax tha imposed a tax im p is of subs and NRW substanti s BB 1. y meaning o 1” suggests nificantly or s YA 2(5)(b ent context th ut forms a phr more than m e wholly” to hav word “substa wholly” but m ely paraphrase n submitted, “ agreed with n bstantially the ccepted that w terprets that be something t would have liberately qu a of what amou leming’s. It i s es were not th s to us that th individual w a Langton emph sameness, wh al”. That con e evidence ex “substantia It is a high to s YA 2(5) s the subst m of the tax reatest part ysis would b ed as a col the tax mus onal tax, PA g of “subst e tax” is us n the follow y be impose ans: t is of sub s under s BB posed as a stantially th WT, provided ially the sa of “substan s that the q r essentially b), this mea 17 he word “subs ase with it. If erely incidenta ve appeared. I antially”. In th ore than mere ed by the wor in the main”, non-union emp e same” in s 5 whether the te phrase. Coun more than “s used these w alified by the a nts to substan s common gro he same and t e more appro age increases hasised, Parlia hether on its o notes a highe hibits. ally the sam her and mo )(a), when tance or eff x. The subs t and in sub be the sam lection me c st be “in th AYE, RWT o tantially th sed in relati wing way: ed by a cen stantially th B 1; or collection m he same na d the foreig me nature ntially the s qualities or y like incom ans the tax stantially” app “substantially al, there woul It is the word he context, ... t ely “insubstan d “in the main “for the great ployees must 59B(1). erms were “su nsel submitted similar” and m ords or phras adjective “sub ntial samenes ound that the the issue is wh priate adjectiv would be sim ament has stip own or, as is i r degree of id me” must m ore precise comparing fect of the t stance or e bstance” th e for s YA 2 chanism for e main, for or NRWT. he same n ion to a for ntral, state he same na mechanism ature as pro gn tax bein as income ame nature characteris me tax impo imposed a pears in contra y” bore the m d have been n “wholly” that the word mea ntial” or “insig n” or “as to th test part” and be the same ubstantially th d that the Leg more than “sub es. GDL says bstantially”. s, we prefer M wage increas hether they w ves to describ milar or even s pulated for th in issue here, dentity than th mean more standard. g a foreign t tax that mu effect of the he same as 2(5)(b). W r the foreig r the greate nature” eign tax, i t or local gov ture as inc for the fo r ovisional ta g collected tax impose e as income stics of the osed under s a collecti ast to the wor eaning ... no need at all gives context ans something nificant” and he greater par d “in substance to come withi he same” depe islature must bstantially s that the wor Mr Langton’s ses given to th were substanti be a compariso ubstantially e higher or m qualified by t he plaintiff than tax to New ust be e tax must New Zeala When gn tax, the est part and ts meaning vernment; ome tax reign tax th x, PAYE, RW is of ed under e tax impos foreign tax r s BB 1. In on mechan rd for t g is rt”. e”, in ends d he ally on ore the be and d in is hat WT sed x n nism fo RW Th108. w n a in t a di d e “s Ne th to na in cl Th109. sa Ap “s a m th Ze Case law As110. is us Th w p a It 111. co Ho ap New Zea Th112. ta co re pu ap ap ex Au 48 m re In113. co de or the foreig WT or NRW he case law hen trying ature as Ne come tax w ax. Conseq fferent to t ecision is st substantiall ew Zealand hat the Fun o a restricte ature as Ne come tax p ass of pers he decision ame” requir pplied in th substantiall different w more stringe he main, fo ealand inco w compari s there is li of “substa seful to refe he following hether a pa articular inc is importa omparison t owever, the pproached aland he New Zea ax” in a tax onsidered w elief tax and urposes of pplying dec pplied two o xemption u ustralian se 82 and Cas meaning of i elevant. n re Richard oncerned a eductions w gn tax mus WT. w also ident to determi ew Zealand was divided quently, som the current till useful a y of the sa d tax (in th d was a pr i ed class of ew Zealand provided be sons. in Nation a res samene he current c y the same way. The ca ent test tha r the greate ome tax. T ing foreign mited New ntially the er to cases g cases are articular ch come tax. nt to note t to the stan e decisions the task of aland court ation conte whether Ne d national s paying out cisions in di of the case nder the A ection is wo se S52 85 A ncome tax ds (Decease testator w whatsoever st be signific tified some ne whether income ta d into two p me of the fe New Zeala s it shows me nature ” at case, so ivate institu persons me social secu enefits from al Distributi ess in subst context, thi e” if it taxes ase also no an “substan est part an This analysis n taxes to w Zealand ca same natu from other e examples harge is an that all the dard set ou s are useful f comparing ts have not ext. Howev w Zealand security tax annuities u ifferent con es in determ ustralian eq orded differ ATC 388. T . Therefore ed), Richar ho granted and free o 18 cantly or es features of r a foreign x. Case 3 7 parts, incom eatures of and income how a New ” test when cial securit ution that e eant that it urity incom m the conso on Union s tance or eff s could me s amounts tes that “s u ntially simila d in substa s would ap income t a ase law tha re” as incom r areas of l of where t “income t a ese cases ap ut in s YA 2 as they sh g taxes. directly co ver, there a social secu x could be c under a wil ntexts. How mining whet quivalent o rently). Se The focus in e, the New rds v Richar d an annuity of all duties ssentially li f a tax that tax is of su 7 was decid me tax and income tax e tax legisla w Zealand c n comparing ty income t existed for t was not su me tax. New olidated rev uggests tha fect but no ean that a f taxed unde ubstantially ar”. The fo ance” of the ply equally ax at considers me tax imp aw and fro he courts h ax” or is suf pply a diffe 2(5) of “sub how how th onsidered th are three ca urity contrib considered l. Care nee wever, the ther to gra of s YA 2(5) ee, for exam n these cas Zealand ca rds \[1935\] y “to be pa and taxes” ike provisio t could be c ubstantially ded at a tim social secu x in that cas ation. Howe ourt has ap g a foreign ax). In Cas the provisio ubstantially w Zealand s venue accou at “substan t necessari foreign tax er the Act, y the same oreign tax m e same nat to s YA 2( s whether a posed unde m other jur have had to fficiently sim erent standa bstantially t e courts ha he meaning ases that h butions, un income tax eds to be t Australian nt a foreig n ) (although mple, Case es is the or ases are po NZLR 909 id clear and ”. The issu onal tax, PA compared y the same me when urity incom se are ever, the pproached t tax to a se 37, the on of pensi y of the sam social secur unt to a wid ntially the ly in form. is still but does s o ” is a highe must be “in ure as Ne w 5)(b). a foreign ta r s BB 1, it risdictions. o decide milar to a ard of the same”. ave g of “incom ave employme n xes for the aken when courts hav n tax the R68 84 AT rdinary otentially (SC) d free from ue was AYE, e the fact ons me rity der o in er, w ax t is e nt e C m all w w r e No114. de in w in T h Re115. H N e gr In116. an “... Ze w Th 117. w m in t h M D118. fo an of Th119. Pa \[1 an ch ta M120. Ta a te M121. in t o co Hi122. m Ac as no w t h Ac hether the hether the elief tax (th orthcroft J eductions w clude incom as “of the c come of th herefore, th e Hirst, Pub igh Court d ew Zealand rouped with n Hirst, an E nnuities we ...income ta ealand”. T hether the he court he as a separa meant it cou fluenced by hat the SSC orton J, thi espite conc ound it suffi nd recovere f the SSC. he same iss aterson (De 1944\] NZLR nd national haracter of axes. yers CJ co n ax Act 1923 tax on inco erm is ordin yers CJ agr come tax, o the incom ould not pro irst and Pat main income ct, then it w ssessed and oted that th hether the he Commiss ct of a fore annuity sh estate sho e precurso held that t whatsoever me tax. No character o e taxpayer he annuity blic Trustee decision. H d social sec h the New Z English test ere to be pa x at the cu he issue w a annuities w eld that the ate tax (fro uld not be in y the langu C should be is indicated cluding the iciently res ed. For this sue came b eceased), R R 104 (CA). security ta income tax ncluded tha 3 could be ome, but th narily under reed with N was of the me of the ta operly be d terson are e tax and im will not be a d collected hese cases tax was of sioner’s opi ign country hould be pa ould provide r to the soc he referenc and free o orthcroft J f of income ta r and asses should be p e v Hirst \[19 owever, be curity contr Zealand ca tator left an aid “clear o rrent rate d as whether were to be SSC could om income ncome tax. uage of the administe d the contri SSC was n embled inc s reason it before the N Rennick v G . Applying ax were not x so the an at only inco considered hat will not rstood. Northcroft J character xpayer an d described as authority fo mposed und an income in the sam were consi f substant inion, whet y is not a h 19 id free of t e additional cial security ce “to be pa of all duties further held ax” as it wa sed in the paid free of 941\] 3 All E ecause the ibution (S S ses. nnuities to f all deduct deductible r the New Z paid free o not proper tax) impos In reachin Social Sec red “as if i t bution was not an incom come tax in was decide New Zealan Guardian Tr Hirst, the c t income ta nuity in qu ome tax imp income ta be enough in Richard of income t d was a cha s income ta or the view der a separ tax. This i me way as t idering whe tially the s ther a tax is elpful ques he unemplo l funds to m y contribut aid clear an and taxes” d that the u as calculate same way f the unem ER 466 (Ch issue was w SC) was an two New Z tions whats at source o Zealand SSC of that tax. rly be desc sed by sepa ng this dec urity Act 1 9 t were incom s not an inc me tax, the the way it ed the annu nd Court of rust and Ex court held t axes. Howe estion shou posed unde x. He obse h to make it ds that the S tax. It was arge on tha ax. w that if a ta rate Act fro s the case he main in c ether a tax same natu s contained stion in dete oyment rel meet the un ion). nd free from ” was wide unemploym ed by refere as income ployment r h) is a Unite whether th income tax Zealand rela soever...” in or payable C was an in ribed as inc arate legisla ision the co 938. That me tax”. A ome tax. e court nev was asse s uities shoul Appeal in I xecutors Co that New Z ever, they w uld be paid er the Land erved that a t an income SSC, while s calculated t income. ax is separ om the main even if the come tax. was incom re as incom d within the ermining w ief tax, ie nemployme m all enough to ment relief t ence to the tax. relief tax. ed Kingdom e x, it has be atives. The ncluding in New ncome tax a come tax. ation. This ourt was Act stated According to ertheless ssed, collect ld be paid f In Re of NZ Ltd Zealand SSC were of the free of the and Incom a tax might e tax as tha not an d by referen However, i ate from th n income ta e tax is However, me tax, not me tax. In e income ta whether a ent tax e m en e and It o ted free C e ese me t be at nce it he ax it is ax fo ch Australi General c Th123. de al Ev 124. re in Ev125. ch sp ch At So126. be Tax exem Au127. pe 1 Th128. ex cr ex ta su or up In129. th pe No ex w A c ta to se Th130. th oreign tax is haracteristi ia case law he facts in eed of sepa l State inco vatt J, in hi elief tax (a come tax” . vatt J held harge could pecial purpo harge that w t 675: It is tru But in (Mana g case, is exemp and Re as taxa 22 brin o the fact t eing an add mption case ustralia cur eriods prior July 1987, he Commis xemption o reditable sh xemption sy ax credits o ubject to fo r credit sys p to the am n Case 20 ( he United S eriod, Fede o other Uni xemption fo ere an inco ct 1936-19 ax”. (This i o be a tax “ ection BB 1 he Commis he FICA con s sufficient cs of the t a de Romero aration, Mr ome tax”. is dissentin social secu . (The othe that the un d still be a t ose. He als will determ ue that the ta essence it is a gement) Act it s “net assessa t from tax an elief of Unemp able income u ngs into play t that the tax ditional inco es rrently oper r to 30 June Australia h sioner cons r a credit, t hould not ch ystem the r offsets. T oreign tax w tem, an off mount of Au 1957) 7 CT States of Am ral insuran ited States or his Unite ome tax for 55. Sectio s not the s of substan t ”.) sioner den ntributions ly like New ax imposed o v Read (1 R agreed t g judgme n rity tax) wa er judges d nemployme tax even if so held tha mine whethe x in question an additional i tself. The sub able income”, d after makin ployment Act, nder the Inco the machinery x was not c ome tax. rates a fore e 2008, a f had an exe siders that, the underly hange. Ho courts app l This is beca was exempt fset or cred ustralian tax TBR (NS) 9 merica (Uni ce (FICA) c income tax ed States in r the purpos on 23(q) on ame as th e tially the sa ied the clai were an in c 20 Zealand in that are re 932) 48 CL o pay his w t, consider as included id not have ent relief ta it was pai d t it is the s er it is an in is not called “ income tax as bject matter o which means g the allowed “net assessab ome Tax (Man y of income ta alled an inc eign income foreign tax mption sy s , whether t ying princip wever, it is lied a tough ause under t from Aust dit is only a x payable o 1, an Austr ted States) contribution xes were de ncome on t ses of s 23 ly required e s YA 2(5) ame nature m and the come tax. ncome tax. elevant. LR 649 (HC wife a clear red whether d in the exp e to decide x was an in d into a spe subject mat ncome tax, “income” tax b ssessed in acc of the tax, so f s the gross inc deductions. ble income” is agement) Act ax assessment come tax d e tax offset credit regim stem. he relief is ples that de s arguable t her standar r the exemp tralian inco llowed for on that inco ralian-resid ) for just un ns were ded educted. T he basis th (q) of the I that the fo test, which e as income board was It is the n A) were tha annual sum r the unem pression “al this questi ncome tax. ecial fund a tter and ess not the lab but “unemploy cordance with far as it affect come after exc By sec. 18 of s to be assess t 1928, the pr t, including se id not prev t regime. F me applied allowed as etermine wh that under rd than the ption system me tax. U foreign inc o ome. dent profess nder a year ducted from The taxpaye at the FICA Income Tax oreign tax b h requires t e tax impos asked to d nature and at, under a m “free from mployment ll State ion.) He noted nd used for sence of th bel it is give yment relief” the Income T ts the present cluding all inc f the Preventio ed in like man rincipal Act. S ec. 83 itself. vent it from For income . Prior to s an offset, hich taxes a the ey would wi m all incom nder an off ome tax pa sor worked r. During t m his salary er claimed A contributi x Assessme be “an inco the foreign sed under decide whet a m a r a e en. tax. Tax t come on nner Sec. m an are ith me fset aid in this y. an ions ent ome tax ther Th131. re (H Ch pa sp Th132. ba an pr Th133. in e n G134. de In135. a Au to vi it th th Th136. Pa le In137. in t a sa in Th138. ha sa co oc Th139. de su bo w Th140. ea sp co In141. te re co ex here was no esult the tax Hirst, Paters hairman co aid on the i pecific purp he second b asis, the ta nd United S roduced, th he third boa come tax a ntirely fore iven the di f efinite conc n Case 112 patent. He ustralian co o provide se sits. While was subjec he taxpayer herefore be he board he aterson and gislation. n Case R68 Saudi Ara axpayer’s a alary should Saudi Ara he taxpaye ave Saudi A alary. The onsolidated ccupational he issue wa efinition of upplemente oard decide hether the he fact that arning men pecial bank onclude tha n Case S52 erm univers equired to p ontributions xempt from o consensu xpayer’s cla rson, Morris oncluded th income of e pose did not board mem xpayer was States law b he taxpayer ard membe and conclud ign to the c fferent app clusions can (1958) 7 C e granted t ompany. T ervices to t e the fee wa ct to the Ne r argued th exempt fro eld that the d concluded 84 ATC 48 bia. The C ssessable i d be exemp bia. r was not r Arabian soc contributio revenue fu diseases, as whether tax from Le ed by the re ed that the SSI was a t the SSI w n), it was im account an at it was no 85 ATC 38 sity appoint pay federal s. The taxp m Australian us between aim was di s Leventhal at FICA wa every indivi t prevent it mber decide s required t by expert e r’s claim fai er held that ded that “p concept of t proaches an n be drawn CTBR (NS) the manufa The taxpaye he compan as not asse ew Zealand at the fee w om tax in A e contributi d that it wa 82, an Aust ommission ncome for pt from Aus required to cial insuran ons went int und) to pro disability, o the SSI wa eake, but n equirement SSI was no tax at all. was only im mposed for nd not the ot an incom 88, an Aust tment in th income tax payer claim n tax becau 21 the three m sallowed. A l and de Ro as an incom idual. The t from bein ed the case to prove th evidence. A iled. t FICA cont ayments to the term “i nd conclusio from this c 733, a New cturing and er was requ ny. The tax essable inco d social sec was taxed Australia. on was no t as a separa ralian resi d er included that tax ye stralian inco pay Saudi ce (SSI) co to a specia ovide compe old age and as an incom noted that t t that the ta ot an incom posed on a a specific p consolidate e tax. ralian-resi d e United St x, but he w med that his use the sala members o After consi omero, amo me tax. It w fact that th g regarded involved a e differen c As no exper tributions w o such a fun ncome tax” ons of the b case. w Zealand-r d selling rig uired to visi xpayer was ome for New urity contri in New Zea t a tax. It te tax imp o dent taxpay d the Saudi ear. The ta ome tax be Arabian inc ontributions l bank acco ensation fo d death. me tax. Th this definiti ax should r me tax. In segment o purpose, an ed revenue dent taxpay tates. The was required s United Sta ary had bee on this issue dering the ong others) was levied, he tax was d as income conflict of ces between rt evidence were not pa nd are in m ””. board mem resident tax ghts to the it Australia paid a fee w Zealand ibution. On aland and s applied Hir osed by sep yer had wor Arabian sa xpayer clai ecause it ha come tax, b s deducted ount (not th or industrial e board sta on would n relate to inc fact, the bo of the popu nd it was pa fund, led t yer had tak taxpayer w d to make ates salary en subject t e and as a authorities , the collected a used for a e tax. laws. On t n English la e had been yments of my view mbers, no xpayer own patent to a twice a ye for these tax purpos n this basis should rst and parate rked for a y alary in the imed the ad been tax but he did from his he l injuries, arted with t need to be come. The oard doubt ulation (wag aid into a the board t ken up a sh was not FICA should be to income t s, and this aw ned an ar ses, s, year xed the e ed ge- o ort- tax in c o Ca Un ex Th142. th Ac Fe 1 Th143. co th th di Th144. id t a FI Th In145. pe di h a Th146. Se W pe Yu Th147. na or its co or op United K To148. pa in t a “C co the United ontributions ase 20 abo nited Stat e xemption p 12. Ap purpo s Revenu stated statute instalm salary, his case dis he New Zea cts. Howev ederal Insu of the Unit he second g ontext. Hir he board de he context w spute. he board al entical dec axpayer los ICA contrib he decision n Case U52 ension from vorced his ave his pen he pension elf Managin Workers of C ension shou ugoslavia. he tribunal ature of the rganisation s members onsidered in rganisation perative wa Kingdom o qualify fo aid under t come arisi n ax (s 9(1) o Correspond omparison t d States. T s were an i ve. The b o es revenue provision): plied to the p ses of sec. 23( ue Code, it is to be tax to b e). In practice ment of salary none the les s stinguishes aland Socia ver, it is arg rance Cont ted States C ground for rst and Pate ecided to fo was also qu lso incorrec cision on ide t because t utions were s were clea 87 ATC 34 m the Yugos wife and b nsion paid t was subjec ng Interest Croatia at S uld be exclu The issue f held that t e SIZMIORH that helpe s. The tribu n Case R68 would not as formed w r the Unite he law of t h ng in the fo of the Taxat s to United than the s The issue fo ncome tax. oard held th law, it was resent case, I (q). The oblig paid by the e be struck as a e, a proportion . It follows th s it is deemed Hirst and P l Security l guable that tribution Ac Code. distinguish erson conce ollow the de uite differen ctly refers t entical fact the board f e an incom arly not ide 47, an Aust slav Govern ecame liab to her to sa ct to a dedu Communit Split (SIZMI uded from for the trib the contribu H, which w ed to financ unal likened 8, and conc have the c within the c d Kingdom he foreign t oreign territ tion (Intern d Kingdom t YA 2(5) tes 22 or the board . This was hat even th income tax I have conclud gation to make mployee “in a percentage o n of salary is hat even thoug d to be a tax o Paterson on egislation w t neither is ct and codif hing Hirst a erned the in e Romero a nt: a separ to the decis s. As expla failed to rea e tax. In t entical. ralian-resi d nment. Be ble to pay h atisfy the m uction know y of Pensio IORH”). Th his taxable unal was w ution was n as understo e the collec d the contri luded that character of context of t unilateral territory, ca tory, and m national and tax” appea st of “subst d was whet the same i hough FICA x for the pu ded that FICA e the paymen addition to oth of wages (up t withheld for F gh the tax is l on the whole o n two groun was not par FICA. FIC fied at Title nd Paterson nterpretatio and Morris L ration agree sion in Case ained abov ach a unani the current dent taxpay fore he imm er mainten maintenance wn as a “se on and Inva he taxpaye e income as whether this not a tax. T ood to be a ctive needs ibution to t a levy by a f a tax, eve the legal or tax credit, alculated b must corres d Other Pro rs to be a l tantially the ther the FIC issue consid A was not a urposes of constitutes “i nt is part of th her taxes” (sec to the limit im FICA out of ea limited to only of the amount nds. The fi rt of the In A is impos e e 26, Subtit n was their on of wills. Leventhal c ement and e 20 as rea e, in Case 2 imous view case the ta yer was ent migrated to nance. He a e obligation elf-contribu alid Insuran r argued th s it was sub s contributi The tribuna a co-operat s of the com the Saudi A a co-operat en though t rganisation the foreign by reference spond to Un ovisions) Ac ower stand e same”. CA dered in tax under s 23(q) (t h income tax” fo e US Internal c. 3101), is mposed by ach and every y part of \[sic\] t. irst was tha come Tax ed under th tle C, Chapt r different However, cases where a contractu ching an 20 the w on whethe axpayer wo titled to a o Australia, arranged to ns. tion” to th e nce of the hat the bject to tax on was a ta al reviewed tive mmunity an Arabian SSI tive that co- of the Stat n tax must e to the nited Kingd ct 2010). dard of he or at he ter e ual er on. he o e in ax. the nd te. be om Tax credi In149. \[1 w o n Re co Th150. in c a co an General c In 151. ga £5 w Th152. sh In153. se no ta in di a d Re154. co Canada Foreign T Th155. ru an In156. de So Th pa ta Th157. th co Co it case n Yates (HM 1991\] BTC orth £209, n 90% of th evenue arg orporation t he court he come tax o alled “incom ode was to n income ta cases n the case o ave £200,0 5,000 for li hether tha t he Court of hould be pa ... supe indicat that fr e additio n reaching t eparate con oted there axpayer init come tax. fferent. H o dditional in eckitt is the ollected in a Tax Credit C he following ules. Sectio n income o n Kempe v ecide wheth ome, but n he churche ayable by a ax or wages he German he authoriti ollection fee onstitution MIT) v GCA 107 (Ch), t 300 with a he total con gued that th tax because eld that the or corporati me tax”. Th charge tax ax. It was of In Re Re 000 to his tr fe “free of t amount w f Appeal he aid free of s er-tax or sur- ion to restric t eedom is give onal income ta this decisio ncept; inste were differ tiated paym The freque owever, the come tax. erefore aut a different Cases g cases con on 126 of t r profits ta x The Queen her a Germ ot all Germ s used the all members s tax. tax author es were the e had been and was le Internation the taxpaye Venezuela ntract value he Venezue e a tax on Venezuel a ion tax. In he court no x on net pro not a turno eckitt; Reck rustees to i income tax was also to ld that the sur-tax as w tax is in essen t the words to en to the wido ax which has n on, the cour ead it contr rences betw ment of the ency and m e court con hority for t way from i ncern the a he Income x paid in fo \[2001\] 1 C man church man churche tax to fulfi s of a churc rities admin en paid ove deducted. evied on the 23 nal (former er company n company e. The taxp elan tax did 90% of gro an tax did c n fact, a tra oted that th ofits. It the over tax. kitt v Reckit invest and x”. The issu be paid fre sur-tax wa well as inco nce an additio income tax a w in respect o now been give rt did not a rasted the s ween the tw sur-tax, w method of c ncluded tha he view th a ncome tax, pplication o Tax Act 19 oreign jurisd CTC 2060 ( tax was eli es were ent l their eccle ch. The tax nistered the er to the re The churc e basis of G rly Gaffney y entered in y. Venezue payer claim d not corres oss receipts correspond nslation of he intention erefore serv tt \[1932\] 2 to pay his ue for the C ee of super- as an incom ome tax. T onal income ta as known for s of both incom en the name o ttempt to d sur-tax with wo taxes. F whereas the ollection o f t the sur-ta at a tax can , yet might of the Cana 985 provide dictions. (TCC), the c igible for a titled to co esiastical d x was char e church ta espective ch ch tax had German Fed Cline & Ass nto a servic ela levied a med tax cre spond to inc s was a tur to United K the law sh n of the Ven ved the sam Ch 144 (CA widow an a Court of Ap -tax or sur- me tax and The court sa ax, and, as th so many years e tax, as we k of sur-tax. define “inco h income ta For example Revenue a f sur-tax wa ax was in e n be assess still be an adian foreig es a foreign court was a foreign tax llect Germa uties. The ged at 8% x. Proceed hurches, af a legal bas deral State sociates Ltd ce contract tax of 25% dit relief. T come or nover tax. Kingdom owed it w a nezuelan ta me function A), a testat annual sum ppeal was -tax. the annuit y aid at 151: ere is no s, it must follo know it, and t ome tax” as ax. The co e, the assessed as also essence an sed and income tax gn tax cred n tax credit asked to x deduction an church t tax was on income ds collected fter a is in the law. d) % The as ax n as tor m of y ow he s a urt x. it for n. tax. d by Th158. th au pu un 10 Th159. th th no It 160. s c o th an ch th pu Ya161. cl t a be He Ki Th162. co th no In163. Un Th pa re co pe Th164. w p a M a p co pr va cr he court he he propositi uthority of urpose. Th nder autho 0: As to t or chu r is, I co he court als he tax is ge he tax’s des ot change i is the Com YA 2(5) tes ollected by he taxpayer nd the proc hurch, their he “public p urpose – it ates v Her M aim for a fo axpayer wa een refused e had volun ingdom pen he court, in ompulsory a hat the cont o income w n Nadeau v nited State he taxpaye aid to the U etirement s ontributions ension, sick he court dis ere not a ta aid was an SRS contri pplied Laws ollected to r rovide a lim arious bene redit purpos eld that the ion that a t a legislatur he church ta rity of the G he compulsor rch membersh onclude, a com so held tha enerally bas signated de ts characte mmissioner’ st. This is the govern r attends. T ceeds go to r obligation purpose” re is intended Majesty the oreign tax c s a dual Un d, a foreign ntarily appl nsion. n applying L and therefo tributions w was being ea The Queen es citizen an r had soug United State ystem for M s were inte kness, disa smissed the ax. The co income or bution was son and Eur raise reven mited class efits. On th ses. church ta x tax is a levy re, imposed ax was enfo German leg ry nature of th hip does not m mpulsory oblig t the churc sed on the estination ( eristic as a ’s view that because th nment and t The tax is p o fund the a to pay the quirement. d for the be e Queen 20 credit for U nited Kingd n tax credit lied to pay Lawson, he ore they did were not ca arned in th n 2004 TCC nd resident ht, but bee es of Maine Maine publi nded to pro bility and d e taxpayer’ ourt was att profits taxe not a tax a rig and hel nue for the of persons his basis, th 24 x was a tax y, enforcea d by a publ orceable ag gislature. T his tax, the ab make it any th gation. ch tax was a income or w presumably tax on inco t German c e tax is in then distrib payable by activities of e tax ends. . The churc enefit of the 001 DTC 76 United Kingd om/Canadi for Class 3 the contrib eld that the d not amou alculated as e United K C 433, 2007 t of Canada en refused, e Retiremen ic servants ovide the p death benef ’s appeal an tempting to es under s and stoppe d that the M common g – Maine pu he contribu x. It cited L ble by law, ic body and gainst the a The tax was bility to avoid he less a tax. an income wages tax. y to fund th ome or wag church tax w the nature buted to the all membe the church The churc ch tax is no e German t 61 (TCC) co dom NI con an citizen. 3 United Kin butions to m NI contribu unt to a tax s a percenta ingdom. 7 DTC 1670 , employed a foreign t nt System ( and teache public serva fits. nd held the o determine 126(7). Th d the inqui MSRS cont ood. They ublic servan tions were Lawson as a , imposed u d levied for appellant an s also comp the tax by giv The impositio tax. This w The court he church a ges. would not s of a servic e particular ers of the c h. If a pers ch tax also ot intended taxpayer’s o oncerned a ntributions. He had so ngdom NI c maintain his utions were x. The cour age of inco 0, the taxpa d as a teach tax credit fo (MSRS). T ers. The M ants and tea e MSRS con e whether t he court de ry there. T ributions w were inten nts and tea not a forei authority fo under r a public nd imposed pulsory. At ving up citizen on of church t was becaus t noted that activities) d satisfy the ce charge r church th ongregatio son leaves t fails to sati for a publi own church taxpayer’s The ought, but contribution s United e not rt also note me earned ayer was a her in Main or premium he MSRS is SRS achers with ntributions the foreign ecided that The court were not nded to achers – wit gn tax for t or d t nship tax se t did at n the isfy ic h. ns. ed , as e. ms s a h tax the th tax Conclus New Zea Th165. in a s Pa166. ac pr sa W167. se de (s re Summary Th168. im Th169.      Th170. w Summar y Ya171. ta fu w Re172. ta Summary Cl173. w p e Ki ion on the land case l he court in come tax b ssessed in t aterson not ctually not roposition t atisfies that Whether a ta eparate Act etermining see para \[1 elevant. y of Austra he court in mpost that w he cases ha Just b conso mean Paym charg into a tax. It is n one ( Fund s perso A levy tax, e organ here is som ere an inco y of United ates (HMIT) ax would co unction as U ay. eckitt concl ax, even tho y of Canadi lass 3 Unite ere not com ercentage o ingdom (Ya e case law law Richards h because it w the same w ted that wh be enough that income t meaning, ax is separa t from the m whether a 22\] above) lian case la de Romero will determ ave identifie because the olidated rev n it is not an ment into th ge is an inco a private ac not always Case R68) . s used for a ons might n y by a co-o even if the nisation of t me uncertai ome tax and d Kingdom C T) considere orrespond t United King luded that ough it was ian Case La ed Kingdom mpulsory. of income e ates). w comparin eld that un was calcula way as inco hile a tax m to make it e tax has a it will not b ate from th main incom foreign tax ). It is the aw o held that mine whethe ed the follo e charge is venue accou n income ta e consolida ome tax (C ccount, then necessary . a specific p not be an in operative or co-operativ the State (C nty surroun d Case 20 f Case Law ed the title o United K i gdom incom a sur-tax w s assessed aw m NI contrib The contrib earned, as 25 ng taxes to nemployme ated by refe me tax. may have th t income ta “well-unde be income he main inc me tax Act a x is sufficie characteris it is the su er it is an in owing chara paid into a unt) and us ax (de Rom ated revenu Case R68). n it would b for an impo urpose and ncome tax ( rganisation ve is forme Case U52). nding FICA found they of the tax t ingdom inc me tax, eve was an inco and collect butions wer butions wer no income o income t nt relief tax erence to th he characte x. Paterso erstood me tax. ome tax o r are not que ntly like Ne stics of the bject matte ncome tax, acteristics o a special ac sed for a sp mero). ue account However, be highly u ost to be ca d to benefit (Cases R68 does not h d within th taxes. Cas were not. to be releva ome tax if n if it does ome tax bec ted in a diff re not a tax re also not was being tax x was of th he taxpaye r of incom e n is author aning” and r imposed u estions that ew Zealand tax in ques er and esse not the lab of an incom ccount (and pecial purpo may indica if the amou nlikely to b alled a tax t a restricte 8 and S52). have the ch e context o se S52 held ant. It also it serves th not tax in cause it wa ferent way. x as the con calculated earned in t he characte r’s income e tax, this w rity for the unless a t a under a t are helpfu income tax stion that a ence of the bel it is give me tax: d not the ose does n ate that the unt is paid be an incom for it to be ed class of haracter of of the legal d that they o held that he same the same s like inco m . ntributions as a the United r of and will ax ul in x are en. ot e me a y a me Th174. w t h in f a Na175. a w b e th Part 3 - Introduc Th176. th Th177.      Th178. ta Example Facts Ja179. th D180. de th Ja181. an So PA Applicat As182. s I s is th So183. PA em th he court in as an incom he Commiss s YA 2(5) ail to satisfy adeau is au public purp ere not a ta enefits (or hose person - Example ction he following he law. he following The p The p The p The in for th All th he onus is o ax credit un e 1 – Solo ake spent th he Solomon uring his ti educted fro hen remitte ake returne nd prepared olomon Isla AYE. Is Jak tion of the s Jake has YA 2(5)(b) slands PAYE it imposed he same na olomon Isla AYE. Solom mployer an hat New Ze Kempe hel me tax as it sioner’s opi because th y the “publi uthority for pose (the c ax as they in the case ns). es g examples g facts hav person is a person is su person has ncome men hat tax year e other req on the taxp nder s YA 2 mon Isla n he 2011/12 n Islands fo me in the S om his salar ed to the So ed to New Z d his New Z ands. He s ke entitled e s YA 2(5) paid Solom . Section Y E of substan d as a collec ture as inc ands PAYE mon Islands d remitted aland PAYE ld that Ger t was based inion that G he tax is in ic purpose” r the view t ommon go were collec e of a death s are includ e been ass New Zeala n ubject to ta paid the f o ntioned in t r. quirements payer to de (5). nds PAYE 2 New Zeal r a local di v Solomon Is ry by Big B olomon Isla Zealand at t Zealand tax eeks a tax to a foreign ) Test mon Islands YA 2(5)(b) ntially the s ction mech ome tax i m is of substa s PAYE is w to the Solo E is withhel 26 man church d on the in German chu the nature ” requireme hat someth od). In thi cted to prov h benefit, a ded to assis umed: nd tax resid x in both c reign tax. the example of subpart monstrate and tax ye ve compan lands, Jak e lue under t ands Inland the end of x return for credit unde n tax credit s PAYE, the requires a same natur anism for a mposed und antially the withheld fro omon Islan d and remi h tax was a come or wa urch tax wo of a servic ent. hing will be s case, th e vide a limit benefit to st in explain dent. ountries. e is the onl LJ are sati that the fo ar working y called “B e had Solom the PAYE sy Revenue D the 2011/1 r the period er subpart t? tax falls to two-part in re as New Z a foreign ta der s BB 1? same natu m employm ds Inland R tted. an income t ages tax. H ould not sat ce charge. a tax if it i e MSRS con ted class of persons as ning the ap ly income o sfied. oreign tax is as a diving ig Blue”. mon Islands ystem. The Division. 12 New Zea d that he w LJ for Solo o be consid nquiry. Is S Zealand PA ax that is of ure as New ment incom Revenue in tax. The ta However, it tisfy the te It would al is collected ntributions f persons w ssociated w plication o f of that pers s eligible fo g instructor s PAYE e PAYE was aland tax ye as in the mon Islan d ered under Solomon AYE? And if f substantia Zealand me by the the same w ax t is st lso for with ith f son or a r in s ear ds r f so, ally way So184. Is su co R C l I c g I ( w s T “ A  olomon Isla slands Inco ubstantially onsidered b Relevant f Compulsory aw. Imposed by central, sta governmen Intended fo (although it whether it i specific pub The foreign “income” as Act.  Some m be acce ands PAYE me Tax. W y the same below. factors y and enfor y, and paya te or local t. or a public p t is irreleva s tagged fo blic purpose tax must t s defined u minor variat ptable. is also imp Whether Sol nature as i rceable by able to, a purpose ant or a e). tax nder the tions will 27 osed as a c lomon Islan income tax The Solom income ta Islands In Consolida Payment law. Solomon the Solom administe Revenue The reven purpose a stimulate social ser Islands. Division w on 3 Marc The Solom identifies includes:  gains (s 3(1  Sectio profits salari  Sectio shall d gross in the (Solom collection m nds income imposed u mon Island ax on taxpa ncome Tax ated to 14 N is compuls Islands inc mon Islands ered and co Division (I nue that IR as it enable e developm rvices throu (Solomon website: ww ch 2014.) mon Island income th or profits f 1)(a)(ii)). on 5(a) con s” includes es. on 36A stat deduct tax employme e Tax Deduc mon Island mechanism e tax is a ta under s BB ds governm ayers unde Act (\[Cap November sory and en come tax is s governme ollected by RD). RD collects es the gove ent and pro ughout the Islands Inla ww.ird.gov ds Income T at is subjec from emplo nfirms that amounts f tes that an from an em ent income, ction Rules ds). for Solomo ax of 1 is ent impose r the Solom 123\] 2012). nforceable b s imposed b ent and the Inland is for a pub ernment to ovide vital Solomon and Revenu .sb - acces Tax Act ct to tax. T oyment “gains or from wages employer mployee’s , as prescri 2005 on es mon by by blic ue sed This s or bed 28 Calculated as a proportion of income.  The rate of the tax is not important.  Whether the tax is payable at a fixed rate or at graduated rates is not important.  This condition might still be satisfied even if the tax is not payable until a minimum income threshold is reached, or if the applicable income is capped at a certain threshold. Solomon Islands income tax is calculated as a proportion of income. Individuals are entitled to an exemption for their first $15,080 earned. The balance of any income is then subject to income tax at graduating rates. Imposed on taxable or net income.  A taxing formula designed to produce a reasonable approximation of actual taxable/net income may be acceptable.  Where a tax is imposed as a collection mechanism for income tax and is of substantially the same nature as provisional tax, PAYE, RWT or NRWT, then the requirement that the tax be imposed on taxable or net income does not need to be satisfied. Solomon Islands income tax is imposed on “chargeable income”, which is a similar concept to “taxable income” under the New Zealand Act. Income tax for employees is collected under the Solomon Islands PAYE system. Not a penalty. Solomon Islands income tax is not a penalty. Not a service charge or licence fee. Solomon Islands income tax is not a service charge or a licence fee. Not a payment into a fund or scheme where the entitlement to the benefit is limited to those who contribute (or persons associated with contributors). Solomon Islands income tax is not a payment into a fund or scheme where the entitlement to the benefit is limited to those who contribute (or persons associated with contributors). There is no connection between payment of income tax and any specific benefit. Conclus Ja185. Is sa fo as So186. an th pr So187. to ch to co Ja188. in Exampl e Facts Ti189. Un sa sp O a What is Un190. Ti a n fu or FI191. in r e a Th192. in s t FI193. em M w An194. am In m ion ake is entitl slands PAYE ame nature or a tax (So s New Zeala olomon Isla nd intended he same wa roportion o olomon Isla o the New Z harge, licen o the benef ontributors) ake’s foreig come tax p e 2 – Unite m spent th nited State alary. Tim pecifically e rder 1983 a foreign tax FICA? nder the U n tle 26, Sub nd employe und social s r taxes. ICA consist surance ( O etirement b spouse/chi he second t surance fo tage renal d ICA taxes a mployees a edicare. O ages subje n employer mount, cou nternal Rev make the req led to a for E satisfies t e as New Ze olomon Isla and income ands incom d for a pub ay that the f income. ands incom Zealand con nce fee or a it is limited ). n tax credi payable on ed States he 2011/12 es. During has noted excluded fro at Art 2(3)( x credit for nited State btitle C, Cha ers are requ security ben s of two tax OASDI) (als benefits, su ild) and dis tax is know r the elderl disease. are payroll t at the rate o OASDI was ct to Medi c r is required upled with t enue Servi quired paym eign tax cr the test in s ealand PAY nds incom e e tax. me tax is com lic purpose New Zeala me tax is im ncept of “ta a payment d to those w t cannot be his Solomo of Americ New Zeala this time, F that social om the Dou (b). Tim w FICA contr s Federal I apter 21 of uired to ma nefits. The xes. The f so referred rvivor ben e sability bene wn as Medic ly, younger taxes. For of 5.65%. imposed on care. d to deduct the employe ce along w ments or fa 29 edit for Sol s YA 2(5)(b E and it is e tax) that mpulsory, i . It taxes e nd Act doe posed on c axable inco into a fund who contrib e more tha on Islands e a Federal and tax yea FICA contri security an uble Taxatio would like to ributions. nsurance C f the United ake paymen se paymen irst tax is fo to as the S efits (where efits. care. Medic r people wit the 2012 t This consis n wages up t FICA from er contribu ith income ails to pay o lomon Islan b) as it is a imposed as is of substa imposed by employmen s, and it is chargeable me”. It is or scheme bute (or per n the amou employmen Insurance ar working f butions we nd unemplo on Relief (U o know whe Contribution d States Co nts to the F nts are know or old-age, Social Secur e an insure care is used th disabiliti tax year, FI sts of 4.2% p to $110,1 m employee tion, is the tax. An em on time wil nds PAYE. tax of subs s a collectio antially the y central go nt income i calculated income, wh not a pena e where the rsons assoc unt of New nt income. e Contribu for an IT co re deducte oyment tax United Stat ether it is p n Act (as co ode (USC)) Federal gov wn as FICA , survivors rity tax). I d worker d d to fund h es, and pe o ICA was im % OASDI an 00. There es’ gross wa n remitted mployer wh l be liable f Solomon stantially th on mechani e same natu overnment n substant as a hich correla lty, service e entitleme ciated with Zealand utions ompany in d from Ti m es are es of Ame r possible to odified at employees vernment to A contributio and disabil t provides ies and lea ospital ople with e mposed on nd 1.45% is no limit ages. This to the ho fails to for a penalt he ism ure ially ates e nt the m’s rica) get s o ons ity ves nd- on ty. Fo195. sa em Who is F FI196. re ar Eligibilit OASDI Th197. th pe en A 198. re w m qu bo Th199. du m w in A 200. a   If 201. re Th202. (S co do an sp so Medicare Pe203.    or complete atisfy the te mployer’s t FICA impo ICA taxes a equired to m re compulso ty and ben he amount he OASDI b erson must nough and person rec etirement b orked for a money each ualify for a orn after 19 he amount uring their more will get orkers will come earn person can disability b a med secur worke depen a person w eceive a sur he United S SC), held th ontractual r one so man nd benefits pecifically r ocial securit e eople aged receiv have would work eness, it is est in s YA axable or n osed on? are imposed make contr ory. nefits an employ benefit that t be “fully in put enough ceives one c benefits a p at least 10 y quarter to retirement 960 qualify of the mon working life t more bac receive a h ers. n qualify fo benefit a pe dical condit rity legislati ed long eno nding on th who is cove rvivor bene States Supr hat entitlem right. Cong ny times. T that are g eserves th e ty and Med 65 and ove ve a social worked lon d be entitle record and noted that 2(5). This net income. d on the wa ributions. B yee pays th they receiv nsured”. T h money in credit for e erson nee d years). Th get a cred t benefit de for a retire nthly benef e and the a ck. Howeve higher perc r a disabili t erson must tion that m ion; and ough and re he age of th ered by OAS efit. reme Court ment to soc gress can c The rules ca ranted can e right of C dicare provi er are entit security be ng enough t d to a socia d their spou 30 employer is because . ages of all e Both the em roughout th ve on retire This means to the syst ach quarte ds 40 credit ey also nee it for that q epends on w ement bene fit paid depe age at whic er, the syst entage of t ty benefit w have: eets the d e ecently eno he person). SDI dies, th t, in Flemm ial securit y hange the an be made be withdra Congress to sions. tled to rece enefit; to be eligib al security use is aged FICA contri e they are n employees mployer and heir workin ement. To the person tem. This i r year the y ts (meaning ed to earn a quarter. Th when a pers efit when th ends on the h they retir tem is weig their forme with fewer c efinition of ough to be heir survivi ing v Nest o y benefits is rules regar e more gen awn. The F “alter, am eive Medica ble for a soc benefit bas at least 62 ibutions wo not imposed . Employer d employee ng life is ind receive mo n must have s tracked u y work. To g they need a certain am he minimum son was bo hey reach 6 e person’s re. People hted so tha r wages tha credits. To “disability” covered (th ng spouse/ or (1960) 3 s not a lega rding eligib nerous or m FICA legisla end or repe re benefits cial security sed on their 2; or ould not d on the rs are also e contributi directly tied ost benefits e worked lo using credit be eligible d to have mount of m age to orn. Those 67. earnings who earne at low incom an high o be entitled ” in the soci his will vary /children ca 363 US 603 ally binding ility and h a more restric ation eal” any of if they: y benefit; r spouse’s ons d to s, a ong ts. for ed me d to ial y an 3 as ctive the  Pe204. re As205. of Trust Fu FI206. an ap Fu D a n fo sc fu be Th207. Th th Applicat R C l I c g I ( w s have be ins eople aged enal disease s with OAS f the Medica unds ICA taxes a nd paid into ppropriated und, the Fe isability Ins ny particula or any parti cheme, und und the pay enefits. he analysis hey are two hey are con tion of the Relevant f Compulsory aw. Imposed by central, sta governmen Intended fo (although it whether it i specific pub worked lon sured for M under 65 w e may also DI, Congre are provisio are collecte o the Unite d to three s ederal Old-A surance Tru ar individua cular emplo der which c yment of re below com o separate nsidered tog e s YA 2(5) factors y and enfor y, and paya te or local t. or a public p t is irreleva s tagged fo blic purpose ng enough Medicare. who receive qualify for ess has rese ons. d by the U n d States Tr separate fun Age and Su ust Fund. A al. Likewise oyee. The urrent emp etirement b mbines emp taxes. How gether. Em ) Test rceable by able to, a purpose ant or a e). 31 in a federa e disability Medicare. erved the r nited State reasury Gen nds: the Fe urvivors Ins Amounts he e, employe US social s ployer and e enefits to t ployee Medi wever, as t mployer con FICA is co FICA is im Insurance collected United St FICA is in is used to people. The empl a benefit employe e is indirec receive o employee for at lea retireme n This may element t l, state or l benefits or ight to “alt s Internal R neral Fund. ederal Hosp surance Tru eld in these r contribut security sys employee c the current icare and O the same fa ntributions a ompulsory mposed und e Contribut by the IRS tates Treas ntended for o provide b loyee contr . With OAS e pays thro tly tied to t on retireme e also need st 10 years nt age. y mean that to the cont local gover r who have er, amend Revenue Se . They are pital Insura ust Fund an e funds are ions are n o stem is a p contribution recipients OASDI cont actors apply are not con and enforc der the Fed tion Act. FI S and paid i ury Genera r a public p benefits to i ribution is c SDI, the am oughout the the OASDI nt. With M ds to have p s prior to re t there is a ribution. nment job end-stage or repeal” ervice (IRS then nce Trust nd the Fede not held fo ot held in tr ay as you g ns are used of retireme ributions. y to each ta nsidered. ceable by la deral ICA is into the al Fund. urpose. FI nsured connected w mount an eir working benefit the Medicare, an paid Medica eaching private to any ) eral or rust go d to ent ax, aw. CA with life ey n are 32 The foreign tax must tax “income” as defined under the Act.  Some minor variations will be acceptable. FICA taxes employment income in substantially the same way that the New Zealand Act taxes employment income. Calculated as a proportion of income.  The rate of the tax is not important.  Whether the tax is payable at a fixed rate or at graduated rates is not important.  This condition might still be satisfied even if the tax is not payable until a minimum income threshold is reached, or if the applicable income is capped at a certain threshold. FICA is calculated as a percentage of an employee’s gross income. Imposed on taxable or net income.  A taxing formula designed to produce a reasonable approximation of actual net/taxable income may be acceptable.  Where a tax is imposed as a collection mechanism for income tax and is of substantially the same nature as provisional tax, PAYE, RWT or NRWT, then the requirement that the tax be imposed on taxable or net income does not need to be satisfied. Because they are payroll taxes, OASDI and Medicare contributions are imposed on an employee’s gross income. They are imposed in a similar way to New Zealand PAYE. Not a penalty. FICA is not a penalty. Not a service charge or licence fee. FICA is not a service charge or licence fee. N s t w a Conclus Ti208. do sa co em a na Em209. co as in e m ar It 210. to pa pr Em211. ch be co en en Not a paym scheme wh to the bene who contrib associated w ion on FIC m is not en oes not sat ame nature ontributions mployment collection m ature as inc mployee FI ompulsory a s a proport much the mployee inc re not pena is also arg o pay benef ayments ar rivate bene mployee FI haracterised enefit is lim ontributors) ntitled to re ntitled. The ment into a ere the en t efit is limite bute (or per with contrib CA ntitled to a isfy the tes e as New Ze s also do no t income in mechanism come tax im CA contribu and impose ion of the e same way come – via alties, servi guable that fits to eligib re made for efit. CA contrib u d as a paym mited to tho ). By maki eceive bene e benefits a fund or titlement d to those rsons butors). foreign tax st in s YA 2 ealand inco ot satisfy s much the m for a sepa mposed und utions do s ed by centr employee’s as the New a PAYE sy ce charges FICA contr ble recipien r a private utions fail t ment into a ose who con ng the pay efits to whic are not ava 33 FICA is e scheme w is limited persons a The empl benefit e contribut eligible t o How muc correlate One of th FICA is a fund or s employe e contractu United St change e repeal th could be social in s the risk t enough f these po t essential which are entitleme x credit for (5)(a). FIC ome tax imp YA 2(5)(b) same way arate tax th der s BB 1. atisfy cert a ral (Federal income. T w Zealand A stem. Furt or licence ributions ar ts. Howev purpose, ie the s YA 2( a fund or sc ntribute (or yment into t ch they wo ailable to al ssentially a where the e to those w associated loyee contr ntitlement. ions the e m o receive th ch the emp to what th he main arg tax, and n cheme, is t e does not ual right to tates Congr ligibility req e benefit. said for mo surance sch that the gov unds to pay tential risks characteris e payments ent to futur his FICA co CA is not a posed unde ). While th as New Zea hat is of sub ain element ) governm They are im Act imposes ther, emplo fees. re intended ver, it is als e to secure 5) test as t cheme whe r persons a the fund, th uld not oth l citizens, o a payment entitlement who contrib with contri ribution is l Without m mployee wi he relevant loyee pays hey ultimate guments fo ot a contri b that under have an e n receive a b ress has th quirements However, t ost governm hemes. The vernment w y out benef s do not de stic of the p s made to s re benefits. ontribution tax of subs er s BB 1. hey are ded aland PAYE bstantially t ts of the te ent. They mposed on g s income ta oyee FICA c for a publi o the case eligibility t they can be re the entit ssociated w he employe herwise hav only those c into a fund t to the ben ute (or butors). inked to a making ll not be t benefits. in will broa ely receive. r claiming t bution to a FICA an nforceable benefit. Th e power to s or even to the same ment-run ere is alway will not hav fits. Howev etract from payments – secure s as FICA stantially th FICA ducted from E, they are the same st. They a are calcula gross incom ax on contribution ic purpose, that the to a potenti e tlement to with ee becomes ve been citizens tha or nefit adly . that e o ys ve ver, the – he m not re ted me ns ie ial the s at ar th Co (w pa As212. be sc (o em Br213. lia w P u ga co m a St en pa m in a (s to Example Facts M214. Lo he In sy M215. sh th th w U n su What is Un216. em sc co in NI217. on em pa re fully insu hat this ent ommissione whether tha ayment into s employee enefit, and cheme whe or persons a mployee FI r Pub 09/02 ability, Tax hether emp ublic Ruling ave rise to ontributions makes paym property ri tatement a nforceable ayment ma make contrib come tax w taxpayer. such as soc o all citizens e 3 – Unite elanie spen ondon. Me er job in Lo nsurance (N ystem from elanie retu he is able to he Double T he DTA doe hether she nited King d ubstantially National I nited Kingd mployed m cheme is ad ontributions come tax. I contributi n earnings mployees. artly by a f ured. The U itlement is er consider at benefit is o a fund or e FICA cont because th re the entit associated CA contribu 2: Federal Informatio ployer FICA g was main a fringe b e s and noted ments under ight as a co ccepts that right. How ade to secu butions are where paye Subject to cial security s whether t ed Kingdo nt the 2011 lanie’s only ondon. Uni NI) contribu m this incom rned to Ne o claim a fo Taxation Re s not ment is able to c dom NI con y the same Insurance dom NI is a ake contri b dministered s are collec ions are ma and by em The self-em ixed weekly United Stat not a legal rs that as th s ever reali r scheme. tributions a hey have th tlement to with contri utions do n Insurance C on Bulletin, A contributi ly concern e enefit. How d that Flem r FICA does onsequence t the emplo wever, the e re an entitl entitled to ers do not r the eligibil y, unemploy they are re om Nationa 1/12 New Z y income fo ted Kingdo utions have me. w Zealand oreign tax c elief (United tion NI cont claim a fore tributions. nature as i e? scheme w butions tow d by Her Ma cted by HMR andatory co ployers on mployed ar y or month 34 tes Suprem lly binding he paymen sed or not ) re likely to he characte the benefit ibutors), th ot satisfy t Contributio Vol 21, No ons are sub ed with whe wever, it tou mming v Nes s not acqui e. As ment oyee FICA c essential ch lement to a o benefit. T receive any lity require yment, etc) quired to p al Insuran Zealand tax or this tax y m income t e been dedu at the end credit for U d Kingdom) tributions. eign tax cre Are United income tax where emplo wards the co ajesty’s Rev RC through ontributions certain ben re also requ ly payment me Court in contractua t is linked t ), then it ha have a pri eristics of a t is limited he Commiss the requirem ons Act (FIC o 4 (June 20 bject to frin ether emplo uched brief stor establi re a right t tioned abov contribution haracteristic a future ben This can be y benefit as ments of g ), the same pay, or have nce Contrib year work year is emp tax and Cla ucted via th of the tax United Kingd ) Order 198 Melanie w edit under d Kingdom imposed u oyees, emp ost of certa venue and h the PAYE s paid by e nefits in kin uired to ma t and partly Flemming l right. Ho to a future as the featu vate as we payment i to those w sioner cons ments of s CA) – Fring 009): 2 loo nge benefit oyer FICA c fly on empl ishes that a o a benefit ve, this Inte ns do not re c of the pay nefit. Only compared a consequ overnmen t e benefits a e paid, inco butions ing as a p h ployment in ass 1 Emplo he United K year. She dom incom 84 (the DTA ould like to subpart LJ NI contribu under s BB ployers and in state b e Customs ( system alo mployees a nd provided ake NI cont y on a perc v Nestor he wever, the benefit ures of a ll as a pub l nto a fund ho contrib u siders that YA 2(5). e benefit ta oked at t tax. The contribution oyee FICA a person wh analogous erpretation esult in an yment is a people tha to a gener ence of bei t benefits are availabl ome tax. harmacist in come from oyee Nation Kingdom PA notes that e tax unde A). Howev o know for utions of 1? the self- nefits. Th e HMRC) and ng with and employ d to ributions – centage of n eld lic or ute ax ns ho to at ral ing e n m nal AYE t r er e d yers net pr co    Em218. Classes o Th219. fo       Benefit e A 220. be    rofits above ontributions an em aged contr and their mployers a of NI contri here are six ollows: Class emplo the e sub m Class in kin Class a PAY payab Class emplo mont losse s Class wishin arisen were certai Class their end o entitlements person’s e enefits) dep Class emplo emplo entitle the a contr some Class towa r Class entitle e a certain s. A person mployee or 16 years o ibutions are earnings ar re also req ibutions x different 1 NI contr oyee contri mployer. T mits the amo 1A NI cont nd provided 1B NI cont YE settleme ble only by 2 NI contr oyed. Whil hly or qua r s (although 3 NI contr ng to fill a g n because t too low. T in state ben 4 NI contr net profits. of the year. s ntitlement pends on th 1 NI contr oyee with a oyer NI con ement to c mount pai d ibutory ben thing called es 1A and rds any con 2 NI contr ement to th threshold. n is require self-emplo or over (alth e not payab re at a pres uired to ma classes of N ributions ar bution is d e The employ ount to HM tributions a to their em tributions a ent agreem employers ributions ar e the amo u rterly. Paym h those with ributions ar gap in their the person This allows a nefits. Clas ributions ar . The amou to contribu he class of ributions (p an entitlem ntributions ontributor y d by the em nefits are d d the “Uppe 1B NI contr ntributory b ributions (p he state pe 35 Individual ed to make yed, hough Clas ble by a pe scribed leve ake NI cont NI contribu e paid by e educted fro yer then ad RC along w are paid by mployees. are payable ent for tax s. e fixed we e unt is calcu ments are d h low earni e voluntar y r contributi was not wo a person to ss 3 NI con e paid by t unt due is c utory state NI contrib u aid by emp ent to all c do not pro v y benefits. mployee. (F etermined er Accrual P ributions (p benefits. aid by the ension and s may als o NI contribu s 1 and Cla erson over t el. tributions. tions. The employers a om the emp ds an emp with income employers e whenever . Class 1B ekly amoun ulated week due regard ngs can ap y payments ion record. orking or b o preserve ntributions a he self-em calculated w benefits (a ution paid: ployees and ontributory vide the em Entitlemen For employ only by NI Point”.) paid by em sel f-employ bereaveme o make volu utions if the ass 2 emplo the state pe se are sum and employ ployee’s gro loyer contr e tax. s on the val r an employ contributio nts paid by kly, it is typ less of trad ply for an e s paid by a The gap m ecause the their entitle are paid at ployed as a with incom nd the am o d employer y benefits. mployee wit nt is determ ee contribu contributio ployers) do yed) provid ent benefits untary NI ey are: oyee ension age mmarised as yees. The oss wages ibution an d lue of bene yer enters i ons are the self- pically paid ding profits exemption) person may have eir earnings ement to a flat rate a proportion e tax at the ount of tho s) provide The Class th an mined solely utions, ons below o not count de an s only. ), s by d efits nto or ). s . n of e se the 1 y by   In221. ha di The Nati o Th222. NI Na Fu Applica R C l I c g Class berea Class towar qualif n addition, e as paid in N fferent clas onal Insura he National I contributi ational Insu und. ation of the Relevant f Compulsory aw. Imposed by central, sta governmen 3 NI contr avement be 4 NI contr rds any con fy for benef entitlement NI contribut sses and fo ance Fund l Insurance ions throug urance Fun e s YA 2(5 factors y and enfor y, and paya te or local t. ributions (v enefits only ributions (p ntributory b fits by payi t to a contr tions. Ther or each of th e scheme is gh the PAYE d (NIF). T 5) Test rceable by able to, a 36 oluntary) c . aid by the benefits. Th ng Class 2 ributory be re are diffe he different s administe E system. T The NIF is s It is comp contribut  an em (Class  aged and  their Employe r contribut Class 3 N NI contrib governme NI contrib administe A proport fund the The rema then paid The NIF i Fund. count towar self-employ his is becau NI contribu nefit depen rent calcula t benefits. red by HMR The NI con eparate fr o pulsory for ions if they mployee (Cl s 2 and Cla between 1 earnings a r rs are also ions (Clas s NI contribut butions are ent. butions are ered by HM tion of NI c National He ainder of th d by HMRC s separate rds state pe yed) do no use the self utions. nds on how ations for e RC. HMRC tributions g om the Con a person t y are: lass 1) or s ass 4), 6 and state re at a pres required to ses 1, 1A an tions are vo e imposed b e collected a MRC. contribution ealth Servi he NI contri into the NI from the C ension and t count f-employed long a per each of the collects the go into the solidated o make NI self-employ e pension a scribed leve o make NI nd 1B). oluntary. by central and ns are used ce (NHS). ibutions are IF. Consolidate d rson e yed ge, el. to e d 37 Intended for a public purpose (although it is irrelevant whether it is tagged for a specific public purpose). A proportion of all NI contributions are used to help fund the NHS. A proportion is also used to fund non-contributory benefits. Use of the NHS and access to non-contributory benefits are available to everyone. There is no eligibility requirement. On this basis, the NI contributions are being used for a public purpose. However, a proportion of NI contributions are also used to fund contributory benefits. This is not a public purpose. In this instance, NI contributions are used to fund a private benefit. The foreign tax must tax “income” as defined under the Act.  Some minor variations will be acceptable. Class 1 employee NI contributions tax employment income. The New Zealand Act also taxes and collects employment income substantially the same way. Class 1 employer NI contributions and Classes 1A and 1B NI contributions do not tax income (of the employer). Class 2 NI contributions are a flat fee and not a tax on income/profits. They are payable regardless of income/profits. Class 3 NI contributions are voluntary and paid at a flat rate unrelated to income. Class 4 NI contributions tax net profits of the self-employed. The “income” that is taxed is the type of income that is taxed under the Act. 38 Calculated as a proportion of income.  The rate of the tax is not important.  Whether the tax is payable at a fixed rate or at graduated rates is not important.  This condition might still be satisfied even if the tax is not payable until a minimum income threshold is reached, or if the applicable income is capped at a certain threshold. Class 1 employee NI contributions are calculated as a proportion of income. Class 1 employer NI contributions are calculated on the basis of the employee’s income and not the employer’s. This means Class 1 employer contributions are not calculated as a proportion of income of the employer. Classes 1A and 1B NI contributions are also not calculated as a proportion of income. They are paid by the employer. Class 2 NI contributions are not calculated as a proportion of income. Class 2 NI contributions are calculated at a flat rate of £2.65 per week. Class 3 NI contributions are voluntary and usually made because the person is not earning any income. They are imposed at a flat rate and therefore not calculated as a proportion of income. Class 4 NI contributions are calculated as a proportion of the self-employed person’s profits. Imposed on taxable or net income.  A taxing formula designed to produce a reasonable approximation of actual net/taxable income may be acceptable.  Where a tax is imposed as a collection mechanism for income tax and is of substantially the same nature as provisional tax, PAYE, RWT or NRWT, then the requirement that the tax be imposed on taxable or net income does not need to be satisfied. Class 1 employee NI contributions are imposed on gross income and deducted from employees’ wages by the employer. In this way, they could be characterised as a collection mechanism for the NI contributions of the same nature as New Zealand PAYE and so would satisfy this requirement. Class 1 employer NI contributions and Classes 1A and 1B are not imposed on the employer’s income. Class 2 NI contributions are imposed as a flat fee. They are payable regardless of profits or losses. Class 3 NI contributions are a voluntary payment paid at a flat rate unrelated to income. Class 4 NI contributions are calculated on net profits. Net profit is broadly the same as “taxable income”. Therefore, Class 4 NI contributions would satisfy this requirement. N f N s t w a Conclus M223. co co in s a PA th Al224. w N I ex no Ca225. co (t t h di o f th th in Not a pena Not a servic fee. Not a paym scheme wh to the bene who contrib associated w ion on NI elanie is no ontributions ontributions come tax i ame nature AYE system hat is of sub ll NI contrib here the en I contributi xample, the ot satisfy th ase F11 is t ontributions his was the he time). T scharge th f the same hat it would he nature o come tax. alty. ce charge o ment into a ere the en t efit is limite bute (or per with contrib contributi ot entitled t s do not sa s are not a mposed un e as PAYE. m, they are bstantially t butions hav ntitlement t ions are co e state pen he test in s the only Ne s are subst e phrase us The Taxatio e burden o nature as N d not be pos f NI contrib (Although or licence fund or titlement d to those rsons butors) ions to a foreign tisfy the te tax of subs nder s BB 1 While they not a colle the same n ve the char to the bene nnected wi sion. Con s YA 2(5). ew Zealand antially of t sed in s 293 n Review A of proof to s New Zealan ssible to dis butions see he acknow 39 NI contrib NI contrib licence fe Class 1 e Classes 2 effectivel where th e limited to deemed c do not co who does responsib contribut linked vi a account t Class 4 N contribut also be c scheme w is limited differenc e contribut not pers o conseque n tax credit est in s YA 2 stantially th . They are y are collect ction mech nature as in acteristics efit is limite th an entitl sequently, d authority the same n 3 of the Inc Authority he show that N nd income t scharge the emed to be wledged tha butions are butions are ee. mployee N 2 and 3 NI c y payment e entitleme o those who contribution ontribute. F s not work bilities is en ions. The b a a person’s to contribut NI contribut ions (Class lassed as p where the e to those w e with thes ions is that onally stand ence of pay t, as United 2(5). Unite he same na e also not a ted in much hanism for a ncome tax i of a payme ed to those lement to a United King to consider nature as N come Tax A eld that the NI contribut tax. Howe e burden of far narrow at the point e not a pena e not a serv I contribut contribution s into a fun ent to the b o contribute ns for certa For exampl because of ntitled to de benefit of t s NI contrib tions made tions and em ses 1, 1A an payments in entitlement who contrib e classes o t the contri d to benefit yment. d Kingdom N ed Kingdom ature as Ne tax of sub h the same a separate imposed un ent into a s who contr a specific be gdom NI co r whether N ew Zealand Act 1976, a e taxpayer tions were ver, Judge f proof in a er than th e t was not a alty. vice charge ions and ns are nd or schem benefit is e. There a ain people w le, a spouse f parental eemed the paymen butions . mployer nd 1B) can nto a fund o t to the ben ute. The o of NI butor does t as a NI m NI ew Zealand stantially t e way via th foreign tax nder s BB 1 cheme or f ibute. Mos enefit – for ontributions NI d income ta pplicable a had failed t substantial Barber sta ny event a e nature of rgued befo or me re who e nt is or nefit only he he x 1. fund st r s do ax t to lly ted s re 40 him in any detail.) The findings in this case are consistent with the view taken in this Interpretation Statement. References Related rulings/statements Br Pub 09/02: “Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) – Fringe benefit tax liability”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 21, No 4 (June 2009):2 Subject references Foreign tax Foreign tax credit Income tax Solomon Islands Income Tax United Kingdom National Insurance Contributions United States Federal Insurance Contributions Legislative references Income Tax Act 2007, ss BB 1, LJ 1-LJ 5, YA 1, YA 2(5), sch 27 Tax Administration Act 1994, s 149A(2) Art 2(1) of the Double Taxation Relief (United Kingdom) Order 1984 Double Taxation Relief (United States of America) Order 1983 Case references Air Caledonie International v Commonwealth of Australia (1988) 165 CLR 462 (HCA) Air New Zealand Ltd v Wellington International Airport Ltd \[2009\] NZCA 259, \[2009\] 3 NZLR 713 Australian Tape Manufacturers Association v Commonwealth of Australia (1993) 176 CLR 480 (HCA) Carter Holt Harvey Ltd v North Shore City Council \[2006\] 2 NZLR 787 (HC) Case F11 (1983) 6 NZTC 59,613 Case R68 84 ATC 482 Case S52 85 ATC 388 Case U52 87 ATC 347 Case 20 (1957) 7 CTBR (NS) 91 Case 37 (1967) 3 NZTBR 442 Case 112 (1958) 7 CTBR (NS) 733 de Romero v Read (1932) 48 CLR 649 (HCA) Eurig Estate (Re) \[1998\] 2 SCR 565 FCT v Clyne (1958) 100 CLR 246 (HCA) Flemming v Nestor 363 US 603 (1960) (SC) Haliburton & Ors v Broadcasting Commission (CA 14-99, 15 July 1999) In Re Paterson (Deceased), Rennick v Guardian Trust and Executors Co of NZ Ltd \[1944\] NZLR 104 (CA) In Re Reckitt; Reckitt v Reckitt \[1932\] 2 Ch 144 (CA) In re Richards (Deceased), Richards v Richards \[1935\] NZLR 909 (SC) Kempe v The Queen \[2001\] 1 CTC 2060 (TCC) Lawson v Interior Tree Fruit and Vegetable Committee of Direction & The Attorney General of Canada \[1931\] SCR 357 Leake v C of T (1934) 36 WALR 66 (WASC) Lower Mainland Dairy Products Sales Adjustment Committee v Crystal Dairy Limited \[1933\] AC 168 (PC) MacCormick v FCT (1984) 158 CLR 622 (HCA) Matthews v Chicory Marketing Board (VIC) (1938) 60 CLR 263 (HCA) Morris Leventhal & Ors v David Jones Ltd (1930) AC 259 (PC) Nadeau v The Queen 2004 TCC 433, 2007 DTC 1670 National Distribution Union Inc v General Distributors Ltd \[2007\] ERNZ 120 (EmpC) R v Barger (1908) 6 CLR 41 (HCA) Re Hirst, Public Trustee v Hirst \[1941\] 3 All ER 466 (Ch) Roy Morgan Research Pty Ltd v FCT & Anor \[2011\] HCA 35, \[2011\] ATC ¶20,282 Warnock v Director-General of Social Welfare \[2004\] NZAR 274 (HC) Westbank First Nation v British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority \[1999\] 3 SCR 134 Yates v Her Majesty the Queen 2001 DTC 761 (TCC) Yates (HMIT) v GCA International (formerly Gaffney Cline & Associates Ltd) \[1991\] BTC 107 (Ch) Other references Concise Oxford English Dictionary (12th ed, Oxford University Press, New York, 2011) 41 Appendix – Legislation Income Tax Act 2007 1. Section BB 1 provides: BB 1 Imposition of income tax Income tax is imposed on taxable income, at the rate or rates of tax fixed by an annual taxing Act, and is payable to the Crown under this Act and the Tax Administration Act 1994. 1. Sections LJ 1-LJ 5 provide: LJ 1 What this subpart does When tax credits allowed (1) This subpart provides the rules for dividing assessable income from foreign-sourced amounts into segments and allows a tax credit for foreign income tax paid in relation to a segment of that income. Limited application of rules (2) The rules in this subpart apply only when— (a) a person resident in New Zealand derives assessable income that is sourced from outside New Zealand; and (b) foreign income tax is not paid in a country or territory listed in schedule 27 (Countries and types of income with unrecognised tax) to the extent to which the foreign income tax is paid on the types of income listed in the schedule. When treated as assessable income (Repealed) (3) Repealed. Source of dividends (4) If a company is not resident in New Zealand, and for the purposes of a law of another territory in relation to which a double tax agreement has been made is resident in that territory, and the law imposes foreign tax, a dividend paid by the company is treated as being derived from a source in that other territory for the purposes of the double tax agreement. Double tax agreements (5) This subpart and sections BH 1 (Double tax agreements) and CD 19(1) (Foreign tax credits and refunds linked to dividends) and section 88 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 as far as they are applicable, and modified as necessary, apply for the purposes of section LJ 2, as if that section were a double tax agreement. Relationship with section YD 5 (6) Section YD 5 (Apportionment of income derived partly in New Zealand) applies to determine how an amount is apportioned to sources outside New Zealand. LJ 2 Tax credits for foreign income tax Amount of credit (1) A person described in section LJ 1(2)(a) has a tax credit for a tax year for an amount of foreign income tax paid on a segment of foreign-sourced income, determined as if the segment were the net income of the person for the tax year. The amount of the New Zealand tax payable is calculated under section LJ 5. Limitation on amount of credit (2) The amount of the person's credit in subsection (1) must not be more than the amount of New Zealand tax payable by the person in relation to the segment calculated under section LJ 5(2), modified as necessary under section LJ 5(4). Amount adjusted (3) The amount of the person’s credit in subsection (1) may be reduced or increased if either section LJ 6 or LJ 7 applies. When person both resident in New Zealand and another country 42 (4) A person described in section LJ 1(2)(a) who has, because they are a citizen or resident of, or are domiciled in, a foreign country, paid foreign income tax on their assessable income, has a credit under subsection (1). However, the amount of the credit is limited to the amount of foreign income tax that would have been paid in the foreign country if the person were treated as not a citizen or resident of, or domiciled in, that foreign country. Multi-rate PIEs and their investors (5) For a multi-rate PIE and an investor in a multi-rate PIE, the amount of a tax credit is limited to the extent allowed under subpart HM (Portfolio investment entities). When subsection (7) applies (6) Subsection (7) applies to a person who derives an amount from an attributing interest in a FIF when the amount is treated as not being income under section EX 59(2) (Codes: comparative value method, deemed rate of return method, fair dividend rate method, and cost method). Tax credit (7) The person has a tax credit under this subpart for foreign income tax paid on or withheld in relation to the amount. The calculation of the maximum amount of the tax credit is made under section LJ 5(2), modified so that the item segment in the formula is the amount of FIF income from the attributing interest that the person derives in the period referred to in section EX 59(2). LJ 3 Meaning of foreign income tax For the purposes of this Part, foreign income tax means an amount of income tax of a foreign country. LJ 4 Meaning of segment of foreign-sourced income For the purposes of this Part, a person has a segment of foreign-sourced income equal to an amount of assessable income derived from 1 foreign country that comes from 1 source or is of 1 nature. LJ 5 Calculation of New Zealand tax What this section does (1) This section provides the rules that a person must use to calculate the amount of New Zealand tax for an income year in relation to each segment of foreign-sourced income of the person that is allocated to the income year. Calculation for single segment (2) If the person has a notional income tax liability of more than zero, the amount of New Zealand tax for the income year relating to the allocated segment is calculated using the following formula, the result of which cannot be less than zero: . (segment – person’s deductions) person’s net income Definition of items in formula (3) In the formula in subsection (2),— (a) segment is the amount of the segment of foreign-sourced income for the income year: (b) person's deductions is the amount of the person's deduction for the tax year corresponding to the income year that is attributable to the segment of foreign-sourced income: (c) person's net income is the person's net income for the tax year corresponding to the income year under section BD 4(1) to (3) (Net income and net loss): (d) notional liability is the person's notional income tax liability for the income year under subsection (5). When subsection (4B) applies (4) Subsection (4B) applies for the income year when the total amount of New Zealand tax for all segments of foreign-sourced income of the person calculated under subsection (2) is more than the notional income tax liability. Modification to results of formula for single segment x notional liability 43 (4B) Each amount of New Zealand tax calculated under subsection (2) in relation to each segment of foreign-sourced income is adjusted by multiplying the amount by the following ratio: Person’s notional income tax liability NZ tax Definition of item in formula (4C) In the formula in subsection (4B), NZ tax is the amount given by adding together the result of the calculation under subsection (2), for each segment of assessable income from all sources, including assessable income sourced in New Zealand. Person’s notional income tax liability (5) For the purposes of this section, a person’s notional income tax liability for a tax year is calculated using the formula— (person’s net income − losses) × tax rate. Definition of items in formula (6) In the formula in subsection (5),— (a) person’s net income is the person’s net income for the tax year: (b) losses— (i) is the amount of the loss balance carried forward to the tax year that the person must subtract from their net income under section IA 4(1)(a) (Using loss balances carried forward to tax year): (ii) must be no more than the amount of the person's net income: (c) tax rate is the basic rate of income tax set out in schedule 1, part A (Basic tax rates: income tax, ESCT, RSCT, RWT, and attributed fringe benefits). 2. Section YA 1 defines “income tax”, “tax” and “taxable income” to mean: income tax means income tax imposed under section BB 1 (Imposition of income tax) except to the extent to which it has a different meaning under section YA 2 (Meaning of income tax varied) tax means income tax, but in the provisions in which the term “income tax” has an extended or limited meaning, “tax” has a corresponding meaning taxable income means taxable income for a tax year calculated under section BC 5 (Taxable income) 3. Section YA 2 provides: YA 2 Meaning of income tax varied DTA and time bar provisions: ancillary tax (1) The term income tax includes ancillary tax in— (a) section BB 3(2) (Overriding effect of certain matters): (b) section BH 1 (Double tax agreements): (c) sections 107A to 108B of the Tax Administration Act 1994. DTA provisions: tax recovery agreements (2) The term income tax includes a tax that is prescribed in a tax recovery agreement made under Part 10A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 in— (a) section BB 3(2): (b) section BH 1. General tax avoidance provisions: ancillary tax (3) The term income tax includes ancillary tax, but not excluded ancillary tax, in— (a) section BB 3(1): (b) sections BG 1 (Tax avoidance) and GA 1 (Commissioner’s power to adjust): (c) the definition of tax avoidance. 44 Modified application of section GA 1 (4) When section GA 1 is applied in the case of an ancillary tax,— (a) the words “taxable income” in section GA 1(2) are treated as replaced by the words “liability to the ancillary tax”; and (b) the following paragraph is treated as added to section GA 1(5): “(e) an amount subject to the ancillary tax”. Tax of other countries (5) The term income tax, when specifically used in relation to tax of another country, whether imposed by a central, state, or local government,— (a) means a tax of substantially the same nature as income tax imposed under section BB 1 (Imposition of income tax); and (b) includes a tax, imposed as a collection mechanism for the foreign tax, that is of substantially the same nature as provisional tax, pay-as-you-earn (PAYE), resident withholding tax (RWT), or non-resident withholding tax (NRWT).  UFTC rules (Repealed) (6) (Repealed) FDP, imputation, and BETA rules (7) The term income tax, in relation to tax that has been paid by a person, includes provisional tax in— (a) the FDP rules: (b) the imputation rules: (c) subpart OE (Branch equivalent tax accounts (BETA)).