IN CONFIDENCE INTERPRETATION STATEMENT: IS 18/06 INCOME TAX – TREATMENT OF COSTS OF RESOURCE CONSENTS All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 unless otherwise stated. Contents Overview ............................................................................................................................... 2 Summary ............................................................................................................................... 3 Summary – Part One .................................................................................................... 3 Summary – Part Two.................................................................................................... 4 Different types of resource consents .......................................................................................... 8 The meaning of “cost”.............................................................................................................. 9 Cost includes that which must be given in order to acquire something ................................ 10 Cost includes expenditure incurred having the asset installed and ready to use .................... 11 Subsequent expenditure added to the cost under ss EE 19 and EE 37 ................................. 12 Some expenditure will not be a cost of the asset ............................................................. 13 “Cost” of a resource consent ........................................................................................ 14 Summary .................................................................................................................. 18 Trustpower v CIR ................................................................................................................... 19 Resource consent expenditure is usually on capital account ............................................... 19 Limited scope for deductible feasibility expenditure in the context of applying for resource consent ................................................................................................................................ 21 Schedule 14 consents are depreciable intangible property ................................................. 21 Expenditure on resource consents can be a cost of other property...................................... 22 Flowchart 1: Environmental consents – ss 12–15 of the RMA excluding reclamation consents – treatment of expenditure ........................................................................................................................... 24 Flowchart 2: Land consents – ss 9 and 11 of the RMA plus reclamation consents – treatment of expenditure ........................................................................................................................................... 25 Feasibility expenditure that is deductible under IS 17/01 ............................................................. 26 Expenditure on revenue account............................................................................................... 26 Deductibility under a specific provision ...................................................................................... 28 Where a resource consent is not obtained or is surrendered or lapses ................................. 28 Pollution control expenditure ........................................................................................ 30 Environmental consents .......................................................................................................... 32 Environmental consents are treated as separate assets for depreciation .............................. 36 Conclusion for environmental consents .......................................................................... 37 Land consents ....................................................................................................................... 37 Land consents depreciable as a right to use land ............................................................. 37 Land consent expenditure capitalised into other depreciable property ................................. 41 Further examples ................................................................................................................... 45 IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 2 IN CONFIDENCE Overview The ability to deduct or depreciate expenditure on a resource consent depends on the type of expenditure, the type of consent and the resulting asset. Different types of expenditure can be incurred on a resource consent. This Interpretation Statement focuses on expenditure that is the “cost” of a resource consent. The Resource Management Act 1991 (RMA) places a number of restrictions on the way people can use land and resources. Resource consents granted by a consenting authority (usually the local or regional council) remove these restrictions. Various types of resource consents can be obtained under the RMA. However, for tax purposes the Act recognises two categories of resource consents, which this statement refers to as: • “environmental” consents; and • “land” consents. Environmental consents are consents granted under ss 12–15 of the RMA (excluding reclamation consents) and listed in sch 14 of the Act as items of depreciable intangible property. These consents broadly concern resources and the environment. Land consents broadly concern activities on land and are granted under ss 9 and 11 of the RMA (including reclamation consents). These are not included in sch 14. This statement discusses whether deductions for the expenditure incurred in obtaining environmental and land consents are available and on what basis. The tax treatment depends on the particular facts and not all expenditure can be deducted or otherwise depreciated. This statement addresses deductibility of expenditure on resource consents in the following order: • Expenditure that is feasibility expenditure (see \[107\]–\[111\]); • Expenditure on revenue account (see \[112\]–\[117\]); • Expenditure that is deductible under a specific provision of the Act: - s DB 19 (\[119\]–\[122\]) for expenditure incurred in unsuccessful consents; - s DB 46 (\[123\]–\[129\]) for expenditure in controlling pollution; • Expenditure that is capital in nature that may give rise to depreciation: - Environmental consents can be depreciable intangible property (see \[131\]–\[154\]); - Capital expenditure on some land consents might be depreciable in two ways. Firstly, a land consent may be depreciable as an item of depreciable intangible property. The Commissioner considers that this would be rare. Secondly, and more commonly, expenditure on some land consents may be capitalised into the cost base of another item of property and potentially depreciated (although there is no depreciation deduction for land, and buildings with an estimated useful life (EUL) of 50 years or more depreciate at 0%). See \[176\]–\[194\]. The ways expenditure on resource consents may be deductible are summarised in the flowcharts following paragraph \[105\]. Flowchart 1 is for environmental consents and Flowchart 2 covers land consents. Because the tax treatment is so fact-specific, taxpayers can use the flowcharts to identify the parts of the statement that are most relevant to their situation. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 3 IN CONFIDENCE Summary This statement considers the tax treatment of the costs of obtaining a resource consent. The ability to deduct or depreciate expenditure on a resource consent depends on the type of expenditure and the type of consent. It is necessary to understand the different types of resource consents for tax purposes and to be able to identify what expenditure is included in the cost base of the resource consent (or another asset) for depreciation purposes. These key concepts and a discussion of Trustpower Limited v CIR \[2016\] NZSC 91 are covered in Part One of this statement. The tax treatment varies depending on the circumstances and Part Two of this statement considers the specific situations in which expenditure on resource consents may be deductible or depreciable. Summary – Part One The different types of resource consent The RMA places a number of restrictions on the way people can use land and resources. Various types of resource consents can be obtained under the RMA to remove these restrictions. However, for tax purposes the Act recognises two categories of resource consents, which this statement refers to as: • “environmental” consents – that broadly concern the environment and are granted under ss 12–15 of the RMA (excluding reclamation consents) and are listed in sch 14(10); and • “land” consents – that broadly concern land and are granted under ss 9 or 11 of the RMA (or are a reclamation consent) and are not listed in sch 14(10). The different natures of the consents affect the tax treatment of the expenditure. In terms of depreciation, environmental consents are items of depreciable intangible property and the expenditure that forms the cost base can be depreciated over the fixed term of the consent. Land consents are generally of unlimited duration and will not usually be depreciable property. Expenditure on land consents can usually only be depreciated to the extent that the expenditure can be capitalised into the cost of another item of depreciable property. No depreciation deduction is available for any expenditure capitalised into the cost base of: • land; or • buildings (with an EUL of 50 years or more). Identifying “cost” for a resource consent Determining the cost base of a resource consent Working out the amount of expenditure on a resource consent that is depreciable involves identifying the “cost” in s EE 16. Relevant is s EE 16(4)(b)(ii), which says the cost is the cost to the person, excluding expenditure that can be deducted under another provision of the Act. Accordingly, the following are excluded from being a “cost” of a resource consent for depreciation purposes: • Expenditure that is revenue in nature and deductible on that basis. • Expenditure that is deductible under the principles in IS 17/01: “Income tax – deductibility of feasibility expenditure” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 3, April 2017) (referred to as IS 17/01 in this statement). IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 4 IN CONFIDENCE • Expenditure otherwise deductible under a specific provision (examples may include legal fees deductible under s DB 62 and land leasing costs deductible under s DB 18). The legislation is of limited assistance in identifying cost but a number of cases have considered the meaning of cost. The Court of Appeal adopted the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary definition, being “that which must be given in order to acquire something” (Tasman Forestry Limited v CIR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,147 and similarly Wilke v CIR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,923). The Court also considered that transactions should be viewed in their commercial reality and that “cost” has a wider meaning than payment on purchase. For the purposes of the depreciation rules, cost includes the set-up and installation costs of an asset (BP Refinery (Kwinana) Ltd v FCT 8 AITR 113). However, cost is fixed at the point the asset is ready to use. The exceptions to this are subsequent costs that can be added to the cost base of property under ss EE 18, EE 19 and EE 37. Where “cost” is unclear, courts have derived assistance from common business parlance and practice, as well as accepted accountancy practice (CIR v Atlas Copco (NZ) Ltd (1990) 12 NZTC 7,327 and BP Refinery). Relevant to resource consents are accounting standards NZ IAS 16 and NZ IAS 38. Both include the same principle that for expenditure to be part of the cost, it must be directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating. The accounting standards also suggest that something as integral to the construction of an asset as a resource consent should be capitalised into the cost of the asset for accounting purposes. The types of expenditure incurred in obtaining a resource consent will vary greatly from case to case and what is a “cost” of a resource consent will ultimately be a question of fact. The different meanings of “cost” depending on the context and the factual circumstances make it impossible to cover what the “cost” will be in each situation. This statement focuses on expenditure on resource consents and provides general principles to assist taxpayers in identifying whether expenditure forms part of the cost base of a resource consent depreciable under sch 14 or part of the cost base of other depreciable property. Trustpower v CIR Trustpower is the leading authority concerning some aspects of the tax treatment of expenditure on resource consents. The Commissioner considers that Trustpower supports the view that: • Resource consent expenditure is usually on capital account. • There is limited scope for feasibility expenditure in the context of applying for a resource consent. • Consents within sch 14 (ie, environmental consents) are depreciable intangible property. This means that capital expenditure that is a cost of the property can be depreciated over the fixed life of the consent. • Sometimes expenditure on resource consents will be part of the cost of other property, which may be depreciable property. Summary – Part Two Having discussed the concepts in Part One of the statement, Part Two considers the situations in which expenditure on resource consents may be deductible or depreciable. The tax treatment of a particular consent depends on the facts and not all expenditure will be able to be deducted or otherwise depreciated. Part Two follows the structure of the two flowcharts (one flowchart addresses environmental consents and one flowchart addresses IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 5 IN CONFIDENCE land consents) and addresses deductibility of expenditure on resource consents in the following order: • Expenditure that is deductible under the principles in IS 17/01. • Expenditure that is revenue in nature. • Expenditure that is deductible under a specific provision of the Act, in particular: - s DB 19 for expenditure incurred in unsuccessful consents; - s DB 46 for expenditure in controlling pollution. • Capital expenditure on environmental consents will be depreciable if the environmental consent is depreciable intangible property. • Capital expenditure on land consents might be depreciable in two ways. Firstly, a land consent may be depreciable as an item of depreciable intangible property. The Commissioner considers that this would be rare. Secondly, and more commonly, expenditure on some land consents may be capitalised into the cost base of another item of property and potentially depreciated (although there is no depreciation deduction for land, and buildings with an EUL of 50 years or more depreciate at 0%). The deductibility of expenditure is subject to the general permission under s DA 1(1). For resource consent expenditure to be either deductible or depreciable, a sufficient relationship or nexus must exist between the expenditure and the taxpayer’s business or income- earning activity. Whether a business or an income-earning activity is being carried on is always a question of fact and degree. For some taxpayers, resource consent expenditure will not be deductible or depreciable because it will have been incurred preliminary to, or preparatory to, the commencement of a business or income-earning activity. Deciding when a taxpayer ceases incurring expenditure that is preliminary or preparatory to the commencement of a business or an income-earning activity and commences incurring expenditure during the course or conduct of a business or an income-earning activity is often difficult to determine. The principles to apply to determine when a business or income-earning activity commences are discussed in more detail at paragraphs \[29\]–\[98\] of IS 17/01. Also, any expenditure on resource consents for private purposes will not satisfy s DA 1 (or s EE 6) as the expenditure will not be incurred in deriving assessable income (and will also be denied by the private limitation in s DA 2(2)). Feasibility expenditure deductible under the principles in IS 17/01 and Trustpower The Commissioner has previously set out her views on the deductibility of what might be labelled “feasibility expenditure” in IS 17/01: “Income tax – deductibility of feasibility expenditure”. To the extent that taxpayers have incurred such expenditure they should refer to the principles in IS 17/01 and Trustpower. The Supreme Court in Trustpower considered that expenditure associated with early stage feasibility assessments may be deductible but this does not extend to costs incurred with the intention of materially advancing the capital project in question. When it comes to applying for a particular resource consent, the expenditure will often be directed to a specific capital asset or towards making tangible progress on a specific capital asset. If that is the case, then the expenditure will not be deductible under the principles in IS 17/01 and Trustpower. Revenue expenditure Applying the principles in Trustpower, the Commissioner considers that resource consents will generally be capital in nature because resource consents will usually relate to the business structure and provide an enduring advantage. Although usually capital in nature, IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 6 IN CONFIDENCE the Supreme Court in Trustpower recognised that in some cases expenditure associated with resource consents could be revenue in nature. The example provided by the Supreme Court was where the resource consent forms part of the stock-in-trade of a land- developer/speculator. In this case the costs of obtaining the consent are on revenue account and deductible under s DA 1 and s DB 23 (under s DB 23 special timing provisions apply). Deductions under specific provisions of the Act Deductions are also available under certain specific provisions in the Act, for instance s DB 62 allows a deduction for legal expenses under $10,000. Also, some types of expenditure, such as petroleum mining expenditure and mineral mining expenditure, have their own regimes. This statement focuses specifically on ss DB 19 and DB 46 as they are the most relevant to resource consents. Section DB 19 allows a deduction (for what would otherwise be “black hole” expenditure) where money is spent on a consent but the consent is never granted or used. However, a deduction is only allowed to the extent that the expenditure would have been deductible or depreciable had the consent been granted or used. If the expenditure was a cost of an environmental consent it is likely to be deductible under s DB 19. This is because the expenditure would have been depreciable as the cost of an item of depreciable intangible property. For expenditure on a land consent, it depends on the depreciation outcome. To be deductible under s DB 19, the expenditure must be able to be capitalised to an item of depreciable property and be depreciable. Section DB 46 provides a deduction for expenditure incurred in pollution control. To qualify under s DB 46, the expenditure must be listed in parts A and B of sch 19 and not otherwise deductible under another provision in the Act. Practically, this leaves limited scope for a deduction for resource consent expenditure, but an example of where this may arise is where a land consent is obtained for earthworks to remove contaminated soil. Environmental consents depreciable as depreciable intangible property If the expenditure is not deductible under another provision it may be able to be depreciated as a cost of depreciable property. Section EE 1 sets out when a person has an amount of depreciation loss and requires that the person owns the depreciable property and it is used or available for use by the person. Assuming that is the case, s EE 6 defines depreciable property as property that might reasonably be expected to decline in value while available for use in deriving assessable income. The nexus requirement is discussed above in the context of s DA 1, but it is important to note that there is no deduction where the resource consent is obtained for private purposes or prior to the commencement of the business or income-earning activity. Section EE 6(3) describes when intangible property (such as resource consents) will be depreciable property. The crucial requirement is that the property comes within the definition of depreciable intangible property in s EE 62. Section EE 62 restricts depreciable intangible property to the items listed in sch 14. Environmental consents are depreciable intangible property as they are listed in sch 14(10). But for their inclusion in sch 14, environmental consents might be considered inseparable from the asset to which they relate. However, the impact of sch 14 is that environmental consents are treated as separate assets for depreciation purposes and their costs cannot be capitalised into another asset. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 7 IN CONFIDENCE Assuming an environmental consent meets the requirements of ss EE 1 and EE 6, it is an item of depreciable intangible property and the cost can be depreciated over its life using the straight-line method (s EE 12(2)(b)(ii)). For environmental consents, this means expenditure on the application, administrative fees under s 36 of the RMA, legal fees (not deductible under s DB 62) in relation to the consent, hearing costs and expenditure on preparing and compiling the assessment of environmental effects are likely to all be part of the cost of the resource consent and depreciable over its fixed life. Whether other expenditure is depreciable as a cost of the consent is a question of fact. For instance, engineering and civil design reports may have been commissioned solely to address a crucial issue relevant to the resource application, in which case the expenditure will be directly attributable to the resource consent. In other circumstances such reports might be a cost directly attributable to the construction of the resulting tangible asset. Where the expenditure is directly attributable to more than one item of property, the expenditure should form part of the cost base of the items on a basis that is appropriate in the circumstances. Land consent expenditure capitalised into other depreciable property Land consents (unlike environmental consents) are not listed as items of depreciable intangible property under sch 14. Consequently, they are neither depreciable intangible property under s EE 62 nor depreciable property under s EE 6(3). An exception exists for land consents that are a right to use land under sch 14(5). However, the Commissioner considers these will only arise in exceptional circumstances because the consent will have to have a finite useful life (the statutory default in s 123 of the RMA is they have an infinite life) and be a right to use land within sch 14. To be a right to use land under sch 14 it must be a right to use exercised independently from the rights of ownership (ANZCO Foods Ltd v CIR \[2016\] NZHC 1015, (2016) 27 NZTC 22-049, Trustees in the CB Simkin Trust and the Trustees in the NC Simkin Trust v CIR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,001, Trustees of the CB Simkin Trust and the Trustees in the NC Simkin Trust v CIR (2003) 21 NZTC 18,117). Where a land consent is not a right to use land under sch 14(5), expenditure on a land consent can only be depreciated to the extent that it can be capitalised to the cost base of another item of depreciable property. When changes were made to include environmental consents in sch 14, the intention was that, for depreciation purposes, the cost of land consents that pertain to the erection of a structure should be included in the cost of the structure. A similar intention was also evident in subsequent changes to (what is now) s DB 19. The section was specifically amended to more clearly allow deductions for both resource consents that were depreciable in their own right (ie, environmental consents) and as part of other depreciable property. From s DB 19 it can be inferred that Parliament’s intention is to allow resource consent expenditure to be capitalised into the cost of another item of depreciable property. To the extent that expenditure is a cost of another item of depreciable property, it can be depreciated. Where the expenditure is directly attributable to more than one item of property, the expenditure should form part of the cost base of the items on a basis that is appropriate in the circumstances. There will be no deduction when the land consent is capitalised into the cost of land and a 0% depreciation deduction for buildings with an EUL of 50 years or more. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 8 IN CONFIDENCE Part One – Key concepts The ability to deduct or depreciate expenditure on a resource consent depends on the type of consent. It is necessary to understand the different types of resource consents for tax purposes. Some resource consents are depreciable intangible property and depreciable as a stand-alone asset. Some resource consents may be capitalised into the cost of another asset and depreciated as part of that asset. Once the type of resource consent is identified, it is then necessary to identify what expenditure is included in the cost base of the resource consent (or another asset) for depreciation purposes. These key concepts as they relate to deductibility of expenditure on resource consents must be understood against the background of the Supreme Court decision in Trustpower Limited v CIR \[2016\] NZSC 91. Part One of this statement addresses: • different types of resource consents; • the meaning of “cost”; and • Trustpower v CIR. Different types of resource consents The different types of consents are identified in s 87 of the RMA, but for tax purposes resource consents can be divided into two groups depending on whether they are items of depreciable intangible property listed in sch 14. The first group includes those resource consents not in sch 14. Consents issued under ss 9 and 11 of the RMA, along with reclamation consents, all broadly concern land. They are referred to as “land consents”. These consents are characterised as follows: • Section 9 of the RMA provides for a restriction on the use of land that contravenes national environmental standards, a regional rule or a district rule. • Section 11 of the RMA provides a restriction on subdivisions. Under s 218 of the RMA the definition of subdivision is wider than the common meaning of dividing a section of land into separate titles. For instance, the definition includes the grant of certain leases. • Reclamation consents are a subset of ss 12–14 of the RMA consents. These are specifically excluded from being depreciable intangible property and so are grouped with ss 9 and 11 of the RMA consents. Reclamation consents concern permanent changes to land and are more like land consents than ss 12–15 of the RMA consents. The second group includes those resource consents in sch 14. Resource consents issued under ss 12–15 of the RMA broadly concern resources and the environment and are referred to as “environmental consents”: • Section 12 restricts the use of coastal marine areas. • Section 13 restricts certain uses of beds of lakes or rivers. • Section 14 provides restrictions relating to water. • Sections 15, 15A, and 15B restrict the discharge of contaminants; this includes various scenarios involving discharges, dumping and incineration. The RMA treats these two types of consents differently: • Land consents are of unlimited duration unless specified otherwise (s 123), are usually attached to the relevant land and can be enjoyed by the owners and occupiers of the land (s 134). IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 9 IN CONFIDENCE • Environmental consents have a 5–35-year life span (s 123) and can be transferred (ss 135–137). The default position is land consents are granted for an unlimited duration but the consent can specify a 5–35-year period. Land consents may be for a limited duration where they are issued for short-term activities such as concert performances (for excessive noise levels), carnivals on the beach (for exclusive occupation of space) and flea markets in car parks (where they involve the construction of structures that require resource consent). Time-limited consents may also be required for temporary events, such as the America’s Cup or British and Irish Lions rugby events. Despite having a finite or infinite life, consents can lapse (if they are unused), be cancelled or surrendered (ss 125, 126, and 138 of the RMA). The consent can also be changed. Section 127 of the RMA allows the consent holder to apply to change or cancel conditions attaching to a consent. The RMA also sets out the process for obtaining resource consents. The exact process and the cost will vary greatly depending on the circumstances. If the consent is “notified”, the process can involve advertising, seeking submissions, pre-hearing meetings, a formal hearing, a formal decision and even mediation. Where an application is not notified or subject to limited notification, the process is less arduous. In addition, the RMA allows a right of appeal so there may be litigation and further appeals after an initial decision. The meaning of “cost” For the purposes of determining the amount that is depreciable, it is necessary to determine the cost of the resource consent. There is very little assistance in the legislation as to what constitutes “cost”. The term “cost” is used repeatedly in the Act but is not defined for depreciation purposes. The current depreciation regime was based on the Valabh Committee’s recommendations. The summary to Chapter 1 of the Final Report of the Consultative Committee on the Taxation of Income from Capital (February 1991) concluded that it was not possible to apply a general costing rule or definition to the entire Act because cost concepts are only capable of definition in a particular context. Case law also recognises “cost” is capable of variable meanings and of longer or narrower construction according to the subject matter and circumstances of the particular case (Wilke v CIR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,923 citing PM Scientific Fur Cleaners Ltd v Home Insurance Co (1970) 12 DLR (3d) 177, 184). The Commissioner has published several items on the meaning of “cost” in particular circumstances, including: • IS 10/06: “Deductibility of business relocation costs” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 8 (September 2010)); • QB 15/13: “Income tax – whether the cost of acquiring an option to acquire revenue account land is deductible” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1 (February 2016)); • BR Pub 09/08: “Cost price of the vehicle” – meaning of the term for fringe benefit tax purposes” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 1 (February 2010)); and • IS 17/05: “Income tax – treatment of New Zealand patents” (Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 6 (July 2017)). When dealing with resource consents, the Commissioner considers the following principles are key: IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 10 IN CONFIDENCE • Cost includes that which must be given in order to acquire something. A transaction should be viewed in its commercial reality and it is possible to look at business practice and accepted accounting standards. • Cost includes expenses incurred in having an asset installed and ready to use but cost is fixed once the asset is capable of being used. • Cost includes subsequent expenditure after this point only to the extent that it is allowed under the Act; see ss EE 19 and EE 37. • Cost does not include all expenditure associated with the asset where it does not satisfy one of the above principles. Cost includes that which must be given in order to acquire something The definition of cost as “that which must be given in order to acquire something” comes from case law, notably Tasman Forestry Limited v CIR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,147 (CA). In Tasman Forestry the taxpayer was allowed a deduction for the cost of certain forestry assets against profits or gains derived from the sale of timber. The Court of Appeal was concerned with determining the cost of the forestry assets acquired. The Court of Appeal adopted the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary definition, being “that which must be given in order to acquire something”. The Court also stated that “cost” has a wider meaning than payment on purchase, and the fact that determination of cost may require a valuation exercise does not mean there is no cost. Further, the Court stated that the taxpayer’s submission that cost is to be equated with economic sacrifice was “perhaps too wide in an absolute sense”. The Court of Appeal also noted at 15,157: \[37\] We consider the correct course is not to dissect the transactions by which the forests were acquired, but to view them in their commercial reality. As the Judge found, the shares were purchased as the means for, and with the intention of, acquiring the forests. For practical purposes the cost to Tasman in acquiring the forests was the amount paid for the company shares which gave access to the forest assets. The appropriate proportion of that cost is to be treated as the cost of the timber. \[Emphasis added\] In CIR v Atlas Copco (NZ) Ltd (1990) 12 NZTC 7,327 the High Court also considered the realities of the situation when determining what was meant by cost. The issue in that case was the value of fringe benefits provided by the taxpayer to its employees. The legislation provided that the value of the benefits was to be determined based on the “cost” of the benefits to the taxpayer. The taxpayer argued that this cost did not include the GST component of the relevant expenditure, because ultimately the taxpayer was able to recover that component by claiming input tax deductions. The Commissioner argued that the taxpayer being able to claim back the GST component did not change the fact that the GST component was part of the cost incurred. The High Court found for the taxpayer and considered that the approach suggested by the Commissioner was unduly restrictive and would not give effect to the realities of the situation (at \[738\]). The Court also had regard to the evidence given by two accountants as to the commonly held commercial understanding of the word “cost”. The Court observed that where the meaning of words in a statutory context is unclear or ambiguous, the Court may derive some assistance from common business parlance and practice, as well as international standards. The relevant accounting standards in New Zealand are NZ IAS 16 (where the expenditure is capitalised into a tangible item of depreciable property) and NZ IAS 38 (where the expenditure is a cost of an item of depreciable intangible property). When determining IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 11 IN CONFIDENCE whether an asset that incorporates both intangible and tangible elements should be dealt with under NZ IAS 16 or NZ IAS 38, the accounting standards say taxpayers should use judgement to assess which element is “more significant”. Clause 10 of NZ IAS 16 includes in cost the costs initially incurred to construct an item. Clauses 16 to 22A discuss the elements of cost and particularly relevant are: 16. The cost of an item of property, plant and equipment comprises: (a) its purchase price, including import duties and non-refundable purchase taxes, after deducting trade discounts and rebates. (b) any costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management. (c) the initial estimate of the costs of dismantling and removing the item and restoring the site on which it is located, the obligation for which an entity incurs either when the item is acquired or as a consequence of having used the item during a particular period for purposes other than to produce inventories during that period. 17. Examples of directly attributable costs are: (a) costs of employee benefits (as defined in NZ IAS 19 Employee Benefits) arising directly from the construction or acquisition of the item of property, plant and equipment; (b) costs of site preparation; (c) initial delivery and handling costs; (d) installation and assembly costs; (e) costs of testing whether the asset is functioning properly, after deducting the net proceeds from selling any items produced while bringing the asset to that location and condition (such as samples produced when testing equipment); and (f) professional fees. \[Emphasis added\] Reading clauses 16 and 17 of NZ IAS 16 together suggests that something as integral to the construction of an asset as a resource consent should be capitalised into the cost of the asset for accounting purposes. NZ IAS 38 is broadly similar and includes the same principle that cost must be directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating. For instance, clause 34 (cost of separately acquired intangible assets) includes “any directly attributable cost of preparing the asset for its intended use” and clause 64 (cost of an internally generated intangible asset) includes “all directly attributable costs necessary to create, produce, and prepare the asset to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.” Accordingly, “cost” is that which must be given in order to acquire the asset. However, a transaction must be viewed in its commercial reality, and assistance may be derived from common business practice or accepted accounting practice. Cost includes expenditure incurred having the asset installed and ready to use In the Australian case BP Refinery (Kwinana) Ltd v FCT 8 AITR 113, Kitto J made the following comments in the context of a discussion of what items were to be included in the cost of an asset for depreciation purposes: ...in my opinion, the word “cost” in section 56(1)(b) bears the meaning which it has in the business life of the community. It seems to me impossible to suppose that the depreciation provisions of the Act are intended to apply only to those simple cases in which the ascertainment of cost is a purely arithmetical process. I interpret it as embracing the whole sum which, according to accepted accountancy practice as applied to the circumstances of the case, ought to be considered as having been laid out by the taxpayer in order to acquire the subject-matter as plant, that is to say installed and ready for his use as plant for the purpose of producing assessable income. (p. 117) IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 12 IN CONFIDENCE \[Emphasis added\] Kitto J considered that cost has the meaning it has in the business life of the community and that accepted accountancy practice can be used to interpret “cost”. This meant the cost included having the property installed and ready for use for the purpose of producing assessable income. Similarly, in IRC v Barclay, Curle & Co Ltd \[1969\] 1 All ER 732, the House of Lords considered that expenditure that had to be incurred before a capital item could be made available for use was part of the cost of the item and was, therefore, capital expenditure. The issue was whether the cost of excavation, which was necessary to enable a dock at a shipping yard to be built, was capital expenditure. Lord Reid commented: So the question is whether, if the dock is plant, the cost of making room for it is expenditure on the provision of the plant for the purposes of the trade of the dock owner. In my view this can include more than the plant itself because plant cannot be said to have been provided for the purposes of trade until it is installed: until then it is of no use for the purposes of trade. This plant, the dock, could not even be made until the necessary excavating had been done. All the commissioners say in refusing this part of the claim is that this expenditure was too remote from the provision of the dry dock. There, I think, they misdirected themselves. If the cost of the provision of plant can include more than the cost of the plant itself, I do not see how expenditure which must be incurred before the plant can be provided, can be too remote. (p. 741) \[Emphasis added\] “Cost” for depreciation is restricted to the initial cost of an item The scheme of the Act, BP Refinery and Barclay Curle indicate that cost is fixed at the point the property is set up and ready to use. At this point the cost is fixed (with some exceptions discussed below) and IS 10/06: “Deductibility of business relocation costs”, provides the Commissioner’s view on this at \[131\]: In the Commissioner’s view the term “cost” as it is used in the depreciation rules is effectively restricted to the initial cost of an item of depreciable property. Case law and commercial practice dictate that included in the initial cost are set-up and installation costs. However, the scheme of the depreciation rules seems to prevent any costs incurred subsequent to the initial setting up of the item from coming within the “cost” of that item unless they qualify under sections EE 18 and EE 19 (variations to cost) or section EE 37 (improvements). If subsequent costs can be implicitly added to the cost of an item of depreciable property it becomes difficult to understand the need for sections EE 19 and EE 37 in the depreciation rules. Subsequent expenditure added to the cost under ss EE 19 and EE 37 Although cost is fixed, it is possible to add additional costs under ss EE 19 or EE 37. Section EE 19 applies to fixed life intangible property. Additional costs can be added to depreciable tangible property if there is an improvement under s EE 37. For intangible property, it will generally be appropriate to use the specific provision of s EE 19 rather than the more general provision of s EE 37. Section EE 19 allows additional costs incurred to be added to the cost of fixed life intangible property for the purposes of the formula in s EE 16: EE 19 Cost: fixed life intangible property When this section applies (1) This section applies when— (a) a person owns an item of fixed life intangible property; and (b) the person incurs additional costs in an income year for the item; and IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 13 IN CONFIDENCE (c) the person is denied a deduction for the additional costs other than a deduction for an amount of depreciation loss. ... Additional costs for fixed life intangible property (2) For the purposes of the formula in section EE 16, the item’s cost at the start of the income year is treated as being the total of— (a) the item’s adjusted tax value at the start of the income year; and (b) the additional costs the person incurs. While “additional costs” are not defined, there is guidance in some of the supporting materials. Section EE 19 was originally added in 1997 as ss EG 2(3) and EG 8 to the Income Tax Act 1994 as part of the review of the depreciation rules. The focus in the Commentary to the Taxation (Remedial Provisions) Bill 1997 (and echoed in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 9, No 12 (November 1997)) is renewal fees and the example used is where an option to renew is exercised and money is paid to extend the life of the intangible property. The Commentary notes the specific issue the amendment is addressing: When a taxpayer incurs additional capital costs during the life of a FLIP, the current mechanism results in part of those costs being deductible only on disposal of the asset. This will generally occur if a taxpayer has a right or contract that may be renewed conditional on the payment of pre- determined fees. The legal life of property includes any such period of renewal. Despite this, s EE 19 is drafted widely and the Concise Oxford English Dictionary (12th Edition, 2011) defines “additional” as: extra or supplementary to what is already present or available. “Cost” is that which must be given in order to acquire something (Tasman). Based on its plain and natural meaning, “additional costs” are expenditure (or value) extra or supplementary to that already given in order to acquire something. It might be argued that “additional cost” should be interpreted to mean any subsequent expenditure relating to the asset. The Commissioner does not agree with this interpretation. The Commissioner considers that additional costs will usually only apply to expenditure that is an improvement to the asset. Therefore, expenditure incurred after the asset is ready to use and which does not result in an improved asset will not be additional costs. Some expenditure will not be a cost of the asset Not all expenditure that is associated with an asset will be a cost of that asset. The reasons that expenditure might not be part of the cost base of an asset include the following: • It is deductible elsewhere in the Act (eg, it is revenue expenditure). • It is incurred after the cost of the asset has been fixed. • It is a cost directly attributable to another item of property for depreciation purposes. Section EE 16(4)(b)(ii) states that when a person uses a straight-line method to calculate their loss, the item’s cost excludes expenditure for which the person is allowed a deduction under a provision outside subpart EE. This means the following types of expenditure are not part of the cost of an asset for depreciation purposes: • Expenditure that is revenue in nature and deductible on that basis. • Expenditure that is feasibility expenditure and deductible under the principles in IS 17/01. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 14 IN CONFIDENCE • Expenditure otherwise deductible under a specific provision. “Cost” of a resource consent Having identified the two different types of resource consents and how to determine an asset’s cost, the next step is to consider what types of expenditure form the cost base for a resource consent. This is relevant because it is the “cost” of a resource consent that will be depreciable. Cost includes that which must be given in order to acquire a resource consent Whether expenditure is a cost of the resource consent depends on the facts. Expenditure on the application and administrative fees under s 36 of the RMA is incurred to obtain the resource consent and will be a cost of the consent. Expenditure on legal and hearing costs is also likely to be a cost of the consent. Schedule 4 of the RMA sets out the information required in an application for resource consent. This includes an assessment of environmental effects and schedule 4 also prescribes the information this assessment must include and the matters it must address. Expenditure incurred in compiling the information, reports and strategies for the purposes of the application will generally be part of the cost of the resource consent. This could include expenditure on resource monitoring, environmental investigations, engineering reports and the development of mitigation strategies for adverse environmental effects. On larger projects, consultation will often be a necessary step in the process of applying for resource consent. Expenditure on public awareness campaigns, public meetings, mail drops, media releases and consultation with affected persons including iwi, may all be part of the cost of the resource consent. It depends on the particular facts, but all of this expenditure may need to be incurred to acquire a resource consent. Cost includes expenditure having the asset installed and ready to use Case law and commercial practice allow expenditure incurred in having an asset installed and in getting it ready to use, to be added to the cost base of an asset. It is generally easier to identify this type of expenditure for tangible assets than it is for intangible assets. For example, it is usually straightforward to identify installation and setup costs for an item of depreciable plant. There appears to be less scope for this type of expenditure on an intangible asset because: • The nature of fixed life intangible assets is that they will start to depreciate at the point in time when the asset’s life span begins to reduce. Once obtained it will usually be “available to use” (the requirement in s EE 1(2)(c)) and depreciable. Once an item is available to use, the cost of the item is fixed, and it is too late to add subsequent costs to the cost base (outside of the provisions of the Act). • Unlike tangible assets, there is unlikely to be any element of installation. However, there is still some scope to incur expenditure that would be a cost of getting the resource consent ready to use. This seems most likely to arise where the consent has been granted but has not commenced. Under the RMA, a consent does not commence until s 116 is satisfied. There are a number of situations where commencement may be delayed, for instance when the grant of the consent is appealed. Until the resource consent commences it will neither be available for use nor capable of depreciating in value (because its fixed life is not diminishing). IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 15 IN CONFIDENCE If a resource consent is subject to a condition that must be fulfilled before the consent commences then this expenditure, although incurred after the consent has been granted, may be a cost of getting the resource consent ready to use. In these circumstances the expenditure should be added to the cost base of the resource consent. Following commencement, a condition will not usually be enough to prevent a resource consent being available to use. Under s 108 of the RMA, councils have very wide powers to impose conditions on resource consents. However, the conditions imposed must still be reasonable and a condition cannot be a condition precedent to the granting of the consent. For more information on conditions, see IS 08/03: “Resource consent application fees and provision of works, provisions of information and transfer of land as conditions of resource consent – GST treatment”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 20, No 8 (September/October 2008). Although non-compliance with a condition may eventually lead to some level of enforcement, it will not usually stop the consent from being available to use. Once a resource consent is available to use, any expenditure incurred on meeting the conditions of the consent will not be a cost of the consent unless s EE 19 or s EE 37 applies. Subsequent expenditure added to the cost under ss EE 19 Environmental consents are fixed life intangible property and s EE 19 allows additional costs incurred to be added to the cost of fixed life intangible property for depreciation purposes. In the context of a resource consent, the consent will already have been acquired. To be an “additional cost” of the depreciable resource consent, the expenditure needs to be acquiring something more in relation to the consent, such as an enhancement or improvement to the resource consent by amending an onerous condition. For the purposes of environmental consents, “additional costs” will likely include expenditure incurred under ss 125, 126 and 127 of the RMA to make changes to the consent and its terms. Expenditure incurred on the conditions attaching to a resource consent will not usually be part of the cost base of a resource consent as the expenditure will be incurred after the cost base is fixed. The only way this can be included is if it is an “additional cost” under s EE 19. Expenditure on meeting the conditions attached to a granted environmental consent will generally not be an additional cost under s EE 19 because to be a “cost”, the expenditure must be given to acquire “something”. In this case, the “something” (being the resource consent) has already been obtained. Expenditure on satisfying conditions will often be directed at other assets or purposes distinct from the consent itself and may still be deductible, for example, it might be revenue expenditure or a cost of another item of depreciable property. For instance, a resource consent may be subject to a condition requiring the consent holder to build a retaining wall. Expenditure incurred on removing or modifying conditions is an additional cost under s EE 19 as it enhances or improves the resource consent – something additional in respect of the consent is obtained. Section EE 37 is broadly similar to s EE 19 as it allows additional expenditure on improvements to be added to the cost of an item of depreciable property. Given s EE 19 specifically deals with intangible property the statutory interpretation principle that the specific provision overrides the general provision means that s EE 19 should be used when dealing with resource consents. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 16 IN CONFIDENCE Example 1 XYZ Quarries obtains an environmental consent for a new quarry. However, a downturn in construction and competition from overseas mean the site is dormant and the consent is never used. Nearly five years later market conditions change, and the quarry becomes viable. Because the unused consent is due to lapse (under s 125 of the RMA) the quarry owner applies to the local council under s 125 to extend the period. The costs associated with the application run to $12,000 as the quarry owner engages experts to provide reports on the market conditions and the effects of the extension on the district plan. The $12,000 is an additional cost under s EE 19 and can be added to the cost of the existing consent and depreciated as part of the cost of the resource consent. The expenditure is capital in nature and incurred under the RMA to secure an extension to the terms of the consent. Expenditure directly attributable to multiple items Where expenditure is directly attributable to more than one item of property, the expenditure should form part of the cost base of the items on a basis that is appropriate in the circumstances. Where the expenditure serves two or more objects indifferently and dissection is impractical, then it must be apportioned on a fair and reasonable basis. It is impossible to prescribe any precise formula applicable to all cases because the circumstances of the particular case will usually determine the most appropriate way of deciding how to apportion an amount. However, the case law says the apportionment must be fair, not arbitrary, and must be done as a matter of fact (Buckley & Young v CIR (1978) 3 NZTC 61,271 (CA)). In apportionment cases the onus of proof lies with the taxpayer (Buckley & Young). However, it is recognised that absolute precision cannot be expected and a reasonable estimate will be sufficient (Omihi Lime Co Ltd v CIR \[1964\] NZLR 731). Some fair and reasonable bases for apportionment may include (Buckley & Young): • the respective values of the advantages arising from the expenditure; and • where the advantages do not lend themselves to measurement, some particular part or fractional share of the total expenditure if the part or share can be established on the basis of sufficient evidence. The Commissioner will accept apportionment of the expenditure on a reasonable basis between the items of property. For instance, when applying for an environmental consent to develop a hydroelectric plant, the taxpayer will likely need designs for the turbine that will be placed into the water. If the designs are high-level drawings undertaken for the resource consent application, then it might be reasonable to allocate the full cost of these designs to the resource consent. On the other hand, if the designs are detailed engineering and construction plans that will be used to build the turbine, it may be reasonable to allocate the expenditure on the designs to the cost of the turbine and nothing to the resource consent. In other circumstances, the allocation of expenditure may not be so straightforward, and it will be necessary to apportion on a fair and reasonable basis. Examples of expenditure The Commissioner considers the following types of expenditure to be examples of expenditure that may be incurred in the resource consent process. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 17 IN CONFIDENCE Examples of expenditure on a resource consent • Resource monitoring • Land access o Licence fees for access to the land to enable the applicant to carry out resource monitoring and environmental studies • Consultation o Costs of determining who is affected o Public awareness campaigns including public meetings, mail drops, media releases o Public meetings and one-on-one meetings with affected parties to identify possible opposition and mitigation o Development of mitigation, including payments to affected parties o Consultation with iwi • Engineering and civil design necessary to support the resource consent application • Detailed environmental investigations to determine potential environmental effects and mitigations o Impact on flora and fauna o Archaeological and cultural impact o Social impact o Transport assessment • Other investigations necessary to support the application o Noise assessment o Dust assessment o Visual impact assessment o Economic impact o Surveys • Salaries and overheads of employees directly involved in the resource consent application and travel and accommodation connected to the consent process • Project management and legal support • Application and processing fees for consent application • Preparation of Assessment of Environmental Effects (AEE) • Peer review of engineering, civil and environmental studies • Preparation of evidence and submissions for consent hearing • Detailed financial and economic studies • Design and creation of areas to mitigate environmental effect • Development of other mitigation strategies for adverse environmental effects • Hearing costs of consent authority o Includes pre-application meetings, pre-hearing meetings and mediation o Payments to experts o Legal fees o Further environmental and engineering studies to provide responses to requests for further information by hearing authority • Consideration of hearing authorities’ decision and considering conditions of consents if granted • Appeal costs The expenses in the table are examples of the types of expenses that might be incurred in obtaining a resource consent. Whether a particular expense forms part of the cost base of IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 18 IN CONFIDENCE the resource consent depends on the facts (see discussion on “cost” from \[39\] onwards). For instance, expenditure on legal fees may be expenditure that can be deducted under s DB 62 rather than treated as a cost of the consent. Also, engineering reports may be a cost of the resulting item of plant, rather than a cost of the resource consent. Summary Whether expenditure is a cost of the depreciable resource consent depends on the facts. Case law defines cost as “that which must be given in order to acquire something” (Tasman Forestry). A transaction must be viewed in its commercial reality and assistance may be derived from common business practice or accepted accounting practice (which may involve considering whether the expenditure is directly attributable to a particular asset). For a resource consent, the cost is effectively restricted to the initial cost of an item of depreciable property. Case law and commercial practice allow set-up costs to get an asset ready to use to be included in the asset’s cost. Whether expenditure is incurred in getting a resource consent ready to use is a question of fact. However, it would be unusual to incur any such expenditure once the period for which the consent has been granted has commenced. Although, it may still be possible to add further expenditure to the cost of a resource consent after the cost is fixed under s EE 19. Not all expenditure associated with a resource consent will form part of its cost base. For example, an expense may have been incurred as an ordinary incidence of business and is deductible under the general permission, in which case it will not be a cost of the consent. Alternatively, the expenditure may have been incurred on meeting a condition of the consent after the cost of the consent has been fixed, in which case it will not be a cost of the consent. Example 2 New Zealand Molluscs Ltd farms oysters for export. It has identified a sheltered harbour that would suit a pacific oyster farm. An environmental consent is obtained to place and use a number of inter-tidal racks within the harbour. When the consent is granted, there are a number of conditions, including the following: • Water quality must be tested regularly, and any change reported to the council. • All equipment used in the harbour must be cleaned regularly and checked for leaks. • A small area of hardstanding for a car park is required for company employees working at or visiting the site to avoid cars driving on to the beach and disturbing wildlife. Expenditure on meeting these conditions will not be a cost of the consent. Firstly, in terms of timing, the consent is available to be used and starts to depreciate as soon as it commences. At this point the cost has become fixed and the expenditure on the conditions is incurred too late to be a cost of the consent. The first two conditions relate to costs that are an ordinary incidence of doing business, and as such are revenue expenditure and deductible on that basis. The expenditure is recurring and does not result in an enduring capital benefit. Monitoring water quality and cleaning and maintaining equipment is an ordinary incidence of business for the company. The expenditure incurred in creating an area of hardstanding for a car park is a cost of the car park – not of the consent. This expenditure is depreciable as a cost of hardstanding under sch 13. There is also a condition requiring the tidal racks to be located at an exact height and position. However, the company subsequently discovers that the inter-tidal racks would be more productive if their position was altered. It applies under s 127 of the RMA to change the condition of the consent to allow it to re-position the inter-tidal racks. This expenditure is an additional cost under s EE 19 and must be added to the cost of the consent. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 19 IN CONFIDENCE Trustpower v CIR Before considering specific situations in which expenditure on resource consents may arise, this statement will address the Supreme Court decision in Trustpower. The case is the most recent authority concerning the tax treatment of expenditure on resource consents. Trustpower maintained a “development pipeline”, which consisted of over 200 possible electricity generating projects, not all of which would be carried through to completion. This case concerned four particular projects and in dispute was the deductibility of expenditure on applying for and obtaining resource consents. The total spent was approximately $17.7m. As a result of the expenditure, Trustpower had obtained resource consents (land use consents, water permits and discharge permits). Apart from some of the land use consents that were of an unlimited duration, the consents were for fixed periods (generally 10, 15 or 35 years). The projects were all in limbo and it was unclear whether they would be abandoned or advanced. Despite this, the Supreme Court thought it reasonable to suppose that the projects were still marketable and they noted that Trustpower had been approached about its willingness to sell two of them. The arguments were refined over the course of the hearings. In the High Court, Andrews J considered the expenditure was revenue in nature primarily because the resource consents were inseparable from what was considered to be revenue account property. Whether the consents were separate property was irrelevant to the approach of the Court of Appeal and Supreme Court, who both considered that the expenditure was capital in nature. The focus of Trustpower is fairly narrow but in the Commissioner’s view the following principles can be drawn from the litigation: • Resource consent expenditure is usually on capital account. • There is limited scope for deductible feasibility expenditure in the context of applying for a resource consent. (See IS 17/01). • Consents within sch 14 (ie, environmental consents) are depreciable intangible property. This means that capital expenditure that is a cost of the property can be depreciated over the fixed life of the consent. • Sometimes expenditure on resource consents will be part of the cost of other property, which may or may not be depreciable property. This statement will now discuss these principles as they are key to how resource consent expenditure is treated. Resource consent expenditure is usually on capital account The principles that need to be applied in determining whether expenditure is capital or revenue were comprehensively considered by the Courts in Trustpower. The principles identified included the following: • It is necessary to consider what the expenditure is calculated to effect from a practical and business point of view (Hallstroms Pty Ltd v FCT (1946) 72 CLR 634 (HCA)). • The contrast between the two forms of expenditure corresponds to the distinction between the costs of creating, establishing, acquiring or enlarging the permanent structure of a business (capital) and the costs of using the structure to earn income, or performing the income-earning operations (revenue) (Commissioner of Taxes v Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines \[1964\] AC 948 (PC)). IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 20 IN CONFIDENCE • The indicia discussed in BP Australia Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation for the Commonwealth of Australia \[1966\] AC 224 (PC) can be used to assist in the determination, but they are not determinative in themselves. • In the end, the answer will depend on a close examination of the facts of the particular case and the character of the particular payment to ascertain the nature and purpose or effect of the relevant expenditure. Applying the principles and the approach of both the Court of Appeal (CIR v Trustpower Ltd (2015) 27 NZTC 22-010) and Supreme Court, expenditure on obtaining a resource consent will usually be capital in nature. The Court of Appeal set out the previous case law that supports this view (the Supreme Court also discussed these cases in a similar manner): \[82\] In both England and New Zealand expenditure incurred in obtaining resource consents and permissions has been held to be on capital and not revenue account: (a) In ECC Quarries Ltd v Watkis (Inspector of Quarries) Brightman J in the English High Court held that while the permissions for a quarry would not themselves produce profits the subsequent operations of working and winning the minerals, which were permitted by the consents, would. Therefore, the assets of the company had radically and enduringly changed when the permissions were granted, and on common sense principles and based on consideration of the authorities, the expenditure was of a capital nature. (b) In Waste Management New Zealand Ltd v Commissioner of Inland Revenue this Court indicated that expenditure incurred investigating the feasibility of a site as a landfill for disposing of industrial waste, designing the landfill and seeking the planning consents and water rights it needed was capital. (c) In Case T53 the New Zealand Taxation Review Authority (Judge Barber), with a brief reference to the decision in ECC Quarries Ltd, held that legal fees incurred in a successful appeal against the refusal of resource consents required to carry on a second-hand machinery business were not deductible on revenue account because the acquisition of the resource consent was an intangible asset of the objector’s business, a right \[sic\] of benefit and advantage that did not previously exist. (d) In Milburn New Zealand Ltd v Commissioner of Inland Revenue Wild J in the New Zealand High Court, relying on ECC Quarries Ltd, held that expenditure incurred in obtaining resource consents for Milburn’s quarries for sourcing aggregate and lime for its cement and concrete business was of a capital not revenue nature because it was a necessary part of the development of those quarries for production of materials for use in the taxpayer’s business. It was relatively clearly of a capital nature. \[footnotes omitted\] The Supreme Court recognised at \[29\] that expenditure associated with resource consents could be revenue. However, there is a legislative assumption that it will usually be capital: We agree with the Court of Appeal on this to the extent that we accept that there are circumstances in which expenditure associated with applications for resource consents are on revenue account. But both the explanatory note and the commentary are suggestive of a legislative understanding that such expenditure will usually be on capital account; thus the need for s DB 13B \[now s DB 19\]. The Court also made similar comments about the legislative assumption at \[49\]: Such assistance as can be derived for \[sic\] the statutory text is in favour of the Commissioner rather than Trustpower. This is by reason of the specific provisions \[ie, s EE 6, Schedule 14 and s DB 19\] of the 2004 and 2007 Acts as to (a) resource consents being depreciable property and (b) deductibility of expenses associated with failed or withdrawn resource consent applications and abandoned consents. These provisions suggest a legislative assumption that, in the absence of such provisions, resource consent expenditure is usually on capital account. \[Emphasis added\] The Supreme Court also provided an example of when expenditure on a resource consent will be revenue in footnote 21 of the decision: By way of example, resource consents may form part of the stock-in-trade of a land-developer/speculator and, if so, the costs of obtaining them are obviously on revenue account. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 21 IN CONFIDENCE In conclusion, expenditure on a resource consent will usually be capital in nature, although there are exceptions to this, such as land developers or traders, where the expenditure may be on revenue account. Limited scope for deductible feasibility expenditure in the context of applying for resource consent In the Supreme Court much of the argument concerned whether the expenditure on resource consents was feasibility expenditure (and deductible on this basis). Ultimately, the Supreme Court considered it was not because the expenditure on the resource consents was directed towards a specific capital project or directed to materially advancing a specific capital project. Accordingly, even if recurrent, it was not deductible. The Supreme Court considered at \[72\]: The expenditure on obtaining resource consents in this case was directly related to specific projects that would be on capital account if they came to fruition. The projects could not proceed without resource consents. Obtaining the consents thus represented tangible progress towards their completion. The expenditure is thus on capital account and not deductible. The Supreme Court did acknowledge that there is some scope for feasibility expenditure in a resource consent context at \[72\]: We are not required to determine the status of the expenditure which preceded the decisions to apply for resource consent. It may be that the Commissioner could have denied deductibility in relation to at least some of that expenditure. We are, however, also of the view that expenditure associated with early stage feasibility assessments may be deductible. Such assessments can be seen as a normal incident of business. Treating the associated costs as deductible is consistent with the passages of the judgments of Noel ACJ and Davies J which we have set out. It is also consistent with the use of the expression “to the extent” in the capital limitation, which, as noted, suggests that questions of degree may be involved. Expenditure which is not directed towards a specific project or which is so preliminary as not to be directed towards the advancement of such a project is likely to be seen as being on revenue account. \[footnotes omitted\] \[Emphasis added\] This leaves limited scope for deductible feasibility expenditure when it comes to applying for a particular resource consent. In most instances, expenditure incurred in applying for a resource consent is expenditure directed towards a specific capital project or expenditure that materially advances a capital project. Schedule 14 consents are depreciable intangible property It was not necessary for any of the Courts to address depreciation in any detail. However, the Supreme Court did refer to time-limited resource consents within s EE 53 (now s EE 62) as being both depreciable and depreciable intangible property: \[24\] The s OB 1 definition of “property” expressly encompasses resource consents. Resource consents are within the s EE 53 meaning of “depreciable intangible property” and are “depreciable property” for the purposes of s EE 6 when they are time limited unless the costs of obtaining them are deductible. This means that the question whether a time limited resource consent is depreciable or not turns on the application of the capital/revenue distinction. We accept therefore that s EE 53 does not resolve the case in favour of the Commissioner. \[footnotes omitted\] \[Emphasis added\] The reference to resource consents within s EE 53 (now s EE 62) encompasses environmental consents because these are listed (in what is now) sch 14 as depreciable intangible property. The Supreme Court considered that consents within (what is now) s EE 62 and sch 14 are depreciable intangible property and the costs are depreciable unless the cost can be deducted as revenue expenditure. In most cases the expenditure will not IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 22 IN CONFIDENCE be revenue and the correct approach will be to depreciate the cost over the fixed life of the consent. Expenditure on resource consents can be a cost of other property Cases such as ECC Quarries Ltd v Watkis (HMIT) \[1975\] All ER 843 (which concerned planning permission rather than a resource consent) and Milburn NZ Limited v CIR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,017, provide support for the view that resource consents will often be inseparable from the asset to which they relate. In such instances expenditure on a resource consent is likely to form part of the cost base of that asset. The existing case law was considered by the High Court (Trustpower Ltd v CIR (2013) 26 NZTC 21-047) because whether the resource consents were a stand-alone asset was a central issue before the High Court. However, as the arguments developed on appeal, this particular issue was not considered further. Nonetheless the High Court seemed to accept (and the appellate courts did not disagree) that resource consents could be either separate items or part of another item (in which case the tax treatment was what applied to the other item). In the High Court Andrews J concluded: \[97\] On the particular facts of this case, I therefore find that the resource consents obtained by TrustPower for the Arnold, Kaiwera Downs, Mahinerangi, and Wairau projects are not stand-alone assets, separate from the projects to which they relate. The resource consents are part and parcel of the projects. It would be artificial from a practical and business point of view to regard them as separate assets in their own right. The expenditure in obtaining them must, therefore, be treated in the same manner as the projects ... This issue was not considered further on the subsequent appeals (it was unnecessary to decide the issue), and the Court of Appeal accepted Andrews J’s finding that the resource consents were not stand-alone assets: \[85\] We start our consideration of the application of the general principles relating to the income/capital distinction by accepting the factual findings made by Andrews J in the High Court relating to Trustpower’s development pipeline for its possible future electricity generation projects, including her finding that the resource consents were not stand-alone assets, separate from the projects to which they related. In other words, we proceed at this stage on the basis that it is unnecessary to determine the Commissioner’s challenges to those findings. We take this course because, as Mr Harley accepted in the course of argument, the correct approach is an objective one. Determining on which side of the line the expenditure falls involves an objective analysis of the factual background relating to the nature and purpose or effect of the expenditure and not a subjective approach based on the views of the witnesses for Trustpower. \[footnotes omitted\] \[Emphasis added\] However, this finding was made on the basis that the depreciation rules in subpart EE did not apply. The Supreme Court indicated (see \[96\] above) that in the depreciation context, environmental consents are discrete items of depreciable intangible property. The Commissioner agrees and considers the effect of the specific statutory regime in s EE 62 and sch 14 is to treat environmental consents as separate property for depreciation purposes (see paragraphs \[152\]–\[153\]). In conclusion, the Courts in Trustpower accepted that resource consents are capable of being part of another asset, and in that case, the tax treatment is that which applies to the other asset. Although not directly addressed, this suggests that where a land consent is inseparable from a resulting item of depreciable property, the expenditure can potentially be depreciable as a cost of the resulting item of property (see paragraphs \[176\]–\[180\]). IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 23 IN CONFIDENCE Part Two – Deductibility of expenditure on resource consents The next section of this interpretation statement addresses the different treatment of expenditure on resource consents. Having addressed the key concepts in Part One, Part Two steps through the flowcharts and explains the factors and issues that are relevant in determining the deductibility of expenditure on a resource consent. Accordingly, the statement covers: • feasibility expenditure that is deductible under the principles in IS 17/01; • expenditure on revenue account; • deductibility under a specific provision of the Act, in particular: - s DB 19 may allow a deduction for the costs incurred in un-lodged, withdrawn, refused, lapsed or surrendered resource applications; - s DB 46 allows deductions for certain expenditure in avoiding, remedying, or mitigating the effects of contamination; • capital expenditure and the ability to depreciate depending on whether the taxpayer holds: - an environmental consent – the costs of which will be depreciable as depreciable intangible property; - a land consent – in which case expenditure incurred in obtaining the consent is only depreciable if it forms part of the cost base of a resulting item of depreciable property (there will be no deduction for land, and buildings with an EUL of 50 years or more have a zero deduction because of the 0% depreciation rate). The flowcharts are intended to provide a pathway to deductibility to assist in deciding whether expenditure is deductible or depreciable. They are also intended to be a reference tool to guide taxpayers to the part of the statement that is relevant for them. For instance, if expenditure on an environmental study is deductible feasibility expenditure under the principles in IS 17/01 and Trustpower, then there is no need to consider whether it is deductible on any other basis. If it is not deductible feasibility expenditure, then the next consideration is whether it is revenue expenditure and deductible under the general permission (and so on). IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 24 IN CONFIDENCE Flowchart 1: Environmental consents – ss 12–15 of the RMA excluding reclamation consents – treatment of expenditure Flowchart 2 for land consents follows the same general structure. The main difference is that land consents do not depreciate. However, the cost of obtaining a land consent may be depreciated where it is capitalised into the cost of an item of depreciable property. No depreciation deduction is available for any expenditure capitalised into the cost of land or buildings (with an EUL of 50 years or more). For land consents, deductibility under s DB 19 for unsuccessful consents may not be possible as it depends on the depreciation outcome. However, some expenditure may be deductible if it is for pollution control. Expenditure depreciable on a straight-line basis over the life of the consent. $ Expenditure may be deductible under ss DA 1 and DB 23 when expenditure is on revenue account property. Deductibility of feasibility expenditure determined under: •Trustpower Ltd v CIR \[2016\] NZSC 91 •IS 17/01 Income tax – deductibility of feasibility expenditure. Where the consent has been abandoned before it is lodged, refused, has lapsed, been withdrawn or surrendered, then expenditure will be deductible under s DB 19. Certain types of expenditure can also be deductible under specific provisions (eg, s DB 62 for legal fees) or regimes (eg, for petroleum mining). Is it expenditure on revenue account? See \[112\] Is it deductible feasibility expenditure? See \[107\] Is expenditure deductible under a specific provision or regime in the Act? See \[118\] Yes Yes Yes No No No Is expenditure a cost of depreciable intangible property under sch 14(10)? See \[130\] Yes No Deductibility under normal capital / revenue principles. See \[60\] & \[81\] IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 25 IN CONFIDENCE Flowchart 2: Land consents – ss 9 and 11 of the RMA plus reclamation consents – treatment of expenditure $ Deductibility of feasibility expenditure determined under: •Trustpower Ltd v CIR \[2016\] NZSC 91 •IS 17/01 Income tax – deductibility of feasibility expenditure. Expenditure may be deductible under ss DA 1 and DB 23 when expenditure is on revenue account property. Where the consent has been abandoned before it is lodged, refused, has lapsed, been withdrawn or surrendered, then expenditure may be deductible under s DB 19 depending on depreciation outcome (see below). Certain types of expenditure can also be deductible under specific provisions (eg, s DB 62 for legal fees) or regimes (eg, for petroleum mining). Is it deductible feasibility expenditure? See \[107\] Is it expenditure on revenue account? See \[112\] Is expenditure deductible under a specific provision or regime in the Act? \[118\] Yes Yes Yes No No No Is it a cost of pollution control? \[123\] Potentially deductible under sch 19, parts A and B. Yes Is it a cost of a capital asset? \[176\] No deduction available unless controlling pollution (see below). No Yes Land No Buildings (EUL ≥50yrs) Sch 13 Land improve- ments Other depreciable property What is the capital asset? No deduction as not depreciable 0% depreciation Sch 14 Right to use land Depreciable as FLIP (rare cases only) Depreciable Deductibility under normal capital / revenue principles see \[60\] & \[81\] No IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 26 IN CONFIDENCE Feasibility expenditure that is deductible under IS 17/01 This part of the statement is concerned with what might be labelled “feasibility expenditure” to the extent that such expenditure can be deducted under the principles in IS 17/01 and Trustpower. If taxpayers believe they have incurred expenditure that is deductible on this basis they should refer to IS 17/01: “Income tax – deductibility of feasibility expenditure”. The label “feasibility expenditure” is not determinative when considering deductions because the Act does not prescribe a deduction for amounts of “feasibility expenditure”. Rather deductibility is determined by the same general principles that apply to all expenditure. For expenditure to be deductible it must meet the requirements in the general permission in s DA 1(1). It is then necessary to consider whether any of the general limitations in s DA 2 deny a deduction. IS 17/01: “Income tax – deductibility of feasibility expenditure” includes a discussion on the general principles of deductibility. IS 17/01 analyses feasibility expenditure in two steps: • Firstly, whether there is the ability to deduct under s DA 1(1). IS 17/01 identifies that for many taxpayers, feasibility expenditure will be non-deductible because it will have been incurred preliminary to, or preparatory to, the commencement of a business or income-earning activity. The principles to apply to determine when a business or income-earning activity commences are discussed in detail at paragraphs \[29\]–\[98\] of IS 17/01. • Secondly, whether a deduction is prohibited under the capital limitation in s DA 2(1). The Commissioner’s view following the Supreme Court’s Trustpower judgment is summarised in IS 17/01 at \[129\]: Therefore, in the Commissioner’s view, expenditure is likely to be deductible in accordance with the Supreme Court decision if it is of a type incurred on a recurrent basis as a normal incident of the taxpayer’s business and it satisfies one of the following: • the expenditure is not directed towards a specific capital project; or • if the expenditure is directed towards a specific capital project, the expenditure is so preliminary as not to be directed towards materially advancing a specific capital project – or, put another way, the expenditure is not directed towards making tangible progress on a specific capital project. The Supreme Court considered that expenditure associated with early stage feasibility assessments may be deductible. This may occur where expenditure is incurred in the initial investigation of a project. Example 5 in IS 17/01 demonstrates when expenditure on initial investigations may be deductible feasibility expenditure. However, once expenditure is directed towards a particular consent there is limited scope for deducting feasibility expenditure. This is because expenditure incurred in applying for a particular resource consent will often be directed towards a specific capital asset (or making tangible progress on a specific capital project) and so is not deductible under the principles in IS 17/01 and Trustpower. Expenditure on revenue account The Supreme Court in Trustpower considered that expenditure in that case was on capital account. Applying the Supreme Court’s approach, the Commissioner considers that expenditure on resource consents will usually be on capital account. This is because resource consents are usually for a substantial or unlimited duration, provide an enduring benefit and also commonly form part of the profit-earning structure of the business. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 27 IN CONFIDENCE The exception identified in Trustpower is land developers where the expenditure is on revenue account. Where property is “revenue account property”, its cost is deductible under s DB 23(1). “Revenue account property” is relevantly described in s YA 1 as property that if disposed of for valuable consideration, would produce income for the person (other than income under ss EE 48, FA 5 or FA 9). Where the expenditure is on revenue account property, special matching provisions apply to the timing of the deduction (s EA 2). Generally, the deduction is deferred until the time the property (which is the subject of the consent) is disposed of and the income arises. Identifying other exceptions depends on a close examination of the facts of the particular case and the character of the particular payment to ascertain the nature and purpose or effect of the relevant expenditure. For instance, if a stadium owner needs a land consent to use floodlights to allow the stadium to host night-time concerts and events, this will likely be capital as it provides an enduring benefit and enlarges the business structure by allowing them to host concerts and other events. Alternatively, if a concert promoter obtains a similar consent to use floodlights for a one-off concert event, then arguably there is no enduring benefit and the expenditure appears more likely to be revenue. Ultimately, it is a matter of applying the principles discussed in Trustpower (referred to at \[87\]) to the particular facts of the case. Where a deduction is being claimed, the expenditure must also meet the general principles of deductibility. The two leading cases in New Zealand relevant to general deductibility are CIR v Banks (1978) 3 NZTC 61,236 (CA) and Buckley & Young Ltd v CIR (1978) 3 NZTC 61,271 (CA). A more in-depth discussion of the general principles of deductibility is included in IS 17/01. Briefly, where there is expenditure on a resource consent, for a deduction to be claimed it will be necessary for the expenditure to be incurred by the taxpayer: • in deriving assessable income; and • as an ordinary incident of a particular business or income-earning activity. The deductibility of expenditure is subject to the general permission under s DA 1(1). For resource consent expenditure to be deductible under either paragraph of s DA 1(1), a sufficient relationship or nexus must exist between the expenditure and the taxpayer’s business or income-earning activity. Whether a business or an income-earning activity is being carried on is always one of fact and degree (the commencement of a business or an income-earning activity is discussed in IS 17/01 (at \[29\]–\[106\])). Any expenditure on resource consents for private purposes will not satisfy s DA 1 as the expenditure will not be incurred in deriving assessable income (and will also be denied by the private limitation in s DA 2(2)). When resource consent expenditure is revenue in nature and deductible under s DA 1(1), it is still necessary to consider whether the general limitations in s DA 2 apply. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 28 IN CONFIDENCE Deductibility under a specific provision Obtaining a resource consent can be a complicated and expensive process. Depending on the circumstances, some expenditure may be deductible under a specific provision in the Act. This statement only addresses ss DB 19 and DB 46 as these provisions are the most relevant to resource consents. However, other provisions may also be relevant, for instance, s DB 62 for legal expenses less than $10,000 and ss DB 5 to DB 7 for interest expenditure. Also, some categories of expenditure, such as petroleum mining and mineral mining expenditure, have their own regimes in the Act. Where a resource consent is not obtained or is surrendered or lapses Section DB 19 allows a deduction for costs where an application for a resource consent is not lodged, withdrawn or not granted. Section DB 19 can be described as a deduction provision for costs of unsuccessful resource consents. It also allows a deduction where a consent lapses (s 125 of the RMA) or is surrendered (s 138 of the RMA). Section DB 19 has been amended on several occasions to increase the scope of the section. The most recent amendments in 2014 were part of a series of amendments to address “black hole expenditure”. The section was extended to cover applications that had not been lodged and where the consent had been granted but had lapsed or been surrendered. Section DB 19 currently reads: DB 19 Expenses in application for resource consent When this section applies (1) This section applies when a person who incurs expenditure for the purpose of applying for the grant of a resource consent under the Resource Management Act 1991— (a) does not obtain the grant because the application is not lodged or is withdrawn, or because the grant is refused: (b) obtains the grant but does not use the resource consent before it lapses or is surrendered. Deduction (1B) The person is allowed a deduction for the expenditure— (a) that the person incurs in relation to the application or intended application; and (b) that would have been part of the cost of depreciable property, or otherwise a deduction, if the application or intended application had been granted or if the resource consent had been used; and Example 3 Lindsay and Adrian are in partnership as property and land developers. They commonly buy bare land or houses on large plots that they subdivide and sell. They buy an empty 1-hectare site on the outskirts of their town that they rename “Trafalgar Mews”. They are dividing Trafalgar Mews into 12 plots, which they will sell. Lindsay and Adrian obtain s 11 RMA resource consents from the council to subdivide the property into 12 plots. They also obtain s 9 RMA land consents because the density of the housing will be more than is permitted under the district plan. Once the plots are subdivided and capable of being built upon, the plots are sold. As land developers, the land is held on revenue account and costs are deductible under s DB 23. The s 9 and s 11 consents form part of the cost of the land. They also satisfy the general permission in s DA 1, as required by s DB 23. Special timing provisions apply, and Lindsay and Adrian get the deduction for the expenses incurred in obtaining the consents in the year in which they dispose of the property. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 29 IN CONFIDENCE (c) for which the person is not allowed a deduction under another provision. Timing of deduction (2) The deduction is allocated to the income year in which— (a) the person decides not to lodge the application, withdraws the application, or is refused the grant; or (b) the resource consent lapses or is surrendered. Link with subpart DA (3) This section overrides the capital limitation. The general permission and other general limitations still apply. Crucially s DB 19 does not allow a deduction when the expenditure would not have been part of the cost of depreciable property or otherwise deductible. This means: • Section DB 19 applies to the costs of an environmental consent because environmental consents are always capable of being depreciable as depreciable intangible property. This means that if the requirements of s DB 19(1B) are met, a deduction will be available for the cost of the environmental consent. • The deductibility of expenditure on land consents depends on whether the cost would have been deductible if the project went ahead: - There is no deduction under s DB 19 for expenditure on land consents that are not depreciable or deductible (eg, where the land consent is a stand-alone asset or where expenditure is capitalised to land or buildings with an EUL of more than 50 years). - Where expenditure on a land consent would have been depreciable as a cost of an item of depreciable property, then a deduction is available (eg, it is a land consent required to construct a swimming pool, retaining walls, fences, roads, dams or any other depreciable land improvement in sch 13). This is because had the consent been granted or used, then the costs would have been deductible or depreciable. Under s DB 19, the deduction is available in the tax year when the person decides not to lodge their application, when the application is rejected, when the consent lapses or when it is surrendered. Example 4 Wild Coast Electricity Ltd is an electricity generator and retailer. Part of its business involves identifying and developing potential sites. Whether a site is developed depends on a number of factors including the market conditions. The company decides to develop a solar power installation on an empty site it owns in the South Island. The project will require a number of different resource consents. The company obtains detailed environmental reports that will be used to apply for environmental consents (for waste water and to discharge contaminates during construction) and prepares strategies to mitigate any effects. The company also intends to clear and contour the land to fit as many solar panels as possible onto the site and to maximise the amount of solar energy each panel harnesses. Plans and drawings of the site are obtained and will be used to apply for a land consent for the clearance and contouring of the land. News of the proposed project leaks and is met with significant local community opposition and unsympathetic media coverage. Some directors also believe the projected levels of electricity generation at the site may have been overstated. For these reasons a decision is made not to lodge the application and to permanently abandon the project. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 30 IN CONFIDENCE Pollution control expenditure Section DB 46 allows a person a deduction for expenditure commonly described as “pollution control expenditure”. Broadly, s DB 46 allows a deduction for the expenditure listed in Part A or B of sch 19. Section DB 46 overrides the capital limitation in s DA 2(1) and allows deductions for specified activities that are undertaken to avoid, remedy or mitigate the effects of discharging contaminants. For an expense to be deductible under s DB 46, the taxpayer must: • carry on a business in New Zealand; • incur, in the business or the ending of the operations of the business, expenditure that was of a kind listed in sch 19, Part A or B; and • satisfy the general permission in s DA 1. Section DB 46 only applies where no other provision allows a deduction. The Commentary to the Taxation (Base Maintenance and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2004 identified three ways that taxpayers could claim a tax deduction for environmental expenditure (outside of industry specific provisions): • A deduction for normal operating (revenue) expenditure; • A deduction under the tax depreciation rules for certain types of capital expenditure, such as tanks, reservoirs, pipes, pumping machinery and screens; and • A deduction under section DB 37 (DJ 10) \[now s DB 46\] for other capital environmental expenditure. Section DJ 10 was introduced to permit business taxpayers a deduction for expenditure incurred for the purpose of treating industrial waste when no other allowance might otherwise be possible. It allows business taxpayers to claim a deduction for the cost of constructing on land in New Zealand any earthworks, ponds, settling tanks, or other similar improvements primarily for the purpose of treating industrial waste in order to prevent or combat pollution of the environment. When a deduction is available, it must be spread evenly over five years, beginning with the year in which the expenditure was incurred. \[Emphasis added\] Environmental consents Under s DB 19 a deduction is available at the point the directors make the decision not to lodge the application. However, the company can only deduct expenditure that would have been deductible or depreciable. The costs of environmental consents are deductible. This is because environmental consents are depreciable intangible property and the expenditure would have been depreciable had the consents been obtained and used. Land consents The plans and drawings were to be used to apply for a land consent for non- depreciable earthworks. For land consents, the operation of s DB 19 depends on the depreciation outcome. The land consent if granted would have been for an unlimited duration and would not have been depreciable property in its own right. While the expenditure could have been capitalised into the cost of the land, there is still no deduction as land is not depreciable property (s EE 7). If the project had gone ahead, the resulting property would not have been depreciable. Therefore, a deduction cannot be taken under s DB 19 for the expenditure. If the plans and drawings were instead required for an application for a land consent to construct an item of depreciable plant, then the expenditure could have been capitalised to the item of plant and depreciated (if built). In this case a deduction would be available under s DB 19 as the expenditure would otherwise have been allowed as a deduction for depreciation as part of the cost of the item of plant. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 31 IN CONFIDENCE Section DB 46 only applies if the amount is not deductible on any other basis. Accordingly, s DB 46 cannot apply to the costs of an environmental consent because these will be depreciable as a cost of an item of depreciable intangible property. Only expenditure on land consents (that would not be otherwise deductible) can be potentially deducted under s DB 46. Section DB 46 allows a deduction for the kind of expenditure listed in Parts A and B of sch 19 but excludes the types of expenditure in Part C. Schedule 19 lists kinds of expenditure relating to avoiding, remedying, or mitigating the detrimental effects of discharging contaminants. The default categories of expenditure are expenditure relating to an activity or improvement to land and expenditure relating to restoration and monitoring. Some examples of the types of expenditure in sch 19 are: • expenditure, in the construction of an improvement on land in New Zealand, incurred to avoid or mitigate future detrimental effects on the environment from the discharge of a contaminant; • expenditure on screen planting, on land in New Zealand, incurred in association with the construction of an improvement to the land that is intended to avoid, or mitigate future detrimental effects on the environment from the discharge of a contaminant; • expenditure related to monitoring the discharge of a contaminant; • expenditure incurred after the discharge of a contaminant, on avoiding, remedying, or mitigating detrimental effects on the environment from the discharged contaminant; • expenditure incurred after the discharge of a contaminant, on the installation of impermeable surfaces on land in New Zealand with the purpose of avoiding, remedying, or mitigating detrimental effects on the environment from a discharged contaminant. Subsections DB 46(2)–(8) deal with the timing and calculation of any deduction. In Waste Management NZ Ltd v CIR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,147 (CA), the Court of Appeal considered s 124 of the Income Tax Act 1976 (ITA 1976) (an earlier version of s DB 46). Section 124 of the ITA 1976 was worded differently to s DB 46 and did not specify the categories of qualifying expenditure in detail. Richardson J, who delivered the judgment of the Court of Appeal, said that s 124 of the ITA 1976 was an incentive provision designed to encourage improvements to land for the purpose of treating industrial waste to combat pollution. Richardson J also indicated that the section applied where the taxpayer met the criteria prescribed by the subsection, at 12,148: Where the taxpayer meets the criteria prescribed by the subsection it may spread the expenditure and claim a deduction of one-fifth of the amount in the year in which the expenditure is incurred and in each of the succeeding four years. The section is an incentive provision applying where no other deduction is available and is designed to encourage improvements to land for the purpose of treating industrial waste to prevent or combat pollution. \[Emphasis added\] Section DB 46 is only relevant in the small number of cases where expenses incurred in obtaining a resource consent form part of the expenditure under sch 19 and the expenses are not otherwise deductible. It is most likely to be relevant where the: • cost of the land consent is not depreciable – this means the expenditure is capital in nature and the expenses are neither part of an item of depreciable intangible property nor part of the cost of a resulting item of depreciable property. This is likely to arise in the case of land consents where the resulting asset is a non-depreciable improvement to land (ie, a s 9 RMA consent for earthworks); IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 32 IN CONFIDENCE • property is not owned by the person incurring the expenditure and so cannot be depreciated by them. Section DB 46 may apply where a land consent is obtained to remedy contamination on a neighbouring property, eg, a land consent obtained to remove contaminated soil from a neighbouring property; • capital expenditure is incurred in meeting conditions attaching to a resource consent and that expenditure is not depreciable as a cost of the resource consent. Because the cost of the consent is fixed at the point it is ready to use, subsequent expenditure on meeting conditions will usually not be a cost of the consent. An example is a condition attaching to a consent requiring the consent holder to rectify any pollution or contamination of neighbouring properties. This expenditure will not normally be a cost of the resource consent but may be deductible under s DB 46. Example 5 Cerys runs a haulage business and has specialised tankers that transport various liquids and chemicals. The tankers need to be thoroughly cleaned between jobs and there is specialised cleaning equipment at the depot. On very busy occasions the drains at the depot cannot cope with the volume of water and some excess contaminated water has spilt into an area of native bush on a neighbouring property. Cerys has arranged for extra drainage channels to be created so that in the future any excess water drains away into a lined ditch at the depot. The earthworks involved are significant enough to require a land consent. The expenditure on the land consent is capital (and would not be depreciable because the resulting asset is a non-depreciable land improvement) but is still able to be deducted under a specific provision. Section DB 46 overrides the capital limitation but not the general permission that must still be satisfied. This is expenditure on the construction of an improvement on land in New Zealand, incurred to avoid or mitigate future detrimental effects on the environment from the discharge of a contaminant, and the works are within sch 19(A)(2). As such, s DB 46 allows the cost of the earthworks (including the land consent) to be deducted and spread in accordance with the section. Environmental consents Where a taxpayer holds an environmental consent, the cost will usually be depreciable over the fixed life of the consent. Section DA 1 allows a deduction for an amount of expenditure or loss, including depreciation loss, to the extent that the expenditure or loss is incurred in deriving assessable income. Section EE 1 provides that a person has an amount of “depreciation loss” if: • the person owns a relevant item of property (as described in ss EE 2 to EE 5); • the item is depreciable property (as described in ss EE 6 to EE 8); • the item is used or is available for use by the person in the relevant income year; and • the amount of depreciation loss is calculated under the relevant provisions (ss EE 9 to EE 11). As noted above, from a tax perspective, resource consents available under the RMA can be divided into two general categories; environmental consents and land consents. Section 122(1) of the RMA provides that resource consents are not real or personal property. However, for the purposes of depreciation, the definition of property in the Act includes all types of consents granted under the RMA in, or after, the 1997 income tax year. Specifically, s YA 1 defines “property” as follows (as relevant): property,— IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 33 IN CONFIDENCE (a) in subpart EE (Depreciation), includes consents granted in or after the 1996-97 tax year under the Resource Management Act 1991: The crucial issue in terms of resource consents is whether they are depreciable property under the legislation. Section EE 6 defines “depreciable property” as: Description (1) Depreciable property is property that, in normal circumstances, might reasonably be expected to decline in value while it is used or available for use— (a) in deriving assessable income; or (b) in carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable income. Subsections (2) to (4) expand on this subsection Property: tangible (2) An item of tangible property is depreciable property if— (a) it is described by subsection (1); and (b) it is not described by section EE 7. Property: intangible (3) An item of intangible property is depreciable property if— (a) it is within the definition of depreciable intangible property; and (b) it is described by subsection (1); and (c) it is not described by section EE 7. Intangible property will only be depreciable property if it comes within the definition of depreciable intangible property (s EE 6(3)(a)). The Commissioner considers the best approach to the analysis is to then consider whether the property is depreciable intangible property under s EE 62. The definition of depreciable intangible property is in s EE 62: EE 62 Meaning of depreciable intangible property Meaning (1) Depreciable intangible property means the property listed in schedule 14 (Depreciable intangible property). Criteria for listing in schedule 14 (2) For property to be listed in schedule 14, the criteria are as follows: (a) it must be intangible; and (b) it must have a finite useful life that can be estimated with a reasonable degree of certainty on the date of its acquisition. Schedule 14 prevails (3) Property that is listed in schedule 14 is depreciable intangible property even if the criteria are not met. Section EE 62(1) limits depreciable intangible property to the items listed in sch 14. Unlike most depreciable tangible property, items of intangible property must be listed in the schedule to be depreciated. This is not an issue for environmental consents, but it is for land consents, which are intangible property but not listed as depreciable intangible property. Schedule 14(10) includes environmental consents: IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 34 IN CONFIDENCE 10 a consent granted under the Resource Management Act 1991 to do something that otherwise would contravene sections 12 to 15B of that Act (other than a consent for a reclamation), being a consent granted in or after— (a) the 1996–97 tax year, if the consent relates to sections 12 to 15 of that Act; or (b) the 2014–15 income year, if the consent relates to sections 15A and 15B of that Act Schedule 14 provides that consents removing the restrictions in ss 12–15B of the RMA are depreciable intangible property. Broadly, those restrictions are on the use of coastal marine areas, on uses of beds of lakes and rivers, in relation to water and on the discharge of contaminants. These environmental consents concern resources and under s 123 of the RMA environmental consents have a fixed life of between 5 and 35 years. They are usually expected to depreciate in value over their life. Consents for reclamation are usually of unlimited duration and concern land and are excluded from sch 14. Environmental consents are depreciable intangible property under s EE 62, so the next step is to consider whether they are also depreciable property under s EE 6 and whether they satisfy both ss EE 6(1) and EE 6(3). Intangible property is not subject to wear and tear so will usually only decline in value (as required by s EE 6(1)) if it has a finite life. The Court of Appeal in Trustpower made the point that consents require a fixed term to decline in value (at \[25\]): The land use consents of unlimited duration are not within the definition of “depreciable intangible property” because without a fixed term they cannot be “expected to decline in value” over time. Environmental consents are usually granted for a period between 5 and 35 years so will decline in value as required by s EE 6(1). This can be contrasted with land consents that generally have an infinite lifespan and will not therefore be capable of being depreciable property. There are two aspects to s EE 6(1) that need to be satisfied. The environmental consent must be used or available for use in deriving assessable income (or in carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable income). The Court of Appeal in Trustpower (at \[27\]) considered that the resource consents were “available for use” in that case once they were granted: Clearly, once the resource consents were granted, they were “available for use” by Trustpower. The fact that they were not being used and would not be used unless and until Trustpower decided to use them and obtained land access did not mean that they were not “available” for use. The expression “available” simply means “capable of being used”. Once Trustpower decided to use them and obtained land access, they would be used. Prior to that they were available for that purpose. \[footnote omitted\] In this case, even lacking the land access to use the consent did not prevent the resource consent being “available for use” upon grant of the consent. Applying this approach, a resource consent will usually be available to use on being granted. However, in some cases there will be a delay between the grant of the consent and the commencement of the consent under s 116 of the RMA. Section 116 is discussed at \[67\] of this statement but does not appear to have been relevant in the Trustpower litigation. Where there is a difference between commencement and grant, the better view is that the consent is available to use on commencement. This might occur where a resource consent is granted but there is an appeal and it will not commence until the appeal has been resolved Whether the environmental consent is available for use in deriving assessable income is a question of fact. This is equivalent to the nexus requirement under s DA 1. The Supreme Court in Trustpower accepted that the “expenditure was incurred by Trustpower in the course of carrying on its existing business as a generator and retailer of electricity, a business which it carries on for the purpose of deriving assessable income”. The Court of IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 35 IN CONFIDENCE Appeal took a contrary view on nexus (under s DA 1 rather than s EE 6). Its view was Trustpower’s profit-making enterprise was the generation and retailing of electricity, not the development of possible new projects and applications for resource consents for those projects. While the Supreme Court took a different approach, this highlights the importance of nexus to deriving income, particularly with new projects not yet part of the profit-making enterprise. On new projects, any expenditure incurred before the establishment of a business or an income-earning activity will not fulfil the statutory nexus, because the expenditure will have been incurred too soon. The Commissioner’s view on the commencement of a business or an income-earning activity is set out in IS 17/01 (at \[29\]–\[106\]). In summary: • The decision as to whether a business or an income-earning activity has commenced is one of fact and degree. Four factors are relevant: o It is critical to determine the true nature of the business. o A commitment must have been made to enter into that business. o The required profit-making structure for the particular business must be in place. o The ordinary current operations of the business must have begun. This is particularly relevant to resource consents because an application for a consent may precede both the profit-making structure being in place and the start of the ordinary current operations of the business. Any resource consents obtained for private or domestic purposes (eg, consents relating to private dwellings) will not be available for use in deriving income or carrying on a business for deriving income. Consequently, such consents will not be depreciable property under s EE 6. Examples 6, 7, 8 and 9 Example 6: Nexus with income required Dave and Barbara own a home on the banks of the Brockhampton River, close to where the river meets the sea. They are avid boaties and want to install a floating pontoon on the river. They check with the council and are told they require an environmental consent for the floating pontoon. In the future, Dave wants to retire from his job as a mid-ranking civil servant and run fishing and boat charters from the pontoon. The environmental consent is not depreciable property because the consent is not used in deriving assessable income. Despite Dave’s future intention, the use is private. Example 7: Nexus with income established Incin-a-lot Ltd provides services collecting and incinerating waste. The company has been successful and wants to offer a new service incinerating medical waste. It intends to build an additional incinerator at its existing premises for this purpose. To operate the new incinerator, it requires an environmental consent under s 15 of the RMA allowing the discharge of contaminants into the atmosphere. The council grants a s 15 resource consent with a 25-year term. The environmental consent is depreciable property because there is sufficient nexus with deriving assessable income. The consent is used in carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable income. Example 8: Preliminary expenditure Costco have carried on a successful business for many years selling household products. Costco purchased some vacant land intending to develop another retail outlet, but current market conditions are unfavourable, so Costco has been looking at alternative uses for the land. The tourism industry is booming in the region and IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 36 IN CONFIDENCE In terms of tax treatment, environmental consents are depreciable as items of fixed life intangible property. “Fixed life intangible property” is “depreciable intangible property” that has a legal life that could reasonably be expected, on the date of acquisition, to be the same length as the property’s remaining EUL (s EE 67). The legal life of environmental consents is between 5 and 35 years and will usually be the same as the EUL. Section EE 33 provides for the annual rate of depreciation for “fixed life intangible property”. The annual rate is calculated using the formula: 1 푙푒푔푎푙 푙푖푓푒 As environmental consents are items of fixed life intangible property under sch 14, they must be depreciated using the straight-line method (s EE 12(2)(b)(ii)). This spreads the cost (as determined above from \[39\]) of the environmental consent over its legal life. To the extent that an environmental consent is unused taxpayers can surrender the consent (s 138 of the RMA) and claim a deduction under s DB 19. This is discussed at \[119\]. Environmental consents are treated as separate assets for depreciation Environmental consents would often be inseparable from the asset to which they relate (as happened in Milburn, which predates sch 14 and Trustpower HC which did not apply sch 14). However, the impact of sch 14 is that environmental consents are treated as separate assets for depreciation purposes. This raises the question of whether the costs of an environmental consent must always be depreciated as separate items of depreciable intangible property. The Commissioner’s view is that sch 14 is a code for items of depreciable intangible property. Environmental consents are specifically included in sch 14 and they are granted for fixed periods. The Commissioner’s view is that Parliament intended (for depreciation purposes) environmental consents to be treated as stand-alone items of depreciable intangible property, which are depreciable according to their own legal life, rather than according to the estimated useful life of any other depreciable items to which they may relate. Costco have identified a need for more budget accommodation in the city, so seek consents to construct and operate a hotel on its land. Following extensive opposition to the proposal, Costco withdraws its application for consent. The expenditure will not be deductible because Costco was not in the hotel business when the expenditure was incurred. Example 9: Preliminary expenditure Dave runs a company that operates a successful gym franchise. Dave has purchased some vacant land and wants to turn it into another gym. However, a competitor has opened up nearby and Dave decides the current market conditions are unfavourable, so is considering a different business use for the land. He already sells a limited range of sports goods at the gym (energy bars, drinks bottles, towels, yoga mats, weight- lifting accessories etc) and thinks he could expand this side of the business by using the land to open a retail outlet selling sports gear. He applies for a resource consent to build and operate the store. Following extensive opposition to the proposal from existing sports gear retailers, Dave withdraws the company’s application for consent. The expenditure on the withdrawn consent will be deductible under s DB 19 because retailing of sports gear has sufficient connection with his existing business. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 37 IN CONFIDENCE Conclusion for environmental consents In summary, environmental consents are: • separately listed in sch 14; and • depreciated according to their legal life, rather than according to the estimated useful life of any items to which they may relate. Land consents The deductibility of the expenditure for land consents is highly fact-dependent: • In exceptional circumstances a land consent may be depreciable as a right to use land under sch 14(5). In this case the treatment is the same as for environmental consents (see from \[131\]). • Expenditure on land consents may be capitalised to the cost of a resulting item of depreciable property. In this case the costs are depreciable at the rate that applies to the resulting item of property (note that buildings generally depreciate at 0%). Land consents depreciable as a right to use land Like environmental consents, to be depreciable land consents must meet the criteria in s EE 6 (at \[134\] above). Section EE 6(3)(a) provides that intangible property will be depreciable property if it is within the definition of depreciable intangible property: Property: intangible (3) An item of intangible property is depreciable property if— (a) it is within the definition of depreciable intangible property; and (b) it is described by subsection (1); and Example 10 Incin-a-lot Ltd is building an additional incinerator for medical waste. The council has granted Incin-a-lot Ltd a 25-year environmental consent to discharge contaminants into the atmosphere from this incinerator. The consent cost is $50,000, including legal fees, application fees, design and engineering reports, scientific reports and an environmental report. The costs of the environmental consent are depreciated over the legal life on a straight-line basis. This means the cost of $50,000 is depreciated over a 25-year period resulting in a straight-line depreciation deduction of $2,000 a year. However, developing contracts with customers has been slower than expected and the new incinerator will not be put into operation until next year. Further, due to high operating temperatures, this kind of incinerator only has a 10-year useful life. Does this change how the costs are depreciated? No. The environmental consent can be depreciated from the point where the consent is available to be used. It is available to use and the costs are depreciable, despite the incinerator not actually being used until the following year. The incinerator’s shorter useful life does not affect the environmental consent. The environmental consent should be depreciated as a separate item of depreciable intangible property over its fixed term. Incin-a-lot Ltd may wish to surrender the environmental consent once the incinerator is no longer in use and write off the remaining amount of the un- depreciated cost of the consent. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 38 IN CONFIDENCE (c) it is not described by section EE 7. This means the first step is that land consents need to be depreciable intangible property under s EE 62. Section EE 62 defines depreciable intangible property as the property listed in sch 14, that includes: 5 the right to use land ... 10 a consent granted under the Resource Management Act 1991 to do something that otherwise would contravene sections 12 to 15B of that Act (other than a consent for a reclamation), being a consent granted in or after— (a) the 1996–97 tax year, if the consent relates to sections 12 to 15 of that Act; or (b) the 2014–15 income year, if the consent relates to sections 15A and 15B of that Act While environmental consents are listed in sch 14(10), land consents are not. However, it is possible some consents could come within sch 14(5). As discussed below, the Commissioner’s view is that while it is possible that a land consent could be a right to use land, this is unlikely to occur very often. Outside of sch 14, there is no ability under the Act to depreciate intangible property (as a stand-alone item of property). A right to use land as depreciable intangible property in sch 14(5) Land consents can be depreciated as stand-alone items of depreciable intangible property if they are a “right to use land” under sch 14(5) and depreciable property under s EE 6. “Land” is defined broadly in s YA 1, as including any estate or interest in land, and an option to acquire land or an estate or interest in land, but does not include a mortgage. The meaning of a “right to use land” in sch 14 is discussed in ANZCO Foods Ltd v CIR \[2016\] NZHC 1015, (2016) 27 NZTC 22-049. The High Court considered whether a “right to use land” was a separate item of depreciable intangible property or merely part of the inherent rights of fee simple ownership. ANZCO purchased a meat processing plant that had previously been owned by a competitor. When the competitor sold the plant to a third party they had included a covenant preventing certain meat processing activities for a period of 20 years. An encumbrance was registered against the title. Subsequently, ANZCO purchased the property and the competitor considered they were breaching the terms of the encumbrance and commenced legal proceedings. Ultimately, a settlement was reached whereby ANZCO paid the competitor $5.6m and in return the encumbrance was altered to allow the meat processing activities in question. The settlement deed recorded this as being a grant of a right to use land from the competitor to ANZCO. ANZCO depreciated the $5.6m as a cost of the right to use land under sch 14. The Commissioner did not accept that there was a right to use land under sch 14. In ANZCO, Mander J specifically considered the meaning of the term “right to use land”. Mander J considered a “right to use land” under sch 14 refers to: • rights that have a finite life; and • rights to use land that are not part of the inherent ownership of the fee simple estate. Right to use land must have a finite life Section EE 62 reads: Criteria for listing in schedule 14 (2) For property to be listed in schedule 14, the criteria are as follows: IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 39 IN CONFIDENCE (a) it must be intangible; and (b) it must have a finite useful life that can be estimated with a reasonable degree of certainty on the date of its acquisition. Schedule 14 prevails (3) Property that is listed in schedule 14 is depreciable intangible property even if the criteria are not met. On the face of it there is an argument that subsection (3) means a right to use land does not have to have a finite life to be depreciable intangible property (although it would still need to decline in value under s EE 6). This approach was not adopted in ANZCO: \[96\] The “right to use land” as that term is used in sch 14, must be read in its statutory context – the objective of the Act, and in particular the purpose for which sch 14 was provided. The statutory intent of the criteria used in s EE 62 was to limit the interpretation of items of intangible property listed in the schedule to those that depreciate. This is consistent with the statutory purpose of the legislation to allow a deduction for an item of property used in deriving assessable income which declines in value over a finite period. \[97\] In Commissioner of Inland Revenue v Trustpower Limited \[Trustpower\] the Court of Appeal considered the depreciation regime provided by the Act. The case concerned deductions for expenditure incurred in the acquisition of various resource management consents. The consents included land use consents, water permits and discharge permits. The land use consents were for an unlimited duration, whereas the other permits were for fixed periods and would expire after a number of years. \[98\] The predecessor to the current regime, sch 17, also listed consents granted under the Resource Management Act 1991 as items of depreciable intangible property. In considering whether resource consents, as that term is described without qualification in the schedule, were intangible depreciable property, the Court of Appeal distinguished between the land use consents which were for an unlimited duration and the water and discharge permits which had been granted for fixed periods. The Court held: \[25\] In the case of intangible property, this provision \[section EE 6\] will apply if the three requirements of s EE 6(3) are met. As the cl 9 resource consents are “depreciable intangible property”, the first requirement is met. The land use consents of unlimited duration are not within the definition of “depreciable intangible property” because without a fixed term they cannot be “expected to decline in value” over time. \[99\] The approach taken by the Court of Appeal demonstrates that notwithstanding s EE 62(3), which provides that property listed in the schedule is depreciable intangible property even if the criteria are not met, the meaning of items listed in the schedule are still to be interpreted in accordance with the criteria provided in subs (2). Because the land use consents were not subject to any fixed term it was accepted they could not be expected to decline in value. That finding may be viewed as an amalgam of the criterion in s EE 62(2)(b) and the qualifying description of depreciable property in s EE 6(1), but the effect is the same; intangible depreciable property cannot include property that does not have a limited useful life. \[Emphasis added and footnote omitted\] In summary, the “right to use land”, must be read in its statutory context – the objective of the Act and its purpose. The High Court considered the intent of the criteria in s EE 62 is to limit the interpretation of items of intangible property listed in the schedule to those that depreciate. Further the purpose for which sch 14 was provided is to provide a deduction over time for an item of property used in deriving assessable income that declines in value over a finite period. The High Court notes that the finding in Trustpower was an amalgam of ss EE 6(1) (the property must decline in value) and EE 62 (the property must have a finite life) but the effect is the same and intangible depreciable property cannot include property that does not have a limited useful life. The approach adopted in ANZCO requires a land consent to have a finite life to be depreciable intangible property. This approach is consistent with Trustees in the CB Simkin IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 40 IN CONFIDENCE Trust and the Trustees in the NC Simkin Trust v CIR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,001, where the Privy Council (at \[8\]) were concerned with the predecessor of s EE 62 and considered that the types of intangible property in sch 14 were distinguished by the longevity of their useful lives. Right to use land not part of inherent ownership of fee simple Mander J’s conclusion in ANZCO is that a right to use land in sch 14 does not extend to include rights which form part of the ownership of the fee simple estate: \[108\] The meaning of a “right to use land” as listed in sch 14 as depreciable intangible property does not extend to include rights which form part of the ownership of the fee simple estate. The rights to use the land which became available to ANZCO as a result of the settlement do not have a finite useful life over which they will depreciate. As a consequence the payment made by ANZCO to obtain the variation of the encumbrance in order to access those rights reflects the increased capital value of the property in the hands of the owner. \[Emphasis added\] Mander J draws a clear distinction between the rights of the owner and the right of use, relying on the Court of Appeal’s decision in Trustees of the CB Simkin Trust and the Trustees in the NC Simkin Trust v CIR (2003) 21 NZTC 18,117 (which was upheld by the Privy Council on appeal). The case concerned the meaning of “the right to use a trademark” in sch 17 of the Income Tax Act 1994 (a predecessor to sch 14) rather than the “right to use land”. Gault J, delivering the decision of the Court, undertook a comprehensive analysis of the scheme of what was sch 17 (now sch 14). Specifically addressing a right to use land, Gault J considered the right to use land is clearly limited to rights distinguishable from right of use inherent in the ownership of the tangible property itself. In ANZCO, the removal of an encumbrance was found to be the return of the inherent rights of ownership and not a right to use land under sch 14. Mander J discusses at \[91\]–\[93\] how some rights to use land are rights inherent to the ownership of the land. In that case, the competitor had the benefit of the encumbrance but it never acquired any right to use the land, only a right to prevent the owner from using it. The right to use the land was with ANZCO at all times. Where a right to use land has been recognised by courts this has been in the context in which the term is usually understood, ie, a right to physically access land you do not own for a particular purpose. For instance, in Ben Nevis Forestry Ventures Ltd v CIR \[2008\] NZSC 115, \[2009\] 2 NZLR 289, one aspect of the structure that was ultimately held to be tax avoidance involved the forestry investors being granted a licence to use land for approximately 50 years to grow trees. However, the Supreme Court concluded that absent the tax avoidance conclusion, the licence to use the land for forestry purposes was a right to use land under sch 14 (at \[54\]). Whether a land consent is a right to use land If a land consent is to be a right to use land under sch 14(5), the first hurdle is that it has a finite life. The second hurdle is that it must be a right to use land separate from the rights of inherent ownership, that is, it is not a right obtained through ownership of the land. Land consents will generally not be a right to use land under sch 14 because land consents are usually granted for an unlimited duration (s 123 of the RMA) and so do not have a finite life (part of the criteria in s EE 62(2)). The Court of Appeal confirmed this point in Trustpower (at \[25\]) in relation to resource consents, considering that land use consents of unlimited duration are not within sch 14: IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 41 IN CONFIDENCE As the cl 9 \[now cl 10\] resource consents are “depreciable intangible property”, the first requirement is met. The land use consents of unlimited duration are not within the definition of “depreciable intangible property” because without a fixed term they cannot be “expected to decline in value” over time. \[Emphasis added\] Even if a land consent has a finite life, it still needs to be a right to use land. The RMA prevents people from subdividing property and doing anything contrary to the district plan. Land consents are by default infinite rights (s 123 of the RMA) that attach to the land (s 134 of the RMA). Because they attach to the land they can be used by any owner and cannot be transferred separately from the land. Sections 9 and 11 of the RMA are drafted in a way that restrict certain inherent rights of property ownership and a consent will remove that fetter on ownership rather than create a new and separate right to use land. In most cases where a land owner obtains a land consent (say to build a certain distance from the boundary or to build a three-storey property) they are having rights returned to them that become indistinguishable from the inherent rights of ownership of the land. However, there may be instances where a land consent is a right to use land and has a finite life. This might be the case where the person does not own the relevant property, ie, they may be granted a licence to access the land for a particular purpose. For instance, time-limited land consents may be granted for concert performances, carnivals on the beach, flea markets in car parks, street parades and temporary events. This issue could also arise in relation to land consents for reclamation of seabed, foreshore, rivers and lakes (or using them in a way that is contrary to a district plan) as the person seeking the land consent may not have any rights of ownership in respect of the land. However, these land consents would need to be time-limited to be a depreciable right to use land. If a land consent is a right to use land under sch 14, then it is depreciable intangible property. The costs are depreciable by reference to their fixed life in the same way as environmental consents. However, depending on the circumstances, some time-limited consents may be deductible as revenue expenditure. This may arise where a land consent is granted for a one-off event or a short duration and so provides no enduring benefit. Conclusion on a right to use land under schedule 14 In conclusion, there is limited scope for land consents to be a right to use land under sch 14. This is restricted to rare circumstances where the consents: • are granted for a finite duration; and • give rise to a right to use land, meaning it must be a right to use exercised independently from the rights of ownership, ie, fee simple owners will not usually have a separate right to use. Land consent expenditure capitalised into other depreciable property While most land consents are unlikely to be depreciable as depreciable intangible property under sch 14, expenditure on land consents may be capitalised into the cost of a resulting item of property. However, where this is not possible there will be no depreciation deduction. Whether expenditure on a land consent is a cost of another item of property depends on the terms of the consent and the relationship to the property. To be included in the cost of another item of depreciable property the expenditure must satisfy the general principles in relation to cost, discussed above from \[39\]. It seems generally well accepted that expenditure on a land consent can be capitalised into the cost of a resulting asset. The Officials’ Report on the Taxation (Miscellaneous Issues) Bill 1995 discusses the tax treatment of land use consents: IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 42 IN CONFIDENCE Issue: Cost of land use resource management consents Clause 62 Submission (43 - New Zealand Society of Accountants; 37W - Mercury Energy) Where land use consents that have an infinite life relate to the erection of a structure their cost should be added to the cost of the structure and depreciated. Comment The bill allows depreciation of fixed-life resource management consents. In relation to land use consents that have an infinite life, it was announced in the Commentary on the Bill that Inland Revenue considered that, where such consents relate to the erection of a structure, they have a finite useful life that is the life of the structure. Inland Revenue is therefore currently working on a Tax Information Bulletin item that proposes that, for depreciation purposes, the cost of land use consents that pertain to the erection of a structure should be included in the cost of the structure. Mercury and the New Zealand Society of Accountants note that this policy is both logical and appropriate and is fully endorsed by them. The submission does not seek an amendment to the legislation. \[Emphasis added\] The commentary relating to the introduction and amendment of s DB 13B (now s DB 19 and discussed above from \[119\]) contains comments about the correct tax treatment of land use consents. The reasoning behind the insertion of s DB 13B by the Taxation (Venture Capital and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2004 was explained in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 1 (February 2005) as follows: A new section DJ 14B has also been added to the Income Tax Act 1994 and new section DB 13B to the 2004 Act to allow deductibility for costs associated with resource management consent applications that are not granted or are withdrawn. Again, the costs that are deductible are those that would have been part of the cost of a resource consent (for depreciation purposes) if the application had been granted. On the recommendation of the Finance and Expenditure Committee, the change applies to both resource consent applications that, if successful, would have resulted in consents with a fixed legal life (fixed life intangible property) as well as non-fixed life consents that would nevertheless have been depreciable by other means (for example, included in the cost of a building or other structures). \[Emphasis added\] Allowing expenditure on a land consent to be added to the cost of the resulting asset, to which it is directly attributable, recognises that the consent’s useful life is not unlimited but mirrors that of the asset. For instance, if a resource consent is granted based on plans to permit a building to extend beyond the building envelope, then in most instances once that building has been completed the resource consent has no further utility. It continues to exist but is inseparable from the building. In these circumstances, it would be unrealistic to say it has an infinite life separate from the building. Where the useful life of a land consent does not correspond to that of a particular asset, it suggests that the resource consent should not be capitalised to the cost of the asset. In the majority of cases the resulting asset will be obvious (eg, if a land consent is obtained for the construction of a road, then the asset is the road). Where consents potentially relate to more than one asset, an issue arises as to how the expenditure should be allocated. Allocating the cost between items of property On large infrastructure projects there could conceivably be improvements to land, new roads and access ways, hardstanding, plant, structures and buildings. Identifying the correct resulting items of depreciable property will have significant implications for taxpayers because some items will not depreciate at all (eg, land) and other items will depreciate at varying rates. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 43 IN CONFIDENCE Where there is expenditure on a land consent, it is first necessary to identify the various items of property for depreciation purposes that the consent relates to. Allocating the cost of a land consent will be possible once the item of depreciable property is clearly identified. The general principles in determining “cost” are discussed above from \[39\]. In short, the cost of an asset includes expenditure that must be incurred to acquire it. This requirement is determined by reference to the commercial reality, with consideration given to standard business practice and what is commercially required to obtain the asset. Case law allows standard accounting practice to be used in interpreting cost. In the accounting standards, construction costs are generally included in the cost of an asset along with any costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary to operate it. If a land consent is required for the construction of an asset it will be directly attributable to that asset. The requirements under district plans vary from place to place but the construction of many buildings and structures will require resource consents. In these cases a consent will be obtained based on plans or specifications to build a structure to a certain height, at a certain location or to undertake specific commercial or industrial uses. In these circumstances, expenditure on a land resource consent will likely be part of the cost base of the structure. Resource consent expenditure may be incurred in circumstances where it is not directly attributable to a single item of property. Where that is the case, the Commissioner will require apportionment of the expenditure on a reasonable basis between the items of property. The exact nature of any apportionment will depend on the facts. Sometimes a condition of a resource consent will require the consent holder to construct another asset (see Example 11) that will require further “sub-consents”. The first step is to identify the items of property for depreciation purposes. If the new asset is functionally and physical distinct from the existing assets, it is likely to be a separate item of property for depreciation purposes. Because the sub-consent was required for the construction of the new asset it is likely to be a cost of the new asset. Treatment of different property Land Land is not depreciable property (s EE 7) because it usually appreciates in value. Where the resulting item is land, expenditure on a land consent directly attributable to the land will not be depreciable. In Queenstown Airport Corporation Ltd v CIR \[2017\] NZCA 20, (2017) 28 NZTC 23-002 the Court of Appeal considered that contouring, levelling, draining, excavation, filling and reclamation were inseparable from the underlying land and not likely to be subject to loss in value due to wear and tear or obsolescence: \[46\] Land (apart from certain specified land improvements) is not depreciable because, unlike other assets, it does not have a determinate design life after which replacement in whole or in part is expected to be necessary. Nor is it expected to decline in value over time through ordinary wear and tear. \[47\] The text of the ITA makes it clear that the items listed as improvements in schedule 13 are exceptions to the general rule that land is not depreciable. There is nothing to suggest Parliament intended that the generous approach advocated by the appellant should be adopted in interpreting the specified items. The structure of the relevant provisions does not support this. Rather, Parliament has chosen to specify the items it has concluded are to be treated as exceptions to the general prohibition on the depreciation of land. \[48\] The analysis in the 1992 officials’ paper we have set out above is helpful in identifying two relevant categories of land improvements. The first is improvements to the land itself such as contouring, levelling, draining, excavation, filling, reclaiming and making retaining walls. These were considered to be inseparable from the land and not likely to be subject to loss in value due to wear and tear or obsolescence. The second category comprises structures or other additions to the land itself that were considered likely to diminish in IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 44 IN CONFIDENCE value over time due to fair wear and tear. The examples given were fences, dams, cables and bridges. Since it was considered this category would be difficult to define, the list approach was prepared and adopted. \[49\] The items listed in schedule 13 clearly reflect this approach and may be regarded as improvements or additions on or under the land itself. The items listed are likely to be subject to fair wear and tear such that they would ultimately require replacement in whole or in part during their anticipated design life. \[footnotes omitted\] Accordingly, where a land consent is obtained for improvements to the land itself, such as contouring, levelling, draining, excavation, filling and reclamation, expenditure on the consent will not be depreciable. This is because the expenditure is directly attributable to the land, which is not depreciable property. However, expenditure on land consents for contouring, levelling, draining, excavation, filling and reclamation can still be depreciable where it forms part of the cost of a resulting item of depreciable property that is not land. This might be the case where, for example, a land consent is obtained to excavate foundations for a structure that is depreciable. The land and foundations are not physically or functionally distinct from the structure. Accordingly, the resulting item of property for depreciation purposes is the structure. This treatment recognises that where land is altered to accommodate a structure (eg, excavations for foundations), the altered land and the structure will often have a similar useful life. In summary, where the resulting asset is land, expenditure on land consents will not be depreciable. This may apply to consents for reclamation, earthworks, drainage, levelling or contouring. Similarly, subdivision consents will usually create an asset that is land, in which case there will be no depreciation (although expenditure on subdivision consents may be a cost of revenue account property and deductible this way). Buildings From the 2011–12 income year, the depreciation rate for buildings with an EUL of 50 years or more is 0%. Accordingly, where expenditure incurred to obtain a land consent forms part of the cost of a building of this type there will be no depreciation deduction. An example would be where a land consent is required under the district plan to construct a building (with an EUL of 50 years or more) within a certain distance of the boundary or to a certain height. Expenditure on the consent can be capitalised into the cost base of the building but because the building depreciates at 0% there is no deduction. Schedule 13 depreciable improvements to land In Queenstown Airport the Court of Appeal differentiated between improvements to the land (not depreciable) and improvements on the land (the items listed in sch 13 and depreciable). Expenditure incurred to obtain a land consent required to construct any of the items listed in sch 13 (eg, airport runways, dams, swimming pools, roads, fences) will be depreciable as such expenditure forms part of the cost of the item. Other depreciable property Where a land consent is required to construct or operate an item of depreciable property, the expenditure may form part of the cost of the item of depreciable property. Provided the consent has sufficient connection to be a cost of the asset it can be capitalised into the cost base of the asset and depreciated at the rate that applies to that item. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 45 IN CONFIDENCE Further examples The following further examples are included to assist in explaining the application of the general principles outlined in this statement. Example 13 is based on the lifecycle of an infrastructure project and focuses on a number of narrow issues and principles. Consequently, this is a simplification of what happens on infrastructure projects and the example assumes that the consent is only for the turbines and the example does not address different items of depreciable property nor different depreciation rates. Examples Example 11 – Expenditure on two land consents Incin-a-lot Ltd obtains a land consent to build a new chimney at their existing premises. It needs a land consent because the district plan places a restriction on building structures over a certain height. The expenditure on the land consent forms part of the cost of the chimney, which is an item of depreciable property. Consequently, the company can add the expenditure on the land consent to the cost of the chimney and depreciate it at the applicable rate. As a condition of the resource consent, the council requires Incin-a-lot Ltd to build an earth wall close to the state highway so that the new chimney is less visible from the road. The earth wall requires a land consent for the earthworks and contouring. The expenditure on the resource consent for the earth wall cannot be allocated to the cost of the chimney. The earth wall is functionally and physically distinct from the chimney. Expenditure to obtain the land consent is directly attributable to the earth wall. That means that expenditure on the land consent is capitalised into the cost of the earth wall. Example 12 – Land improvement or asset constructed on land Dave and Barbara’s charter boat business (see Example 6) has been so successful they now have a number of boats and employees. Their floating pontoon is no longer big enough for their business. They want to replace the floating pontoon with a large modern wharf. As part of the construction they must reclaim a strip of land at the water’s edge. This will strengthen the estuary bank to allow heavy construction vehicles to be used in the construction of the wharf. Amongst other things these vehicles are required to drive the supporting structure into the estuary bed. After construction the reclaimed land will be used as a picnic area for Dave and Barbara’s customers and staff. A reclamation consent is a type of land consent and not depreciable property. However, expenditure on land consents can potentially be part of the cost of the resulting item of property. Proper identification of the resulting asset is important because if the expenditure is part of the cost base of the wharf it is depreciable (wharves are depreciable under sch 13). If the expenditure is a cost of a non- depreciable land improvement (that is obtaining the reclaimed land) then there will be no depreciation deduction. Judgement is required to determine whether improvements to land should be part of the cost of the land or part of the cost of some other asset constructed on the land. It may depend on the nature and extent of the land improvements. In this particular case the wharf and the reclaimed land are distinct items of property. The wharf structure is built into the estuary bed not the reclaimed land. Functionally the reclaimed land and the wharf also serve different purposes. There are two items of property and the reclamation consent is directly attributable to the reclaimed land and not the wharf. Consequentially the expenditure is not depreciable. Example 13 – Major infrastructure project After the failure of its solar energy plant, Wild Coast Electricity Ltd (see Example 4) is searching for new wind power sites. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 46 IN CONFIDENCE Wild Coast Electricity engages a contractor to monitor wind readings at numerous sites across the Lower North Island. The contractor accesses the sites and prepares a report comparing the wind readings and suitability of the sites. The expenditure is not directed towards making tangible progress on a specific capital project. The cost of the report and amounts paid to farmers for site access are deductible under the principles in IS 17/01: “Income tax – deductibility of feasibility expenditure”. Based on the contractor’s recommendation, Wild Coast Electricity decides to go ahead and develop three sites in the Wairarapa, that they name Rimu, Kowhai and Kauri. Wild Coast Electricity wants to apply for land consents to erect wind turbines on the sites and commissions detailed environmental reports, drawings showing the placement of the turbines and an engineering report that contains all the specifications for the model of turbine being used. The reports will be used as part of the application. Rimu site The environmental report for Rimu shows that the site is close to the habitat of the Waiohine Robin, an endangered native species. A local volunteer group has been set up to protect the robins. They monitor bird numbers and set traps for predators. Although there are only a dozen volunteers they have a decent following on social media. The company gets an opinion from a specialist resource consent lawyer who believes the proximity of the Waiohine robin means it is 50/50 as to whether they will be granted resource consent. Costly mitigation strategies and additional legal costs are certain to affect the profitability. Wild Coast Electricity also thinks it will be a reputation risk and decides not to lodge an application for resource consent. Expenditure on obtaining a land consent for the construction and use of the turbines would have been able to be capitalised into the cost of the wind turbines and depreciated if the development went ahead. On this basis, s DB 19 allows a deduction once the company decides not to proceed with the development. The expenditure on the environmental report, drawings and legal fees can all be deducted under s DB 19. The engineering report is specific to the model of turbine and the report was to be used for the resource consent applications at all three sites. As the same engineering report will be used for the resource consent application at the other sites it is not appropriate to deduct the entire cost. In these circumstances a reasonable approach is an apportionment of a third to each site. However, a reasonable apportionment on some other basis may also be acceptable, for instance, in some circumstances it might be more reasonable to apportion the expenditure based on the expected number of turbines at each site. Kowhai site At the Kowhai site, access is over a farmer’s land and Wild Coast Electricity decides it wants an initial five-year easement. Wild Coast Electricity negotiates with the farmer for an easement and one of the conditions of the easement is that the company will put in a short single-lane metalled road over the farmer’s land that they will use for egress. They pay the farmer $15,000 for the grant of the easement and laying the metalled road costs a further $10,000. The easement is a right to use land under sch 14(5) and is depreciable over its fixed life. The metalled road is not owned by Wild Coast Electricity but is part of the cost of the right to use land and so can be capitalised to that easement and depreciated. Kauri site The development of the Kauri site looks promising. However, one close neighbour is a rural school. The resource consent specialist lawyer advises that without the school’s agreement the resource consent application is likely to end up in a contested Environment Court hearing. If opposed by the school, it will cost the company significantly more and there is a strong possibility resource consent would be blocked. Even if resource consent was granted the conditions imposed could make the development un-commercial. The school and Wild Coast Electricity enter into an agreement where the school will support the granting of the resource consent. In return, Wild Coast Electricity will build a new school playground away from any development on the other side of the school. Wild Coast Electricity goes ahead and builds the new playground at a cost of $25,000 and wants to know how this expenditure is treated for tax purposes. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 47 IN CONFIDENCE To be deductible or depreciable the expenditure must be either deductible under the general permission, deductible under a specific provision in the Act or able to be capitalised into the cost of depreciable property owned by the company. To determine whether the expenditure is capital or revenue in nature it is necessary to apply the principles in Trustpower (and other case law), including considering the need or occasion giving rise to the expenditure. In this case, the need or occasion of the expenditure is to obtain the school’s agreement (or agreement not to object) to the resource consent for building the Kauri windfarm on terms that are commercially viable. The Kauri windfarm will be part of and extend Wild Coast Electricity’s capital structure. On these facts, the Commissioner considers the expenditure is capital in nature as it is a one-off cost incurred to expand Wild Coast Electricity’s capital structure. In this case the expenditure is not deductible under the general permission as it is capital. Where a taxpayer incurs capital expenditure on obtaining an item of property they would usually capitalise this to the cost of the property and (assuming it is depreciable property) depreciate the cost. The playground is not owned by Wild Coast Electricity and cannot be depreciated by it. A depreciation deduction is only available to the extent that the expenditure is a “cost” of an item of depreciable property owned by Wild Coast Electricity. The case law says a cost is “that which must be given in order to acquire something”. A transaction must be viewed in its commercial reality and assistance may be derived from common business practice. In this particular circumstance, the commercial reality is that the expenditure incurred under the agreement with the school is necessary to obtain the resource consent. On these facts the expenditure is directly attributable to the consent. The purpose of the expenditure incurred on building the playground is to acquire the consent and Wild Coast Electricity did not obtain any other property or asset to which the expenditure could be attributed. The expenditure is also necessary, proportionate and has a temporal relationship with obtaining the consent. Whether expenditure is a “cost” of an item of property will depend on the particular facts, but in this instance the $25,000 is expenditure that is a cost of obtaining the land consent to build the wind turbines. Kowhai site stalled The market conditions are such that a single development at the Kauri site will be sufficient to meet current demand, so Wild Coast Electricity decides to stall any development of the Kowhai site for the time being. A deduction under s DB 19 for expenses for the various reports for the Kowhai site is not available at this point because the project is stalled rather than abandoned. In the meantime, Wild Coast Electricity wants to store equipment at the Kowhai site. The site is logistically important to Wild Coast Electricity’s long-term operations and is also close to the Kauri site. Wild Coast Electricity applies for a land consent for a storage building. The consent is granted and a building with a useful life of more than 50 years is constructed. The expenditure on the land consent can be capitalised to the cost base of the building but in this case the depreciation rate is 0%. Consent obtained for Kauri site With the school’s support, land consent for the construction of the wind turbines at the Kauri site is granted. The consent is not depreciable as a stand-alone asset, has an unlimited duration and is not depreciable property that has a fixed legal life. However, the expenditure on obtaining the consent can be capitalised into the cost of the turbines and depreciated at the rate that applies to the turbines. One of the conditions imposed on the resource consent is that Wild Coast Electricity must monitor and keep a record of all bird strikes for the life of the turbines. As part of this, it must also provide an email address that members of the public can contact to report any hurt or dead birds. Expenditure on monitoring bird strikes is an ongoing and recurring part of Wild Coast Electricity’s business. It provides no enduring benefit. For Wild Coast Electricity, this sort of expenditure is revenue in nature as it is an ordinary incident of business and is therefore deductible. Kauri site expansion IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 48 IN CONFIDENCE After a couple of years, Wild Coast Electricity successfully negotiates the purchase of land adjoining the Kauri site from a farmer. Wild Coast Electricity applies for a new resource consent for stage 2, which will involve adding additional wind turbines. In applying for a new resource consent, Wild Coast Electricity reuses some of the reports from the previous application. The expenditure incurred on these reports has already been capitalised and depreciated. The reports were obtained and used specifically for the resource consent applications for stage 1 and in this circumstance it is appropriate that the entire expenditure is allocated as a cost of stage 1. If the developments had been contemporaneous an apportionment on a reasonable basis would have been appropriate. IS 18/06: 5 November 2018 49 IN CONFIDENCE Related rulings/statements Draft Interpretation Statement PUB00274: Income tax – identifying the item of property for depreciation purposes IS 17/01: “Income tax – deductibility of feasibility expenditure”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 3 (April 2017): 15 IS 10/06: “Deductibility of business relocation costs”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 8 (September 2010): 20 QB 15/13: “Income tax – whether the cost of acquiring an option to acquire revenue account land is deductible”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 28, No 1 (February 2016): 64 BR Pub 09/08: “Cost price of the vehicle – meaning of the term for fringe tax benefit purposes”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 22, No 1 (February 2010): 3 IS 17/05: “Income tax – treatment of New Zealand patents”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 29, No 6 (July 2017): 4 IS 08/03: “Resource consent application fees and provision of works, provisions of information and transfer of land as conditions of resource consent – GST treatment”, Tax Information Bulletin Vol 20, No 8 (September/October 2008): 15 Subject references Income tax, resource consent, depreciation, costs Legislative references Income Tax Act 1976 – s 124 Income Tax Act 2004 – s EE 53, sch 17, Income Tax Act 2007 – ss DA 1, DA 2, DB 19, DB 23, DB 46, DB 62, EA 2, subpart EE, ss EE 1–12, EE 16, EE 18, EE 19, EE 33, EE 37, EE 48, EE 50–60, EE 62, EE 67, FA 5, FA 9, YA 1, sch 13, sch 14, sch 19 Resource Management Act 1991 – ss 9, 11, 12– 15B, 36, 87, 108, 123–127, 134–138, 218, sch 4 Case references ANZCO Foods Ltd v CIR \[2016\] NZHC 1015, (2016) 27 NZTC 22-049 Ben Nevis Forestry Ventures Ltd v CIR \[2008\] NZSC 115, \[2009\] 2 NZLR 289 BP Australia Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation for the Commonwealth of Australia \[1966\] AC 224 (PC) BP Refinery (Kwinana) Ltd v FCT 8 AITR 113 Buckley & Young Ltd v CIR (1978) 3 NZTC 61,271 (CA) Case T53 (1998) 18 NZTC 8,404 CIR v Atlas Copco (NZ) Ltd (1990) 12 NZTC 7,327 CIR v Banks (1978) 3 NZTC 61,236 (CA) Commissioner of Taxes v Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines \[1964\] AC 948 (PC) ECC Quarries Ltd v Watkis (HMIT) \[1975\] All ER 843 Hallstroms Pty Ltd v FCT (1946) 72 CLR 634 (HCA) IRC v Barclay, Curle & Co Ltd \[1969\] 1 All ER 732 Milburn NZ Limited v CIR (2001) 20 NZTC 17,017 Omihi Lime Co Ltd v CIR \[1964\] NZLR 731 Queenstown Airport Corporation Limited v CIR \[2017\] NZCA 20, (2017) 28 NZTC 23-002 Tasman Forestry Limited v CIR (1999) 19 NZTC 15,147 (CA) Trustees in the CB Simkin Trust and the Trustees in the NC Simkin Trust v CIR (2005) 22 NZTC 19,001 (PC); and Trustees of the CB Simkin Trust and the Trustees in the NC Simkin Trust v CIR (2003) 21 NZTC 18,117 (CA) Trustpower Ltd v CIR \[2016\] NZSC 91 (2016) 27 NZTC 22-061; CIR v Trustpower Ltd \[2015\] NZCA 253, \[2015\] 3 NZLR 658; and Trustpower Ltd v CIR \[2013\] NZHC \[2014\] 2 NZLR 502 Waste Management New Zealand Ltd v Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1995) 17 NZTC 12,147 (CA) Wilke v CIR (1998) 18 NZTC 13,923 Other references Officials’ Report to the Finance and Expenditure Committee on Submissions on the Taxation (Base Maintenance and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2004 Commentary on the Taxation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 1995 Appendix to the report of Legislative Affairs to the Ministers of Finance and Revenue (19 June 1995) Officials’ Report on the Taxation (Miscellaneous Issues) Bill 1995 NZ IAS 16 and NZ IAS 38 Chapter 1 of the Final Report of the Consultative Committee on the Taxation of Income from Capital (February 1991) Tax Information Bulletin Vol 17, No 1 (February 2005); Tax Information Bulletin Vol 9, No 12 (November 1997) Concise Oxford English Dictionary (12th Edition, 2011) References