\[ IN CONFIDENCE\] Proactive release: This document has been released by Inland Revenue under section 18(3) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. This release supports the purposes of the Official Information Act 1982 by increasing progressively the availability of official information to the people of New Zealand. Inland Revenue report: Transformation status update: December 2021/January 2022 Date: 08 February 2022 Priority: Medium Security level: In confidence Report number: IR2022/043 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Finance Note the contents of this report None Minister of Revenue Note the contents of this report None C ontact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Greg James Deputy Commissioner, Transformation Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA 3 IR2022/043: Transformation status update: December 2021/January 2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Note: Table 2 on the previous page does not include ongoing costs that sit outside of the programme. These total $012 million until 2023/24 and ex-gratia payments to KiwiSaver members of $7.2 million (IR2020/ 490 refers). 5. Between 1 July 2014 and 30 June 2020, the programme spent $747 million in operating, and $374.9 million in capital. Any under-spending to date has either been moved to later periods or returned to the Crown. 6. The overall budget for the current phase of transformation, Stage 4, is $274.8 million for operating expenditure and $90.3 million for capital expenditure. We are on track to come in on budget for Stage 4. Transitional operating costs have changed this month to reflect approved funding for START development. 7. Shortly, we will send the final progress update for transformation (please refer to paragraphs 15 and 16) to the Minister of Revenue to consider. In the paper we will provide an estimate of the remaining funding we expect to be able to hand back at the completion of the programme. This will be in addition to the approximately $160 million, including depreciation and capital charge, we have handed back to date. Recommendatio ns 8. I recommend that you note the contents of this report. Noted Noted Greg James Deputy Commissioner, Transformation 08 February 2022 Hon Grant Robertson Hon David Parker Minister of Finance Minister of Revenue / /2022 / /2022 4 IR2022/043: Transformation status update: December 2021/January 2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Progress updates Stage 4, release 2 update 9. We successfully exited early life support for child support and for the upgraded version of myIR on 31 January 2022, as planned. 10. Responsibility for delivering changes in START transferred to its new home in our organisation structure, Planning, Design & Delivery in Customer and Compliance Services – Business, on 1 December 2021. This means that START changes will no longer be delivered by the programme team. Decommissioning 11. We are on track with our decommissioning activity. 12. As at January 2022, we had decommissioned approximately 81% of our heritage systems, and removed about 30% of the infrastructure components from our heritage data centres. These percentages have increased significantly since we last reported them to you (IR2021/507 refers). There is no direct correlation between applications and infrastructure, as much of the infrastructure supports multiple applications. 13. A key achievement during January 2022 was the successful relocation of our contact centre solution from our heritage systems to our new data centres. 14. Our high-level timetable remains: • From 1 December 2021 until early April 2022, we will shut down old heritage systems, archive any data that is to be retained, and then remove the systems and databases. • In April 2022, once all the systems have been removed, the network connections and supporting services will be shut down, and the process of dismantling and disposing of the infrastructure will begin. • We remain on track to e xit our heritage Unisys data centres by 30 June 2022. Final progress update for Cabinet 15. You agreed (IR2021/309 refers) that the final progress update for transformation would be provided to Cabinet in February 2022. This timing was agreed before the Cabinet Committee timetable for 2022 was set. The Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee (GOV) will meet on 10 February 2022. For the paper to be considered at this meeting, it would have ha d to be finalised by 3 February 2022. As we have not yet finalised the paper for the Minister of Revenue to review, it was not possible for us to meet this date. 16. We are aiming to have the final transformation progress update considered at GOV’s meeting on 17 March 2022. We intend to provide the draft paper to the Minister of Revenue by mid-February 2022. Key risks and issues 17. The transformation programme’s risk profile remains light amber this month. A light amber profile means that risks and mitigations are defined and understood, and the mitigations are expected to be successful. 18. The issue (a risk that has been realised) relating to Vodafone being unable to provide the support needed to move a heritage application from our heritage Unisys data centre 5 IR2022/043: Transformation status update: December 2021/January 2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] to the cloud before Christmas, due to resource availability, has been resolved. Together with Vodafone, we identified a solution and completed this work as planned before Christmas. 19. As of December 2021 2 , the programme had a total of 15 open risks 3 . One of these risks is reported to the Portfolio Governance Committee (PGC). 20. Three risks previously reported to the PGC were closed during December 2021: • The risk relating to decommissioning FIRST by 30 June 2022 did not eventuate, as FIRST was handed over to Unisys to begin decommissioning on 30 November 2021 as planned. • The risk relating to delays in decommissioning the heritage KiwiSaver business-to- business solution did not eventuate. All KiwiSaver providers have successfully migrated to the new gateway services. • The risk relating to decommissioning SAP, which supports our payroll, did not eventuate. Our payroll system was successfully relocated to a cloud-based solution on 15 November 2021. 21. The one remaining risk reported to the PGC relates to delays in decommissioning our heritage data warehouse, an application our staff use to analyse data 4 . The current rating of this risk is high. However, it is unlikely to occur (a 3% to 10% chance), as the majority of the planned mitigations have been completed and the issue relating to Vodafone resourcing has been resolved (refer to paragraph 18 ). Coming up in the next two months 22. Key activities over the next two months include: February 2022 • Continue with decommissioning activity, including decommissioning our heritage data warehouse. March 2022 • Continue with decommissioning activity. • Final progress update considered by the Cabinet Government Administration and Expenditure Review Committee. 2 Programme risks were not re-assessed during January 2022 due to the holiday break. 3 During December 2021, nine programme risks were closed, including three reported to the PGC. One risk was transferred from the programme to its enduring home to manage. 4 This risk has since been closed, which we will formally report in the February status update.