Page 1 of 2 Programme Governance - Key BT Governance and Management meetings 1 Governance Forum Role Chair Secretariat Occurrence Terms of Reference (TOR) BT Weekly Meeting The BT Weekly Meeting considers escalations from the programme requiring urgent attention, with focus on critical issues, roadblocks, big decisions. DC Transformation Weekly BT Release Delivery Team Meeting The Release Delivery Team Meeting is a weekly forum that encourages integrated delivery of a quality solution that meets both schedule and functional expectations, it also provides an opportunity for information sharing, round table team status updates and discussion, collective issue and risk review, update and escalation, discussion of special topics of interest and is the opportunity for those collectively responsible for successful release delivery to assemble as a team. , START Release 4.0 Lead / , Release Support Lead Weekly Programme Risk Meeting (PRM) The Business Transformation Programme Risk Meeting (PRM) focuses solely on Programme-level risks and issues, that is those escalated to PGC and PLT. There are no programme updates as these will occur at the fortnightly delivery focussed release meetings. This meeting may as required cover strategic matters. The PRM will ensure all Programme-level risks and issues are well managed and any approved changes to risks and issues (as a result of this meeting) will be included in the current month’s PGC pack. DC Transformation Monthly, the Tuesday prior to PGC Transformation EWC (TEWC) The Transformation Executive Working Committee (TEWC) will be responsible for providing wider business support for the Business Transformation Programme. The TEWC will provide management guidance to maintain Programme momentum in a dynamic business environment. The TEWC will also approve Design Decisions escalated from the programme Design Authority. In addition, the TEWC will act as a prioritisation forum for design ideas and changes that will occur during the life of the programme. This will take the form of a “change backlog” which the TEWC will provide the programme and IR with prioritisation direction. DC Transformation Monthly BT Finances and Headcount meeting The BT Finances and Headcount meeting considers the financial position for the Programme with a focus on the forecast outturn and emerging financial risks and opportunities. DC Transformation As applicable Monthly 1 Updated August 2019; File location: https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/deliv/Forms/D3042 Programme Management Plan/Key BT Goveranance and Management meetings IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE Page 2 of 2 Governance Forum Role Chair Secretariat Occurrence Terms of Reference (TOR) This forum is an opportunity for Programme leads to discuss their workstream budgets and forecasts, noting any forecast deviations are managed through a formal review and approval process. This meeting is attended by DC Transformation and direct reports. Design Authority The Design Authority (DA) for the BT Programme will provide a forum at which ALL aspects of programme design will be presented, discussed, demonstrated (where practical) and endorsed and/or approved. Architecture and Design Lead Weekly Technical Design Authority The Technical Design Authority (TDA) for the BT Programme will provide a forum at which all technical aspects of programme design will be presented, discussed, demonstrated (where practical) endorsed and/or approved. Architecture and Design Lead Weekly Data Owners Forum The Data Owners Forum will own the business processes across IR that will be incorporated into the Business Transformation solutions, and will ratify, refine and recommend changes to the existing business processes. The BOFs will ensure that the Future State business processes represent the optimum future state in terms of best practice relative to benchmarking research, and are fit for purpose to deliver the IR Target Operating Model and the “IR for the Future Vision and Strategy”. , Group Manager Performance & Optimisation, Business Data Stream Every three weeks Information Systems Owners Forum / Technical Architecture Design Council Covers off the business processes across IR that will be incorporated into BT solutions. Chief Technology Officer, Information Fortnightly To provide executive authority for managing and controlling all technical design components associated with the Programme. Please refer to the Programme Forums Calendar which confirms calendar detail for the various governance meetings outlined above. IN CONFIDENCE - EXTERNAL RELEASE