KiwiSaver T rademark Guidelines – Media August 2020 2 Contents page 1. Introduction2 2. Use of the word “KiwiSaver”2 3. Use of the KiwiSaver Logo4 4. Definitions6 3 1. Introduction 1.1 Inland Revenue wishes to protect the integrity of KiwiSaver and the KiwiSaver Trade Marks and therefore asks the media to use the KiwiSaver Trade Marks according to these simple guidelines. 1.2 This will help Inland Revenue to: (a) maintain the integrity of KiwiSaver and stop the KiwiSaver Trade Marks being damaged or diluted; and (b) prevent use of the KiwiSaver Trade Marks by third parties that confuses, misleads or deceives the public. 1.3 These guidelines describe how the KiwiSaver Trade Marks should be used by the media purely in editorial (non-commercial) articles and news coverage. 1.4 Any use of the KiwiSaver Trade Marks for commercial purposes is reserved for Inland Revenue’s licensees, such as KiwiSaver scheme providers. No entities are permitted to use the KiwiSaver Trade Marks (including the KiwiSaver Logo) for any commercial purposes unless they are authorised to do so by Inland Revenue. 1.5 Please contact Inland Revenue if you have any questions regarding use of the KiwiSaver Trade Marks in a commercial context. 2. Use of the word “KiwiSaver” 2.1 The KiwiSaver savings initiative consists of various authorised scheme providers offering their own savings products and services. Care should be taken by the media to correctly identify scheme providers and their schemes and to distinguish them from the overall KiwiSaver savings initiative. For this reason there are certain guidelines that the media should follow when using the word “KiwiSaver”. 2.2 The word “KiwiSaver” should always be used in the following ways: (a) “KiwiSaver” should appear as one word and be spelt with a capital K and capital S. (b) Only use the word “KiwiSaver” on its own when referring to the KiwiSaver savings initiative, for example: “KiwiSaver involves employers, scheme providers and several government agencies.” 2.3 The word “KiwiSaver” should not be used in the following ways: (a) as part of the expression “KiwiSaver fund” as this is an inaccurate way to refer to a KiwiSaver scheme; (b) in conjunction with the name, trading name or trade mark of an organisation; (c) use of the word “KiwiSaver” in an abbreviated or shortened form of a KiwiSaver scheme name (for example, reference to the “XYZ KiwiSaver Scheme” as “XYZ KiwiSaver”); (d) use of any of the expressions “KiwiSavers”, “KiwiSaving” or any other word or term where the word “KiwiSaver” (or a variation of that word) is used as a verb or collective noun; or (e) use of the word “KiwiSaver” in any stylised form or as part of any logo other than as set out in section 3. 4 3. Use of the KiwiSaver Logo 3.1 The KiwiSaver Logo should be used and reproduced without any alterations. The media should use electronically sourced ar twork at all times and Inland Revenue has made appropriate artwork available for download at www.ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver. The TM symbol should appear with the KiwiSaver Logo as indicated in the examples below. 3.2 The smallest size that the KiwiSaver Logo should appear is 25mm wide for colour and greyscale versions, and 20mm wide for black versions. 3.3 Clear space should be included around the KiwiSaver Logo to ensure the logo isn’t crowded by other graphics. The minimum clear space is determined by the height of the ‘w’ above and below the logo, and the width of the ‘w’ on the sides of the logo. 3.4 The KiwiSaver Logo should be reproduced in the correct colours, or in black and white. If you are printing in full colour, you should reproduce the KiwiSaver Logo in a full colour option. Full-colour version (green and stone) The media should use this when printing in full colour, on a white or very pale background. Single-colour version (green only) The media should use this when printing in single colour, on a white or very pale background. Full-colour version (green and white) The media should use this when printing in full colour, on mid-tone backgrounds. 25mm25mm20mm 5 Full-colour version (stone and white) The media should use this when printing in full colour, on mid to dark-tone backgrounds. Greyscale version The media should use this when printing in black and white, on white backgrounds. This logo must never appear on grey backgrounds. Black version The media should use this when you would use the greyscale version, if it is not possible to use tones. White version The media should use this on black backgrounds. 3.5 Please do not incorporate the KiwiSaver Logo into any other company names, trade marks or logos. 3.6 If using the KiwiSaver Logo on a website: (a)the only link navigable from the KiwiSaver Logo should be to www.ird. govt.nz/kiwisaver and (b)the KiwiSaver Logo should not feature so prominently as to suggest the website is an official government website or has some official government sanction. 3.7 Two colours make up the KiwiSaver colour palette – KiwiSaver stone and KiwiSaver green. KiwiSaver stone Pantone 451 C C–32 M–27 Y–58 K–00 R–178 G–170 B–126 KiwiSaver green Pantone 5753 C C–64 M–42 Y–100 K–29 R–87 G–100 B–35 6 4.Definitions In these guidelines the following terms have the following meanings: “KiwiSaver” means the KiwiSaver savings initiative put in place under the KiwiSaver Act 2006. “KiwiSaver Logo” means the logo that is the subject of New Zealand Trade Mark No. 748366, as amended from time to time by Inland Revenue. “KiwiSaver Trade Marks” means the trade marks that are the subject of New Zealand Trade Mark Nos. 729804, 748366 and 812852, as amended from time to time by Inland Revenue. 7 These trade mark guidelines were updated in August 2020. Please note that they may be amended or updated from time to time. For more information on the KiwiSaver Logo and branding or these guidelines, please contact kiwisavercommunications@ird.govt.nz