ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. KiwiSaver is a work-based savings initiative designed to help set you up for your retirement. Most members will build up their savings through regular contributions from their pay, making saving simple and easy. To join KiwiSaver you must: • live, or normally live in New Zealand, and • be a New Zealand citizen or be entitled to stay in New Zealand indefinitely. Already in work You can choose whether you join KiwiSaver. If you decide to,  you can join with a scheme provider directly or through your employer. Starting a new job If you’re between the ages of 18 and 65 you’ll be  automatically enrolled in KiwiSaver if you’re eligible. Your  employer will give you some information about KiwiSaver. Joining KiwiSaver if you’re a new employee 65 or over You can choose whether you join KiwiSaver. If you decide to,  you can join with a scheme provider directly or through your employer. Self-employed or not working You can join KiwiSaver by contacting your chosen scheme provider directly. They’ll send you a product disclosure  statement and enrolment form. Joining KiwiSaver if you’re under 18 If you’re under 18 you can only join KiwiSaver by contacting  your chosen scheme provider directly. You cannot join  through your employer. Opting out If you have been automatically enrolled you can choose to  opt out of KiwiSaver at ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver-individuals This form must be completed within eight weeks of starting  your new job. We’ll refund any contributions you’ve made. If  you’ve chosen to  join  KiwiSaver you  can’t  opt  out.  However,  after  12  months you  could  take  a  savings suspension. KiwiSaver benefits If  you’re over  18  you  may be entitled to: •  an annual contribution paid by the government of up to  $521.43 •  employer contributions that match 3% of your gross  earnings. Three years after your first KiwiSaver contribution you may  be able to use your savings to buy your first home.  Choosing a scheme provider You  don’t  have  to  choose a  scheme when you  join  KiwiSaver. When you join through your employer or are automatically  enrolled, you will either: •  be allocated to your employer’s chosen scheme, (if they  have one) or •  be allocated to a default scheme. You can actively choose your own scheme provider, by contacting them directly. Making contributions Making contributions is easy, whether you’re working, not  working or self-employed. If you’re working Your employer deducts contributions from your before-tax  pay at your chosen rate of 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10%. If you  don’t choose a rate the default rate of 3% will be applied.  Your employer passes this money to us and we pass it on to your scheme provider. You can change your contribution rate by using myIR or  contacting your scheme provider, as well as directly through your employer(s). You can only change your  contribution rate once every 3  months, unless your employer agrees to a shorter timeframe. Self-employed or not working You and your KiwiSaver scheme provider agree how much you want to contribute and you make payments directly to them. How your contributions are processed When you are first enrolled into KiwiSaver we hold your  contributions for two months. Any future contributions  received are normally transferred to your scheme provider  within a few days. We will also pay any interest earned to  your scheme provider once a month. Employer contributions If you’re a KiwiSaver member making contributions from  your pay, employer must also make a contribution. This will  equal 3% of your pay before tax. Your introduction to KiwiSaver – employee information KS3 | June 2024 ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. All employer contributions paid to a superannuation fund for  the benefit of an employee are liable for ESCT (employer  superannuation contribution tax). The exception to this is if  the employee and employer have agreed to treat some or all of the employer contributions as salary or wages under the  PAYE rules. Your employer doesn’t have to make compulsory employer  contributions if: •  they’re already paying sufficient contributions into  another approved superannuation scheme for you •  you’re under 18 •  you’re over 65 •  you’re not required to have deductions made from your  pay (eg, if you’re on a savings suspension, or on leave  without pay). Savings suspension After you’ve been contributing to KiwiSaver for 12 months  you can apply to take a break from contributing for three to  12 months. There’s no limit on how many times you can do  this. However, when you’re on a savings suspension, your  employer doesn’t have to make contributions either. If you’re experiencing financial hardship you may get  approval to stop making contributions. Existing superannuation schemes If you’re in a complying superannuation scheme, you may  be entitled to some of the KiwiSaver benefits through that  scheme, including the Government contribution and having your employer pay compulsory employer contributions. Your employer only has to pay a total 3% compulsory  employer contribution regardless of whether you’re a member  of  both KiwiSaver and a complying superannuation scheme. You can still join KiwiSaver if you’re a member of a  complying superannuation scheme, but the benefits will only  apply to one of your schemes. Withdrawing your savings In most cases, your KiwiSaver savings will be locked in until: •  you’re eligible for NZ Super (currently 65), or •  you’ve been in KiwiSaver for at least five years (if you  joined prior to 1 July 2019) - whichever date is later. KiwiSaver won’t affect your eligibility for NZ Super or reduce  the amount of NZ Super you’re eligible for. Exceptions You may be able to withdraw part (or all) of your savings  if you’re: •  buying your first home •  moving overseas permanently (to a country other than  Australia) •  suffering significant financial hardship • seriously ill •  suffering from a life-shortening congenital condition. Your  KiwiSaver will be paid to your estate if you  die. If you move to Australia permanently, you can’t withdraw  your KiwiSaver savings. You can either: •  keep your savings in your current KiwiSaver scheme, or •  transfer your savings to an Australian complying  superannuation scheme. Future responsibilities After you’ve enrolled in KiwiSaver, check your deductions  and contributions at ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver or with your scheme provider. When you change jobs, it’s your responsibility to give new  employers a KiwiSaver deduction - KS2 form. Getting advice Neither your employer nor Inland Revenue can give you  financial advice about whether KiwiSaver is the right choice  for you or which scheme you should join. KiwiSaver isn’t guaranteed by the government. This means  you make your investment choices in a KiwiSaver scheme  at your own risk. However, all KiwiSaver schemes are  regulated by the Financial Markets Authority in a similar way  to other registered superannuation schemes. If you’d like help deciding whether or not to join KiwiSaver  you can go to sorted.org.nz This is the Commission  for Financial Capability’s website and it provides free,  independent information about money matters, including  KiwiSaver. Alternatively, contact a financial advisor for advice on: •  your personal financial circumstances •  whether or not KiwiSaver is right for you • how to choose a scheme or investment product •  the overall KiwiSaver scheme and its financial concepts. For more information about KiwiSaver go to  ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver-individuals ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides.