ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Use this factsheet to answer any questions you may have if you're thinking about signing your child up for KiwiSaver. Or if you're under 18 and would like to join. KiwiSaver is a voluntary savings plan designed to make it easier for New Zealanders to save for retirement. Joining KiwiSaver is a big financial decision - once you've joined you can't opt out. If you join KiwiSaver you make contributions (payments) to your KiwiSaver scheme (account) and you can take this money out when you reach the age of eligibility for NZ Super. There are benefits to joining When you join KiwiSaver you have access to the following benefits, however some of these won't apply until you've turned 18. Government contribution When you turn 18, the government will contribute up to $521.43 each year to your KiwiSaver. Employer contributions If you're working your employer may make payments into your KiwiSaver when you turn 18. These payments are in addition to the contributions you make from your pay and are called compulsory employer contributions. Let your employer know when you turn 18 so they can start making these payments. Buying a first home After being a member of KiwiSaver for three years you may be able to withdraw part of your savings to help you buy your first home. If you’ve previously owned a home you may still be eligible for the first home withdrawal if Kāinga Ora determines you’re in the same financial position as a first- time buyer. For more information go to the Kāinga Ora website kaingaora.govt.nz Who can join KiwiSaver To be eligible to join KiwiSaver, you must: • live, or normally live in New Zealand, and • be a New Zealand citizen or entitled to stay in New Zealand indefinitely. How to join KiwiSaver If you're under 18 you'll need to choose a scheme provider and apply direct to them. For a full list of scheme providers go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver Note: If you’re 16 or 17 and you’d like to join KiwiSaver, talk to the scheme provider you’ve chosen. They’ll tell you if you can apply by yourself or if you need a parent or guardian to apply on your behalf. If you are under 16 your parents or guardians will need to complete the enrolment on your behalf. KiwiSaver – a guide for children and young people KS33 | June 2024 ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. For free, independent information about money matters go to sorted.org.nz ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Making contributions If you’re a KiwiSaver member and working for salary or wages (even if it’s a part-time job) your KiwiSaver contributions will be taken out of your pay before you receive it. You can decide if you contribute 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% of your pay. You can change your contribution rate by using myIR or contacting your scheme provider, as well as directly through your employer(s). You can only change your contribution rate once every 3 months, unless your employer agrees to a shorter timeframe. You can find out more by reading our factsheet Your introduction to KiwiSaver - employee information - KS3. You need to provide any new employers with a KiwiSaver deduction - KS2 form. This lets your employer know that you’re a member and your contribution rate. If you aren't working for salary or wages, you and your scheme provider will work out the amount you contribute and the frequency of your contributions. Your contributions can be paid directly to your scheme provider or through us. Taking a savings suspension If you're having deductions made from your salary or wages, as an employee, you can take a break from making contributions. This is called savings suspension and can be taken once you've been a member for 12 months. The savings suspension can last from 3 months to 12 months. You can take a savings suspension in the first 12 months of being a member of KiwiSaver if you're experiencing financial hardship. Investing your savings in a KiwiSaver scheme There's a wide range of schemes and investment funds to choose from. Before you choose a scheme you should research the ones you're interested in to find out how they'll invest your money. The scheme provider's product disclosure statement explains how they'll invest your savings, the specific rules, fees, terms and conditions of the scheme. The product disclosure statement is an important document so make sure you read it carefully. KiwiSaver isn't guaranteed by the government. This means you invest in a KiwiSaver scheme at your own risk. KiwiSaver schemes are regulated by the Financial Markets Authority. Changing KiwiSaver schemes You can change schemes at any time by applying to the scheme provider you want to change to. You can only belong to one KiwiSaver scheme at a time. Withdrawing your savings Your KiwiSaver savings are "locked in" and normally can't be withdrawn until you reach the age of retirement (currently 65). You may be able to withdraw part (or all) of your savings if you're: • buying your first home • moving overseas permanently • suffering significant financial hardship • seriously ill. Find out more about KiwiSaver Inland Revenue can't give you advice about whether you should join KiwiSaver or which scheme provider you should choose. For help in making your decision, you can go to sorted.org.nz this is the Commission for Financial Capability's website and it provides free, independent information about money matters, including KiwiSaver.