KS4 April 2022 KiwiSaver employer guide What employers need to know about KiwiSaver WHAT IS KIWISAVER? KiwiSaver is a voluntary, work-based savings initiative designed to make regular saving for retirement easier for New Zealanders. www.ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver You can get copies of our forms and guides at ird.govt.nz/forms-guides A new employee can opt out by completing the Opt-out request - KS10 on our website. They can also give you or Inland Revenue a KS10 form. Send the KS10 and the New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K forms to Inland Revenue See page 16 New employee(s) start at your business (existing employees can also join) Existing employees (page 9) Exempt employers (page 20) Give them a KiwiSaver employee information pack supplied by Inland Revenue if they meet the criteria for automatic enrolment, if they’re considering opting in or if they ask for one Automatic enrolment (page 6) KiwiSaver information pack (page 15) An overview of your KiwiSaver responsibilities as an employer Employees or Inland Revenue can ask you to stop KiwiSaver deductions by showing you a savings suspension notice from Inland Revenue If the employee opts out, you must stop making deductions and can refund any KiwiSaver contributions you hold that haven’t been sent to Inland Revenue. Employer contributions you’ve made will be refunded to you if you have no amounts owing. Late opt-outs operate slightly differently Employee stays in KiwiSaver New employee opts out Employee gives you their details, including IRD number, name and address. Send this information to Inland Revenue using the New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form You automatically enrol new employee(s) and start deducting from their first pay, or start deducting for employees that opted in. If the employee is eligible, you must also make compulsory employer contributions on behalf of your employee Pay KiwiSaver contributions to Inland Revenue with your PAYE payments Inland Revenue passes contributions to your employee’s scheme provider See page 16 Contents How KiwiSaver works 2 Enrolment 4 Who can join KiwiSaver? 4 New employees 6 Are they eligible? 8 Existing employees 9 Member contributions 10 Employer contributions 12 General administration 14 KiwiSaver forms and the KiwiSaver employee information pack 15 Requests to opt out 16 Savings suspension 16 Deductions from accident compensation payments 16 Parental leave payments 16 Contributions made in error 17 Record keeping 17 Obligations and compliance 17 Penalties and interest 18 Your options as an employer 19 Employer-chosen schemes 19 Existing workplace schemes 19 Additional information 20 Glossary 20 Quick reference guide 23 Answering employees’ KiwiSaver questions 24 About this guide This guide tells you about your KiwiSaver obligations as an employer. The KiwiSaver Act 2006 covers employers who are New Zealand residents or who carry on business from a fixed establishment in New Zealand. Employers who are not New Zealand residents or do not carry on business from a fixed establishment in New Zealand, may choose whether they offer KiwiSaver in their workplace. A non-resident employer may choose to make KiwiSaver deductions and contributions for their eligible employees. Non-resident employers who are intending to participate in KiwiSaver and who are not registered for PAYE should contact Inland Revenue for more information. For more information about employer obligations for complying funds 1 go to ird.govt.nz The KiwiSaver employee information pack has more general information (page 15). 1 A complying superannuation fund (complying fund) is a section of registered superannuation schemes that have been approved by the Financial Markets Authority as having met certain criteria similar to KiwiSaver (eg KiwiSaver lock-in rules and portability). 2KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE How KiwiSaver works Inland Revenue administers KiwiSaver KiwiSaver is a voluntary savings initiative designed to make it easier for New Zealanders to save for their future. For most people, KiwiSaver is work based. This means they receive information about KiwiSaver from you as their employer, and their KiwiSaver contributions come straight out of their pay. You are also required to contribute to your employee’s savings in KiwiSaver schemes or complying funds. There are a number of membership benefits to encourage employees to save. These are set out in the KiwiSaver employee information pack. Enrolment Eligibility KiwiSaver is open to all New Zealand citizens and people entitled to be in New Zealand indefinitely. A person needs to be living (or normally living) in New Zealand to join. New employees You must automatically enrol eligible new employees who are not already KiwiSaver members. See page 8 to check if your new employee is eligible for automatic enrolment. Temporary and casual workers may be exempt from KiwiSaver automatic enrolment (page 4). Make KiwiSaver deductions from the employee’s first pay and continue unless they opt out. New employees who have been automatically enrolled in KiwiSaver can opt out any time on or after day 14 and on or before day 56 after starting their employment. Their contributions will be refunded. If your employee opts out, your employer contributions will be refunded if you have no amounts owing. Existing employees Existing employees are not subject to automatic enrolment but, if eligible, they can choose to join KiwiSaver. They either sign up direct with the KiwiSaver scheme provider of their choice, or tell you they want to opt in. They will usually do this by giving you a KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2, which is in the KiwiSaver information pack. If you receive one of these, you need to determine if they are eligible to opt in (page 4), and send the information to Inland Revenue. You can then start making member and compulsory employer contributions, if applicable. Note: If an existing employee opts in to KiwiSaver they can’t opt out. Employees who return to work after an absence If an employee was automatically ceased you may need to confirm their KiwiSaver status. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/employing-staff/stop-employing-staff Contributions Member contributions Employees can choose a contribution rate of either 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% of their gross salary or wages. Employer contributions The compulsory employer contribution rate is 3% of your employee’s gross salary or wages. Your contributions to existing superannuation schemes may reduce the amount of compulsory employer contributions you’re required to pay, if they meet certain conditions. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver/kiwisaver-employers/contributions-and-deductions KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE3 All employer superannuation cash contributions (employer contributions) to KiwiSaver and complying funds are liable for employer superannuation contribution tax (ESCT). The exception to this is if the employee and employer have agreed to treat some or all of the employer contributions as salary or wages under the PAYE rules (page 12). How contributions are collected You deduct KiwiSaver contributions from your employee’s salary or wages and pay them to Inland Revenue with your PAYE payments. Keep making deductions and employer contributions until your employee gives you an Opt-out request - KS10 form, savings suspension notice, or Inland Revenue tells you to stop deducting contributions (page 14). KiwiSaver member deductions and employer contributions are paid to Inland Revenue through the PAYE system. Inland Revenue forwards contributions to the member’s chosen KiwiSaver scheme provider. If you pay compulsory employer contributions to an employees complying funds, you pay these direct to the complying fund. Your options as an employer There are several options available if you would like to be more involved in encouraging retirement savings among your employees. These include making additional voluntary employer contributions and/or providing your own employer-based KiwiSaver scheme. You can also nominate a KiwiSaver scheme for your employees to join if they make no choice of their own. This is called an employer-chosen scheme (page 19). A note about providing financial advice You should not provide financial advice to employees. Instead, refer them to the Commission for Financial Literacy and Retirement Income’s website sorted.org.nz or encourage them to talk to an independent financial advisor. You do not have any liability if you only provide general savings or KiwiSaver information or select an employer-chosen scheme. How KiwiSaver contributions are invested Employer Saver (Salary and wage earners) Savings Retirement benefit paid to saver Savings Scheme provider (Savers can choose) 4KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE Enrolment This section sets out your responsibilities as an employer for enrolling employees in KiwiSaver. What’s important You are required to: • check whether a new or existing employee is eligible to be a KiwiSaver member (see below) • check whether the new employee should be automatically enrolled (page 6) • distribute the KiwiSaver information pack to new employees who are subject to automatic enrolment, and to existing employees who are considering opting in or who ask for a KiwiSaver information pack. This includes our factsheet Your introduction to KiwiSaver - employee information - KS3, KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2 and the Opt-out request - KS10 form • provide new employees with a product disclosure statement if you have an employer-chosen KiwiSaver scheme and advise them they’ll be allocated to this scheme unless they choose their own KiwiSaver scheme (page 19) • automatically enrol all new employees who are subject to automatic enrolment • send us the details of new employees who are enrolled automatically in KiwiSaver using the New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form. Who can join KiwiSaver? KiwiSaver is open to all New Zealand citizens and people entitled to live here permanently. Citizenship and residency To join KiwiSaver, a person must be living (or normally living) in New Zealand and be a New Zealand citizen or entitled to be in New Zealand indefinitely. This means New Zealand citizens, Australian citizens and people who hold either a New Zealand or Australian residence permit can join KiwiSaver. State Services employees serving outside New Zealand can also join, subject to certain conditions being met (see below). People who hold temporary, visitor, student or work permits can’t join KiwiSaver. Neither can people who are New Zealand citizens or who are entitled to be in New Zealand indefinitely, but are just visiting or on a holiday in New Zealand, eg a New Zealand citizen who normally lives in Australia who returns to New Zealand for a holiday. State Services employees State Services employees who are serving overseas can join KiwiSaver if they remain employed on New Zealand terms and conditions and are serving in a jurisdiction where offers of KiwiSaver scheme membership are lawful and meet other eligibility requirements. Employees under age 18 New and existing employees under 18 can join KiwiSaver but only by contracting directly with a KiwiSaver scheme provider. Once an employee under 18 is accepted by the scheme provider, we’ll write to you and ask you to start deducting their contributions. We’ll provide you with the contribution rate for that employee and their name and IRD number. You aren’t required to make compulsory employer contributions on behalf of employees under 18. Employees 65 and over New and existing employees 65 and over can join KiwiSaver, either by opting in through you or by contracting with a scheme provider. They aren’t subject to automatic enrolment, and you aren’t required to make compulsory employer contributions for a newly enrolled employee 65 and over. Temporary and casual employees Temporary employees employed for 28 continuous days or less are not enrolled automatically but can opt in to KiwiSaver. They can join either through you or by contracting directly with a KiwiSaver scheme provider. KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE5 A temporary employee is employed to work ‘as and when required’ without a specific end. Their period of employment starts each time they are engaged to work and stops each time that engagement ends. If an employee is engaged for future work before the last engagement has ended, the combined engagements are considered as one period of employment. As long as each period of employment remains 28 continuous days or less, these employees are not subject to automatic enrolment. The 28 continuous days refers to the period of employment, not the days or hours worked. For example, if an employee has a two-week contract but only works Tuesdays and Thursdays, this counts as 14 days’ employment not four days. The automatic enrolment rules apply to temporary employees if their employment is extended beyond 28 continuous days. Automatic enrolment applies on the 29th day of employment. You must then give them a KiwiSaver information pack and start member and employer contributions from their next pay. The normal opt-out rules apply. Casual employees engaged on an irregular and intermittent basis and who receive holiday pay with their wages are not subject to automatic enrolment. They can join either through you or by contracting directly with a KiwiSaver scheme provider. Casual agricultural workers Casual agricultural workers who are employed on a day-to-day basis for no more than three months aren’t enrolled automatically, but can opt in. They can either join through you or by contracting directly with a KiwiSaver scheme provider. The automatic enrolment rules apply to casual agricultural workers if their employment is extended beyond three months. You must then give them a KiwiSaver information pack and start member and employer contributions from their next pay. The normal opt-out rules apply. Private domestic workers and other IR56 taxpayers The automatic enrolment rules don’t apply to IR56 taxpayers who pay their own PAYE. They can opt in to KiwiSaver only by contracting directly with a KiwiSaver scheme provider, but they may deduct contributions from their salary or wages and pay them to Inland Revenue in the same way as PAYE. Private domestic workers may also choose to make compulsory or voluntary employer contributions. Election day workers The automatic rules don’t apply to election day workers. However, these employees may already be members of KiwiSaver. If they give you a completed KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2 start deducting member contributions and making compulsory employer contributions from their pay. Changing jobs but not changing payroll Situations where an employee changes jobs but remains on the same payroll don’t count as new employment, so the automatic enrolment rules do not apply. This includes company amalgamations and the purchase and subsequent operation of a going concern. Examples include an employee who transfers between two company branches where the company has a single centralised payroll, or a business bought as a going concern which retains existing staff but uses a different company IRD number. State and state integrated schools are treated as a single employer. You don’t need to consider automatic enrolment for staff transferring between these schools. Contractors and the self-employed Contractors aren’t employees and are treated as self-employed people for KiwiSaver purposes. This means they aren’t automatically enrolled and can only join by contracting directly with a scheme provider. Don’t make KiwiSaver deductions. Shareholder-employees may be considered employees for KiwiSaver purposes if PAYE is required to be deducted from their salary or wage. If PAYE isn’t required to be deducted, the shareholder-employee may join KiwiSaver as a self-employed person, by contracting directly with a scheme provider. If they join KiwiSaver as an employee, they’ll have contributions deducted from their pay. Shareholder-employees should get advice to determine whether their remuneration is subject to PAYE. Working partners of a partnership that pays them a salary or wage for services provided under a written contract of service will be considered employees for KiwiSaver purposes but won’t be subject to the automatic enrolment rules. They can either join as an employee or by contracting directly with a KiwiSaver scheme provider. Seconded employees Employees who are seconded to a new employer and are paid on the new employer’s payroll aren’t subject to automatic enrolment. They may join KiwiSaver as an existing employee by opting in. Returning to their original job at the end of the secondment isn’t considered new employment. 6KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE New employees What’s important Your responsibilities (except if you’re an employer exempt from the automatic enrolment rules - see page 20) are to check whether a new employee: • is eligible to be a KiwiSaver member, and • should be automatically enrolled. If they meet the conditions above: • give your new employee a KiwiSaver information pack. If you have an employer-chosen KiwiSaver scheme, give them the product disclosure statement for that scheme and advise them they’ll be allocated to this scheme unless they choose their own KiwiSaver scheme (page 19) • deduct member contributions from their first pay • make compulsory employer contributions (unless an exception applies) • pay ESCT on any employer contributions made • give us the employee’s details using the New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form. Send this information through your online account (see below) • pay the member and employer contributions to us with your next PAYE payment • if the employee chooses to opt out of KiwiSaver, send their Opt-out request - KS10 form to us. Employees can opt out between day 14 and day 56 of starting their new employment. New employees who meet the criteria for automatic enrolment Start the automatic enrolment process by giving the new employee a KiwiSaver information pack. You must do this within seven days of the employee starting work. The information pack includes a KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2, which the employee can use to let you know whether they want member contributions to be deducted at 3%, 4%, 6%, 8%, or 10% of their gross salary or wages. If they don’t advise you of their preferred rate, deduct member contributions at the default rate of 3%. Keep the KS2 for your records, do not send it to Inland Revenue. If you have an employer-chosen KiwiSaver scheme, give your new employee the product disclosure statement for that scheme and advise them they’ll be allocated to this scheme unless they choose their own KiwiSaver scheme (page 19). They can choose to move to another KiwiSaver scheme at a later date. Deduct member contributions from the new employee’s pay. Make compulsory employer contributions (unless an exception applies). Give Inland Revenue the full names and IRD numbers of new employees using the New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form. You can also supply this information online. You’re only required to give us the information the employee gives you. You are not responsible if an employee chooses not to provide information for privacy or other reasons. You must provide enrolment information supplied no later than the date your next employment information is due. KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE7 New employees who are existing members You need to send Inland Revenue a New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form for new employees who are already KiwiSaver members. Unless you are given or shown a valid savings suspension notice, you must deduct member contributions from their first pay. Start deducting member contributions at the default rate of 3% if they don’t elect a rate. You must also make compulsory employer contributions (unless an exception applies). A new employee who is an existing KiwiSaver member must: • tell you their full name and IRD number • let you know whether they want member contributions deducted at the rate of 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% or give you a valid savings suspension notice (page 16). If your new employee is an existing member of KiwiSaver they should give you a completed KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2. Keep the KS2 for your records, do not send it to Inland Revenue. 8KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE Are they eligible? Use this chart to help work out whether a new employee should be automatically enrolled (unless you are an employer exempt from automatic enrolment - see page 20). Eligibility rules for KiwiSaver - and rules around automatic enrolment - are covered in detail on pages 4 - 6. Not required to be automatically enrolled. Not eligible to join KiwiSaver. Are they already a KiwiSaver member? Not required to be automatically enrolled. They need to give you a KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2 or a valid savings suspension notice (page 16). YES NO NO NO NO NO YES YES YES YES Are they 18 and over? Are they under 65? Are they a New Zealand resident? Information on citizenship and residency - page 4. Are they normally living in New Zealand? They cannot be automatically enrolled. Information about employees under 18 - page 4. Are they a State Services employee working overseas? (page 4). Not eligible to join KiwiSaver. Employee should be automatically enrolled. YES NO Not required to be automatically enrolled. YES NO Do any of the following apply? The new employee is: • employed on a temporary employment contract of 28 continuous days or less (page 4) • a casual employee engaged on an irregular and intermittent basis who receives holiday pay with their wages (page 4) • a working partner of a partnership that pays them a salary or wage for services (page 5) • receiving weekly compensation (from ACC) • a secondee who is paid by the employer the person is seconded to • absent from New Zealand in the service of the New Zealand Government • a casual agricultural worker employed for less than 3 months (page 5) • an election day worker or private domestic worker (page 5) • on paid parental leave paid by Inland Revenue (page 16) • staying on the same payroll (conditions apply - page 5) • only receiving payments subject to withholding tax (page 5) • not required to have PAYE deductions made from their salary or wages. KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE9 Existing employees What’s important For existing employees who are considering joining KiwiSaver, you must: • check they’re eligible to join KiwiSaver • give them a KiwiSaver information pack within seven days. If you have an employer-chosen KiwiSaver scheme give them the product disclosure statement for that scheme (page 19). If an existing employee has told you they’d like to join, you need to check if they’re eligible and: • start making member contributions, at the rate they’ve chosen, from their next pay • make compulsory employer contributions • give us their details using the New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form. Existing employees aren’t enrolled automatically but they can join KiwiSaver as long as they meet the eligibility criteria (page 4). There are two ways an existing employee can join KiwiSaver, by: • contracting directly with their chosen KiwiSaver scheme provider or, • joining through you as their employer if they are 18 or over. If the employee decides to join KiwiSaver the information pack includes a KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2, which the employee can use to select a member contribution rate, 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% of their gross salary or wages. If they don’t nominate a contribution rate, make deductions at the default rate of 3%. Keep the KS2 as part of your records - don’t send it to us. You’ll need to: • deduct member contributions • make compulsory employer contributions • give us your employee’s details using the New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form. You’re only required to give us the information the employee gives you. You’re not responsible if an employee chooses not to provide information for privacy or other reasons. You must provide the enrolment information supplied no later than the date your next employment information is due. If your employee is under 18 years old and wants to join KiwiSaver advise them they need to contract directly with a KiwiSaver scheme provider (page 4). 10KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE Member contributions What’s important You need to: • make sure a new employee’s member contributions start from their first pay • make deductions at the rate they choose (3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% of their gross salary or wages), or at the default rate of 3%. These are the only rates they can choose • send deductions to us together with PAYE payments. You can complete your employment information in the payroll returns account in myIR. Go to ird.govt.nz/myIR You’re also required to make compulsory employer contributions to your employees’ KiwiSaver schemes and complying funds. Compulsory employer contributions are explained on page 12. Contribution rates Employees can choose a contribution rate of either 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% of their gross salary or wages. The employee can make additional voluntary contributions direct to their scheme provider or to Inland Revenue. Make deductions at the default rate of 3% if an employee elects or doesn’t select a rate. Employees can change their contribution rate by providing you a KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2 or contacting their KiwiSaver scheme provider or by submitting a contribution rate change using myIR. We will send you a letter with a list of contribution rate changes requested through scheme providers and myIR on a weekly basis. Once you receive the KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2 or letter from Inland Revenue, you’ll need to: • change the contribution rate from their next pay • keep the KS2 or letter as part of your records. An amendment to an employee’s chosen rate can’t be changed at intervals that are less than three months apart, unless you (the employer) agree. You don’t need to notify us about this. Definition of gross salary or wages KiwiSaver schemes For contributions to KiwiSaver schemes, gross salary or wages generally means total salary, wages or allowances, including bonuses, commission, extra salary, gratuity, overtime and other remuneration of any kind before tax. It does not include: • redundancy payments • payments under a voluntary bonding scheme funded by the Ministry for Primary Industries, the Ministry of Health or the Ministry of Education • the value of overseas accommodation and cost of living allowances • free or discounted shares received under an employee share scheme • the value of providing board or lodging, or use of a house or part of a house, or the payment of an allowance instead of the provision of this benefit. These are the main inclusions and exclusions from the definition of gross salary or wages. See glossary (page 21). Complying superannuation funds For contributions to complying funds, gross base salary or wages has the same meaning as for a KiwiSaver scheme but excludes bonuses, commissions and other amounts that aren’t included in the employee’s gross base salary or wages by the relevant complying fund. Note: If the employee is a member of both a KiwiSaver scheme and complying fund then deductions should be made to both. KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE11 Calculating deductions You can use the online calculator at ird.govt.nz/calculators to work out member contributions at the same time as your employees PAYE. Member contribution calculation tables are also included in the PAYE deductions tables - IR340 and IR341. Here’s an example: An employee earns $600.00 a week and contributes 3% to KiwiSaver. Gross pay$600.00 Less PAYE$ 96.35 Less KiwiSaver contribution$ 18.00(3% of $600.00) Net pay$485.65 Tailored tax code or deduction rate certificate - IR23 Any KiwiSaver contributions are in addition to their tailored tax code or deduction rate. For example, if an employee is on a deduction rate of 30% and they are making KiwiSaver contributions at 4%, total deductions from their salary or wages will be 34%. Employees under age 18 You’ll need to deduct member contributions for KiwiSaver members under 18 if they’re an existing KiwiSaver member or have joined KiwiSaver while employed with you. You’re not required to make compulsory employer contributions on behalf of employees under 18. Starting and stopping deductions You must make KiwiSaver deductions from all payments of salary or wages if: • the employee is subject to automatic enrolment • the employee gives you a KS2 • we notify you and ask you to start deductions. You must stop making KiwiSaver deductions from all payments of salary or wages if: • an opt-out notice takes effect (page 16) • a savings suspension is granted (page 16) • we notify you and ask you to stop deductions • the employee has reached eligibility to withdraw and gives you a Non-deduction notice - KS51. Forwarding member contributions Forward your employee’s KiwiSaver contributions to us along with your PAYE payments using the employment information. These include fields for member net employer contributions and ESCT for each employee. Every field must be completed. Pay complying fund contributions direct to the scheme provider. Don’t pay these through Inland Revenue. Additional contributions If an employee wants to contribute more than the maximum allowed to their KiwiSaver scheme, pay the additional contributions direct to Inland Revenue or the scheme provider instead of using the PAYE system. Scheme providers may offer extra services for members (eg group life insurance). Pay the scheme provider direct for these services. Inland Revenue payments to scheme providers Inland Revenue is required to pass on member contributions received (or which should be received from an employer) to the employee’s scheme provider. We’ll make the payment even if we have not received the contributions. If we do not receive the contributions, we’ll seek to recover the arrears from you in the same way we would recover unpaid PAYE tax debts. 12KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE Employer contributions What’s important • You’re required to contribute 3% of your employees’ gross salary or wages to their KiwiSaver schemes and complying funds, excluding defined benefit scheme members (see Glossary for definition). This 3% is in addition to their gross salary or wages. • Your contributions to existing superannuation schemes may reduce the amount of compulsory employer contributions you’re required to pay, if they meet certain conditions. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver/kiwisaver-individuals/joining-kiwisaver/kiwisaver-providers • Employer contributions to KiwiSaver and complying funds are liable for employer superannuation contribution tax (ESCT). The exception to this is if the employee and employer have agreed to treat some or all of the employer contribution as salary or wages under the PAYE rules. • KiwiSaver employer contributions are paid to Inland Revenue through the PAYE system. You can complete your employment information in the payroll returns account in myIR. Go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver/kiwisaver-individuals/joining-kiwisaver/kiwisaver-providers • If you don’t make compulsory employer contributions, you may have penalties imposed. You’re required to contribute to your employees’ savings in KiwiSaver schemes and complying funds. Compulsory employer contributions can be made to either scheme but must total the minimum rate Compulsory employer contributions may be backdated effective from the date: • the employee should have been automatically enrolled, or • the employee’s savings suspension expired, or • the employee turned 18, and • deductions and compulsory employer contributions should have occurred. Starting and stopping contributions For new employees, you start paying contributions from their first pay. For existing employees, you pay contributions from their first pay after Inland Revenue or the employee notifies you they are a KiwiSaver scheme or a complying fund member. You can stop contributions if the employee elects to take a savings suspension and shows you their savings suspension notice, opts out (new employees only) or when Inland Revenue advises you to stop making contributions. Don’t cease employer contributions until you receive a letter from Inland Revenue advising that an employee has reached their withdrawal date. If you haven’t received a letter and you or your employee think you should have, instruct your employee to check the withdrawal date with their scheme provider. Calculating contributions Use this formula to calculate your contribution to your employee’s superannuation: Payment of gross salary or wages × compulsory rate = minimum employer contribution An employee earns $2,600.00 a month and belongs to a KiwiSaver scheme. From the first full pay period, the gross compulsory employer contribution will be: $2,600 × 3% = $78 You only need to pay the compulsory employer contribution if your employee is contributing to a KiwiSaver scheme or a complying fund through their salary or wages. KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE13 Employer contributions and tax All employer contributions to KiwiSaver and complying funds are liable for employer superannuation contribution tax (ESCT). The exception to this is if the employee and employer have agreed to treat some or all of the employer contribution as salary or wages under the PAYE rules. ESCT must be paid to us along with PAYE deductions. Using the figures from the above example the employee earns $2,600.00 a month and has an ESCT rate of 17.5%. The net compulsory employer contribution will be: $2,600 × 3% = $78 $78 × 17.5% = $13.65 (ESCT) $78 − $13.65 = $64.35 (net compulsory employer contribution) You’ll need to ensure that you list the net employer contribution on the employment information and that ESCT is a separate figure for each employee. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver/kiwisaver-individuals/joining-kiwisaver/kiwisaver-providers or read our Employer’s guide - IR335. Forwarding contributions KiwiSaver contributions As with employee KiwiSaver deductions, you pay KiwiSaver employer contributions to Inland Revenue through the PAYE system. Employment information includes a field for KiwiSaver employer contributions and ESCT. You need to ensure the net amount of KiwiSaver employer contributions is listed, excluding the ESCT. There is a separate field for the ESCT amount. Record compulsory and voluntary contributions as a single total. Inland Revenue will split contributions into compulsory and voluntary amounts. You can complete these online. We pass your employer contributions on to the scheme provider. If a new employee opts out of KiwiSaver, we’ll refund any employer contributions to you if you have no amounts owing. Other contributions Pay contributions other than retirement benefits (eg life insurance premiums) direct to the scheme provider. Complying fund contributions Pay complying fund contributions direct to the scheme provider. Don’t pay these through Inland Revenue. 14KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE General administration What’s important Opt-outs and savings suspension • If a new employee you have automatically enrolled gives you the Opt-out request - KS10 form within 2 to 8 weeks of starting work. You must: - send us the KS10 and the New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form if you haven’t already - stop deducting member contributions and making compulsory employer contributions from their next pay and refund any contributions you hold. • If an employee gives you an opt-out form after 8 weeks, send it to us and continue to deduct member contributions and to make compulsory employer contributions until we advise you otherwise. • Employees can opt out online at ird.govt.nz or by sending us the Opt-out request - KS10 form. We’ll let you know when you can stop contributions. • KiwiSaver members can take a break from saving after they have been a member for 12 months. This is called a savings suspension. General • You need to keep a record of employees who are KiwiSaver members, their contribution rate, the amounts you’ve deducted, employer contributions you’ve made and any notification of savings suspensions or opt-outs. • Penalties may apply if you don’t comply with KiwiSaver processes (page 18). KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE15 KiwiSaver forms and the KiwiSaver information pack The New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form is shown below. Use it to let us know the details of employees who join KiwiSaver. You can supply this information online if you’re registered for myIR. You must give a KiwiSaver information pack to all new employees who are eligible to be automatically enrolled and to existing employees who opt in or ask for one. The KiwiSaver information pack includes: • the KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2, which an employee can use to let you know their full name, address and IRD number and whether they want member contributions deducted at 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10%. • the Opt-out request - KS10 form, which new employees who were automatically enrolled can use to opt out of KiwiSaver. • the factsheet Your introduction to KiwiSaver - employee information - KS3, which gives employees general information about KiwiSaver and tells them how to join. New employee and KiwiSaver details IR346K | March 2020 EMPLOYER DETAILS & WHEN TO COMPLETE THIS FORM You must complete this form for any new employee(s) who start working for you, and any existing employees wanting to opt into KiwiSaver, or when details need updating: • Bef ore their first pay day; or • With the Employment Information - IR348 that includes their first pay. Employer business name: Employer IRD number: (8 digit numbers start in the second box ) EMPLOYER/EMPLOYEE KIWISAVER GUIDANCE SECTION KiwiSaver status Your employee must be one of the five following KiwiSaver status types. • Active KiwiSaver member • Not eligib le for KiwiSaver • Casual/temporary employee • Ne w employee automatically enrolled into KiwiSaver • Existing emplo yee - opting into KiwiSaver. Choosing the KiwiSaver status: Use the following KiwiSaver status when the criteria is met: • “Active KiwiSaver member” when you have a new employee starting employment with you and is an existing KiwiSaver member • “Not eligib le for KiwiSaver” when your new employee is not eligible to be in KiwiSaver • “Casual/temporary employee” when you have a new employee who is not subject to automatic enrolment due to being a casual/ temporary employee • “Ne w employee automatically enrolled into KiwiSaver” when your new employee meets the automatic enrolment criteria • “Existing emplo yee - opting into KiwiSaver” when your existing employee is choosing to opt into KiwiSaver. See the KiwiSaver employers guide - KS4 for further information needed. Tax code status: Tax Code - use the code provided by your employee on their Tax code declaration - IR330 . Exempt earnings for KiwiSaver If your employee receives exempt earnings for KiwiSaver within the first 12 months of employment select one of the reasons below: • Accommodation and living costs overseas” when the exempt earnings are the value of overseas accommodation and cost of living allowance • Boar d or lodging when the exempt earnings are the value of providing board or lodging, or use of a house or quarters, or the payment of an allowance instead of the provision of this benefit • Emplo yee share scheme when the exempt earnings are free or discounted shares received under an employee share scheme • Voluntary Bonding Scheme when the exempt earnings include payments under a Voluntary Bonding Scheme funded by the Ministry for Primary Industries, the Ministry of Health or the Ministry of Education • Ov erpayment of contribution when the exempt earnings include an overpayment of an amount of an employer’s superannuation cash contribution that an employee chooses to have treated as salary or wages • Honor aria payments when the exempt earnings are honoraria payments made under the Fire and Emergency Act 2017 paid by Fire and Emergency New Zealand to a volunteer. See the KiwiSaver employers guide - KS4 for further information. Where and when to send this completed form You can download additional copies of the IR346K form from our website. Go to ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Manage all your Inland Revenue matters securely online with a myIR account. Go to ird.govt.nz/myIR to find out more. Send your completed forms to: Inland Revenue, PO Box 39090, Wellington Mail Centre, Lower Hutt 5045 EMPLOYEE DETAILS Complete this section below if an employee is registering for KiwiSaver Employee Name Date of Birth DD MM YYYY First name(s) IRD number Surname Email Address KiwiSaver Status Physical Address Tax Code Street address Suburb City Postcode Only complete this section below, if your employee will have KiwiSaver deductions taken from their pay EMS identifier Daytime phone: ( ) Exempt earnings for KiwiSaver KS10 0420 Opt-out request KS10 April 2020 KiwiSaver Act 2006 Use this form to opt out if you have been automatically enrolled, are a minor who was incorrectly enrolled, and you don’t want to be a member of KiwiSaver. Or go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver to complete our online form. Read the notes on the back to help you fill in this form . Section A Personal details Use 1. Your IRD number If you don’t know your IRD number or you don’t have one, call us on 0800 549 472 2. Your name Mr Mrs Miss Ms Other Put a dash to indicate your title First names Surname 3. Your postal address Street number Street address or PO Box number Suburb, box lobby or RD Town or city Postcode 4. Your contact numbers Day Mobile 5. Your email address If you give an email address you may receive KiwiSaver information by email 6. Bank account details Bank Branch Account n umber Suffix Name of account holder 7. I wish to opt out of KiwiSaver Day Month Year Signature Section B Employment details Use 8. Employer’s IRD number If you don’t have your employer’s IRD number ask them for it. 9. Employer’s business name 10. Employment start date Give this form to your employer or send it to Inland Revenue. Day Month Year Section C Late opt-out Read the notes on the back of this form 11. If your request to opt out is more than eight weeks after you started employment, or you are a minor who was incorrectly enrolled, give a reason for your late opt-out request. KS2 0920 KiwiSaver deduction form Do not send this form to Inland Revenue. This form should be kept by your employer with your employment records. KS2 September 2020 KiwiSaver Act 2006 Use this form to provide your details to your employer if you are: •• starting new employment •• an existing employee and want to opt into KiwiSaver •• a KiwiSaver member and want to change your contribution rate. To be eligible to join KiwiSaver you must: •• Live, or normally live in New Zealand, and •• be a New Zealand citizen, or entitled to stay in New Zealand indefinitely. You are not required to be auto enrolled when starting a new job if you are under the age of 18 or you are over the age of eligibility for New Zealand Superannuation (currently 65). Please read the notes on the back to help you fill in this form Section A General Please put a dash to indicate your situation eg 1. Are you a KiwiSaver member? Yes. Go to Question 2 No. Go to Question 3 2. Are you on a savings suspension? Ye s See note below No. Go to Question 3 If you have a savings suspension notice you must show it to your employer to prevent them making KiwiSaver deductions. If you have lost your notice, you can get a replacement online at ird.govt.nz from your myIR account. Section B Personal details Please use BLOCKLETTERS You must provide your IRD number, name and address. 3. Your IRD number If you don’t know your IRD number or you don’t have one, call us on 0800 549 472 4. Your name Mr Mrs Miss Ms Other Put a dash to indicate your title First names Surname 5. Your postal address Street number Street address or PO Box number Suburb, box lobby or RD Town or city Postcode 6. Your contact numbers Day Mobile 7. Your email address If you give an email address you may receive KiwiSaver information by email Section C Contributions 8. Choose a contribution rate: 3% 4% 6% 8% 10% If you don’t choose a rate, the default rate of 3% will be deducted. 9. I declare that the information I have provided on this form is true and correct. Signature Date Please give this completed form to your employer ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Please refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. KiwiSaver is a work-based savings initiative designed to help set you up for your retirement. Most members will build up their savings through regular contributions from their pay, making saving simple and easy. To join KiwiSaver you must: • live, or normally live in New Zealand, and • be a New Zealand citizen or be entitled to stay in New Zealand indefinitely. Already in work You  can choose whether you  join KiwiSaver. If you  decide to,   you can join with a scheme provider directly or through your employer. Starting a new job If you’re between the ages of 18 and 65 you’ll be  automatically enrolled in KiwiSaver if you’re eligible. Your  employer will give you  some information about KiwiSaver. Joining KiwiSaver if you’re a new employee 65 or over You  can choose whether you  join KiwiSaver. If you  decide to,   you can join with a scheme provider directly or through your employer. Self-employed or not working You can join KiwiSaver by contacting your chosen scheme provider directly. They’ll send you  a product disclosure  statement and enrolment form. Joining KiwiSaver if you’re under 18 If you’re under 18 you  can only join KiwiSaver by  contacting  your chosen scheme provider directly. You  cannot join  through your employer. Opting out If you  have  been automatically enrolled you  can choose to  opt out of KiwiSaver at  ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver-individuals This form must be completed within eight weeks of starting  your new job. We’ll refund any  contributions you’ve made. If  you’ve  chosen  to  join  KiwiSaver  you  can’t  opt  out.  However,  after  12  months  you  could  take  a  savings  suspension. KiwiSaver benefits If  you’re  over  18  you  may  be  entitled  to: •  an annual contribution paid by  the government of up to  $521.43 •  employer contributions that match 3% of your gross  earnings. Three years after your first KiwiSaver contribution you  may   be able to use your savings to buy your first home. You  may   also be eligible for the First Home Grant from Kāinga Ora. Choosing a scheme provider You  don’t  have  to  choose  a  scheme  when  you  join  KiwiSaver. When you  join through your employer or are automatically  enrolled, you will either: •  be allocated  to your employer’s chosen scheme, (if they  have one) or •  be allocated  to a default scheme. You can actively choose your own scheme provider, by contacting them directly. Making contributions Making contributions is easy, whether you’re working, not  working or self-employed. If you’re working Your employer deducts contributions from your before-tax  pay  at your chosen rate of 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10%. If you   don’t choose a rate the default rate of 3% will be applied.  Your employer passes this money to us and we pass it on to your scheme provider. You  can change your contribution rate by  using myIR or  contacting your scheme provider, as well as directly through your employer(s). You  can  only  change  your  contribution  rate  once  every  3  months,  unless  your  employer  agrees  to  a shorter  timeframe. Self-employed or not working You and your KiwiSaver scheme provider agree how much you want  to  contribute  and  you  make  payments  directly  to  them. How your contributions are processed When you  are first enrolled into KiwiSaver we hold your  contributions for two months. Any  future contributions  received are normally transferred to your scheme provider  within a few days. We  will also pay  any  interest earned to  your scheme provider once a month. Employer contributions If you’re a KiwiSaver member making contributions from  your pay,  employer must also make a contribution. This  will  equal 3% of your pay  before tax. Your introduction to KiwiSaver – employee information KS3 | April 2022 16KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE Requests to opt out If a new employee who’s subject to automatic enrolment gives you an Opt-out request - KS10 form you need to: • make sure they’re within the two to eight week opt-out period (on or after day 14 and on or before day 56 of starting employment) • stop deducting member contributions and making compulsory employer contributions from their next pay • refund any member contributions you’ve made but not yet sent to us, or you can send them with your PAYE payment and we’ll refund the employee direct. If you refund the member’s contributions direct, they’ll benefit by receiving the refund immediately • send both the opt-out and the New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K forms to us so we know that the new employee was automatically enrolled and has opted out. You can complete these forms online. We’ll refund to you the employer contributions you’ve made and any ESCT made on these if you have no amounts owing. The refund will be paid with interest. Savings suspensions KiwiSaver members can take a break from saving 12 months after they made their first contribution to their KiwiSaver. This is called a savings suspension. It can be for a minimum of three months, up to a maximum of one year. An employee can apply for a savings suspension in myIR or by calling us. If we approve the request, either your employee will show you a valid savings suspension notice from Inland Revenue or we will notify you if your employee has asked us to. You can stop deducting member contributions and making employer contributions once you’ve seen a valid savings suspension notice. An employee can give you notice to restart their deductions but they cannot ask you to start and stop deductions too often. The minimum period before requesting a change, unless you agree otherwise, is three months. When an employee shows you a current savings suspension notice, you may refund any contributions you’ve deducted that you haven’t passed to Inland Revenue, otherwise the employee should contact us to request their refund. We’ll write again asking you to restart deductions when the savings suspension finishes. You aren’t required to pay compulsory employer contributions if an employee is taking a savings suspension. If you choose, you can continue to make employer contributions. Any contributions you make to employees on a savings suspension are voluntary and will be liable for ESCT (page 13). Deductions from accident compensation payments If you take part in ACC’s partnership programme or have an ACC employer reimbursement agreement where you pay your employee’s ACC payments, your employee’s KiwiSaver member contributions must continue to be made. You aren’t required to pay employer contributions, but you can on a voluntary basis if you wish. If your employee wants to stop their member contributions they must apply for a savings suspension. When ACC pays the employee weekly compensation you don’t need to make the employee deductions or employer contributions. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver Parental leave payments If you continue to pay your employee a salary or wage while they are on parental leave, keep deducting member contributions and making compulsory employer contributions unless they take a savings suspension. KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE17 Contributions made in error If you make an error relating to KiwiSaver in your employment information you can amend this. If you file online, you can amend your employment information in myIR. We’ll refund any contributions made in error. If these include employer contributions and ESCT, these will be repaid to you. This process will take longer if we have to request the refund from the member’s scheme. Note: You have 4 years from the date you originally send an Employment information – IR348 to make any changes. After 4 years, your assessment becomes final and changes can only be made to student loan or child support deductions. Record keeping You need to record which employees are KiwiSaver members, their contribution rate, and any notification of savings suspensions or opt-outs. Your PAYE records should show the member contributions, net employer contributions and any ESCT you’ve deducted and passed on to us. You must keep records for seven years after the person leaves employment with you. In particular, employers must keep information about the total employer contributions made and gaps in employees’ employment. Obligations and compliance Your obligations • Determine if your new employees are eligible to be automatically enrolled into KiwiSaver. The automatic enrolment rules don’t apply if you’re an exempt employer. • Determine whether any new employees or existing employees who wish to have KiwiSaver deductions from their salary or wages are eligible to be KiwiSaver members (pages 4 - 6). • Determine whether any new employees or existing employees who wish to have KiwiSaver deductions from their salary or wages under the age of 18 are existing KiwiSaver members and provide you with a KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2 (page 4). Note: Employees under the age of 18 cannot join KiwiSaver through their employer. They must opt in through their chosen scheme provider. • Provide a KiwiSaver information pack within seven days to: - a new employee who’s eligible for automatic enrolment - an existing employee considering opting in - an existing employee who requests one. • Provide an IRD number and name to Inland Revenue for each new employee who’s eligible for automatic enrolment and each employee who opts into KiwiSaver. • If you have an employer-chosen KiwiSaver scheme give the new employees the product disclosure statement for that scheme and advise they’ll be allocated to this scheme unless they choose their own KiwiSaver scheme. • Deduct member contributions. You’re required to make compulsory employer contributions and pay them to Inland Revenue by the due date (page 11). • Make deductions and contributions at the correct rate (page 12). • Calculate ESCT (page 13). 18KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE Compliance There are KiwiSaver penalties for: • failure to provide information - where you do not provide KiwiSaver information to your employees or to Inland Revenue • failure to enrol a new employee eligible for automatic enrolment. The penalties are: • $50 a month for employers who file monthly • $250 a month for employers who file twice monthly (page 22). Note: • You won’t be penalised if an employee refuses to supply information or supplies false information to you. • You won’t be penalised for failure to provide a KiwiSaver information pack when required if Inland Revenue does not provide employee information packs to you on time. You must notify us that further packs are required immediately after realising you don’t have enough. In addition, standard tax penalties and knowledge offences apply where either a KiwiSaver employee deduction or compulsory employer contribution is not paid to Inland Revenue or is paid late. This is exactly the same as PAYE deductions where you’re subject to late payment penalties, late filing penalties and use-of-money interest. For more information see the Employer’s guide - IR335. Penalties and interest Compulsory employer contributions will be subject to late payment penalties and shortfall penalties, including any backdated compulsory employer contributions entitlement, short or unpaid. If an overdue amount isn’t paid or an instalment arrangement agreed to, a 10% non-payment penalty (NPP) will be charged. Each month that an amount remains outstanding, a further 10% NPP will be charged. If, after we’ve imposed the penalty, you pay in full or enter into an instalment arrangement, the last NPP will reduce to 5%. Total NPPs imposed are capped at 150% of the unpaid tax per period. Interest won’t be charged on any outstanding compulsory employer contributions. Interest and/or penalties won’t be applied to short or non-payment of voluntary employer contributions. Right of review Within 20 working days of Inland Revenue giving you notice of a decision that affects your KiwiSaver obligations, you can ask for it to be reconsidered. You may have to provide further information to Inland Revenue. Disputes resolution process Not all decisions discussed in right of review above can be reconsidered under the KiwiSaver review process. Some of these other decisions can be disputed under Inland Revenue’s disputes resolution process. For more information about these processes and which one relates to a particular decision go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE19 Your options as an employer What’s important As an employer, KiwiSaver gives you a number of options to offer in your workplace: • You can make voluntary contributions to employees’ KiwiSaver accounts on top of the required compulsory employer contributions. • You can choose the KiwiSaver scheme for your workplace. • If you already offer a superannuation scheme, your options include establishing a KiwiSaver scheme as part of your existing scheme or continuing to operate independently of KiwiSaver. The Government contribution applies if you add a KiwiSaver section to an existing scheme. • You can choose to do none of the above. Employer-chosen schemes You can nominate a KiwiSaver scheme that your employees will join unless they choose their own scheme. This is called an employer-chosen KiwiSaver scheme. If you don’t have an employer-chosen scheme and your employee does not choose a scheme of their own, Inland Revenue will allocate the employee to a default scheme. Employers who select a KiwiSaver scheme for their employees will not have any financial obligation if the scheme fails. You need to reach an agreement with the scheme provider and arrange for them to give you a supply of product disclosure statements to distribute to your employees. When you give your employee a KiwiSaver information pack, you must also give them a: • copy of the product disclosure statement for your chosen scheme, and a • statement advising them they will be allocated to that scheme unless they choose their own scheme. You need to let us know if you choose another scheme or decide not to offer a chosen scheme any more. Existing workplace schemes KiwiSaver is intended to complement, rather than replace, existing registered superannuation schemes. It creates a number of options for existing registered superannuation schemes, including: • establishing a KiwiSaver scheme as part of your existing scheme • continuing to operate independently of KiwiSaver. Your contributions to existing superannuation schemes reduce the amount of compulsory employer contributions you’re required to pay. Contributions to existing superannuation schemes count towards compulsory employer contributions, if they meet certain conditions. For more information go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver/kiwisaver-employers/contributions-and-deductions A registered superannuation scheme may have been granted an exemption from the automatic enrolment rules, but may not be a complying fund. You should consult the superannuation scheme provider which administers the scheme to find out whether a specific scheme is a complying fund. Find out more For more information about the options for existing schemes, talk to: • your scheme trustees • scheme provider or industry advisor, or • visit the Financial Markets Authority website fma.govt.nz 20KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE Glossary Automatic enrolmentIf a new employee is aged 18 or over and under 65, they’ll be automatically enrolled in KiwiSaver unless: • they don’t meet the criteria • their employer is exempt. Complying fund A complying fund is a superannuation fund within a registered superannuation scheme that has been approved by the Financial Markets Authority as having rules similar to those for KiwiSaver (eg KiwiSaver lock-in rules and portability). Compulsory employer contribution The contribution employers are required to make to their employee’s savings in KiwiSaver schemes and complying funds. The compulsory employer contribution rate is 3% of your employee’s gross salary or wages. Savings suspensionAfter 12 months a member can apply to Inland Revenue to take a break from making contributions to KiwiSaver. A savings suspension can be from three months to one year, and can be applied for more than once. Default schemesIf someone joins KiwiSaver without selecting a scheme provider, or if their employer doesn’t have a preferred scheme. For a list of default scheme providers go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver/kiwisaver-individuals/joining-kiwisaver/kiwisaver-providers Defined contribution schemeA scheme where the benefit is based on contributions plus investment earnings. Most schemes in New Zealand are defined contribution schemes. All KiwiSaver schemes must be a defined contribution scheme. Defined benefit schemeA scheme where the benefit does not relate to the investments of the scheme but is based on a formula that takes into account factors such as a member’s length of service and final salary. ESCTEmployer superannuation contribution tax is a tax on any monetary contribution to a superannuation fund that is paid by an employer for their employee’s benefit. All employer contributions to KiwiSaver and complying funds are liable to have tax withheld. Employer-chosen schemeAn employer can choose the scheme their employee will become a member of if their employee does not select their own scheme when they join KiwiSaver. Exempt employerAn employer approved as exempt from the automatic enrolment rules by the Financial Markets Authority. Financial advisorA financial advisor provides advice to assist financial planning and decisions. This doesn’t include an employer who only gives their employees information about KiwiSaver or selects an employer-chosen scheme. Financial hardship savings suspension If a member is suffering or likely to suffer from financial hardship during the first 12 months of Inland Revenue receiving a contribution, they may be granted a financial hardship savings suspension. KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE21 Financial Markets AuthorityThe Financial Markets Authority: • is responsible for registering and regulating KiwiSaver schemes • supervises the management of registered KiwiSaver schemes and other superannuation schemes • monitors and encourages compliance with the Superannuation Schemes Act 1989 and the KiwiSaver Act 2006. Government contributionsKiwiSaver members and complying fund members, if eligible, will receive a Government contribution tax credit of up to $521.43 a year (equivalent to $10 a week). Gross salary or wagesFor contributions to KiwiSaver schemes, gross salary or wages generally means salary, wages or allowances including: • bonuses • commission • extra salary • gratuity • overtime pay • other remuneration of any kind except: • redundancy payments • the value of overseas accommodation and cost of living allowance • the value of providing board or lodging, or use of a house or quarters, or the payment of an allowance instead of the provision of this benefit • free or discounted shares received under an employee share scheme • payments under a Voluntary Bonding Scheme funded by the Ministry for Primary Industries, the Ministry of Health or the Ministry of Education. • an overpayment of an amount of an employer’s superannuation cash contribution that an employee chooses to have treated as salary or wages. • honoraria payments made under the Fire and Emergency Act 2017 paid by Fire and Emergency New Zealand to a volunteer. For contributions to complying funds, gross salary or wages has the same meaning as for a KiwiSaver scheme, but excludes bonuses, commissions and other amounts that are not included in the employee’s gross base salary or wages by the relevant complying fund. KiwiSaver information packInland Revenue provides a KiwiSaver information pack for employers to give to all new employees or for those existing employees who are considering opting in or who ask for one. It includes our factsheet Your introduction to KiwiSaver - employee information - KS3, KiwiSaver deduction form - KS2 and the Opt-out request - KS10 form. KiwiSaver memberSomeone who joins a KiwiSaver scheme and is entitled to benefits under the scheme. KiwiSaver schemeA registered superannuation scheme that meets prescribed requirements can be registered as a KiwiSaver scheme with the Financial Markets Authority. 22KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE Member contribution rateAn employee can choose to contribute to their KiwiSaver scheme at the contribution rate of either 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% of their gross salary or wages. If they don’t choose a contribution rate, the default rate is 3%. New employmentThis is any new job you start. It doesn’t apply to someone who: • stays on the same payroll, eg an employee is transferred between branches or divisions of related companies • is an employee of an amalgamating company • is an employee of a partnership that has been dissolved and reconstituted • is employed by a business purchased as a going concern • is an employee who returns to their employer after a period of secondment. New Zealand SuperannuationThe state-funded pension paid to eligible New Zealand residents, currently from age 65. Non-employeeSomeone who does not work for salary or wages, such as a self-employed person or a contractor/schedular payment earner. Non-employees may still be eligible to join KiwiSaver. Opt inWhere an employee or other eligible person who is not currently automatically enrolled decides to join a KiwiSaver scheme. Opt outA new employee who is automatically enrolled can choose not to become a KiwiSaver member when they start new employment. This choice must be made during the opt-out period. Opt-out periodThe period in which a person who is automatically enrolled may choose to opt out of KiwiSaver. This is from two weeks and up to eight weeks of the person starting employment (ie on or after day 14 and on or before day 56). Commission for Financial Literacy and Retirement Income A government-funded body set up to help New Zealanders prepare financially for their retirement. Scheme providerA superannuation provider registered by the Financial Markets Authority for KiwiSaver. Temporary employmentEmployment is temporary if: • the employment is as a casual agricultural worker, or • the employment is under a contract of service that is for a period of 28 continuous days or less, or • the employment is described in section 28(1)(a)(ii) of the Holidays Act 2003. Twice-monthly filerAn employer with gross annual PAYE and ESCT totalling more than $500,000. Vest/vestingAn employer may choose the length of time a member needs to work for them before they can keep all their employer’s contributions. Some employers may use a sliding scale, eg 1 year = 10%, 5 years = 50%, 10 years = 100%; others may let the contributions ‘vest’ immediately. Compulsory employer contributions must vest in the employee immediately. Voluntary employer contributionAn additional contribution to an employee’s superannuation scheme made by an employer over and above the compulsory employer contribution. KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE23 Accident compensation payments 16 Automatic enrolment 8 casual agricultural workers 5 contractors 5 employees under 18 4 private domestic workers 5 temporary employees 4 Compliance 18 financial hardship 20 Eligibility 2 citizenship and residency 4 State Services employees overseas 4 Employer-chosen schemes 19 Employer contributions 12 compulsory employer contributions 12 ESCT (employer superannuation contribution tax) 13 voluntary employer contributions 16 Existing employees 9 Existing workplace schemes 19 Member contributions 10 calculating deductions 11 contribution rates 10 contributions made in error 17 deducting contributions 12 New employees 6 existing members 7 Opting out 16 Parental leave payments 16 Private domestic workers 5 Savings suspension 16 Record keeping 17 Temporary employees 4 Quick reference guide 24KIWISAVER EMPLOYER GUIDE Answering employees’ KiwiSaver questions The Commission for Financial Capability is an excellent source of information for employees. The Commission’s role is to help New Zealanders prepare financially for retirement through education, information and promotion. It offers free, independent and impartial resources through the Sorted website at sorted.org.nz A range of Sorted resources are available, so you can help your employees make decisions about KiwiSaver and increase their financial knowledge in the process. Disclaimer The information contained in this guide is for general information only. It should not be used as a substitute for financial, legal, business, accounting, tax or other professional advice. This guide is intended to provide general information to the public, and all reasonable measures have been taken to ensure its quality and accuracy. However, Inland Revenue: • makes no warranty, express or implied, nor assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, correctness, completeness or use of any information contained in this guide, nor represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights; and • does not assume any legal liability or responsibility for any damage or loss that may directly or indirectly result from any information contained in this guide or any actions taken as a result of the content of this guide.