MEETING YOUR employer obligations for KiwiSaver I have a new employee who is not in KiwiSaver – Auto Enrol Within seven days of the new employee starting work: Determine if your employee is eligible to enrol in KiwiSaver. Provide them with KiwiSaver information supplied by Inland Revenue (KS3, KS2, KS10). If you have selected a preferred scheme provider, you will also need to provide your employee a copy of that scheme’s product disclosure statement. Start deductions from the employee’s first pay. Employees must contribute a minimum of 3% of their gross salary or wages, but they can pay 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% - they can tell you this by completing a KS2. Start making compulsory employer contributions and pay ESCT (employers are generally required to contribute 3% of an employee’s before tax pay). Send details of the employee’s contributions when you file Employment information each payday. Send Inland Revenue a New employee and KiwiSaver details - IR346K form. Start deductions from the employee’s first pay. Employees must contribute a minimum of 3% of their gross salary or wages, but they can pay 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% - they can tell you this by completing a KS2. Start making compulsory employer contributions and pay ESCT (employers are generally required to contribute 3% of an employee’s before tax pay). Send details of the employee’s contributions when you file Employment information each payday. I have a new employee who is already in KiwiSaver I have a new employee who is already in KiwiSaver and they told me they don’t need to make KiwiSaver contributions Ask to see a copy of your employee’s savings suspension letter from Inland Revenue. If your employee is over 65 and is eligible to withdraw their KiwiSaver, they may elect to cease contributions - ask them to complete a KS51. You can also cease employer contributions. If they don’t have either of the above, or the savings suspension has expired, start making deductions until they can show you these. I have a new employee I’ve auto-enrolled but they want to opt-out of KiwiSaver Continue the auto-enrolment process and start making deductions. Give your employee a KS10 and direct them to our website if they want more information. The completed form needs to be sent to Inland Revenue. Once they give you a completed KS10, send it to Inland Revenue. You can then refund any contributions deducted but not yet sent and Inland Revenue will refund any contributions already received. KS45 | April 2022 For more information, go to ird.govt.nz/kiwisaver Determine if your employee is eligible to enrol in KiwiSaver. Provide your employee with KiwiSaver information supplied by Inland Revenue (KS3 and KS2). If you have selected a preferred scheme provider, you will also need to provide your employee a copy of that scheme’s product disclosure statement. Get your employee to complete a KS2. Start deductions from the employee’s first pay. Employees must contribute a minimum of 3% of their gross salary or wages, but they can pay 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% - they can tell you this by completing a KS2. Start making compulsory employer contributions and pay ESCT (employers are generally required to contribute 3% of an employee’s before tax pay). Send details of the employee’s contributions when you file your Employment information each payday. I have an existing employee who wants to join KiwiSaver Start deductions from the employee’s next pay. Employees must contribute a minimum of 3% of their gross salary or wages, but they can pay 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% - they can tell you this by completing a KS2. Start making compulsory employer contributions and pay ESCT (employers are generally required to contribute 3% of an employee’s before tax pay). Send details of the employee’s contributions when you file Employment information each payday I have an existing employee who said they aren’t in KiwiSaver but they are Ask to see a copy of their savings suspension letter from Inland Revenue. If they don’t have one or it has expired - keep making deductions until they can show you a valid savings suspension letter. Direct your employee to Inland Revenue’s website to get the form to apply for a savings suspension. I have an existing employee who is in KiwiSaver but has told me they are on a savings suspension Double-check the KS2 the employee gave you when they started working for you. Ask the employee. I don’t know if my employee is in KiwiSaver or not They can tell you this directly by completing a KS2, or by contacting their KiwiSaver scheme provider or by submitting a contribution rate change using myIR. We will send you a letter with the list of contribution rate changes requested through scheme providers and myIR on a weekly basis. Start making deductions from the employee’s next pay using the new contribution rate. Note: your employees can request as many rate changes as they like but you are not required to make a change more than once every 3 months unless you agree to a shorter timeframe. Send details of the employee’s contributions when you file Employment information each payday. I have an existing employee who wants to change their employee contribution rate