1 Māori representation at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake Our 2024-2025 roadmap to supporting career development outcomes for Māori 2024-25 2 Table of Contents Introduction by Peter Mersi - Our Commissioner 03 Developing the Māori representation roadmap 05 Understanding our peoples’ experiences 06 Public sector priority 07 Data and insights 08 Measuring Progress – Māori pay gaps 10 Measuring Change – inclusion and people experience 12 Māori representation goals 14 Table of Contents Representation changes 2022 to 2024 16 Our roadmap for creating change 18 3 Introduction by Peter Mersi OUR COMMISSIONER At Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake everything starts and ends with people. Our people are the reason we can do our work and make our workplace a great place to be. Our work is driven by our aspiration – improving oranga for current and future generations. We recognise that we make our biggest contribution to oranga though the activities we support and deliver to our customers. This year, we have continued our strong focus and commitment to responding to the needs of our diverse workforce and building an inclusive workplace for everyone. We do this by providing a workplace where everyone can feel respected, valued, and supported to do their best work every day, regardless of background. Our behaviours of Whanaungatanga, Manaakitanga and Mahi tika which are encompassed in Te Pou o te Tangata, are also vital in creating an inclusive workplace, where diversity is valued, and we are open and accountable for what we do. Last year when we developed our Māori Representation Roadmap, we committed to understanding the experience of Māori at Inland Revenue in terms of career development and barriers they face. We worked in partnership with our people to establish the actions that will create a positive impact on Māori representation, reduce the pay gaps and support meaningful career outcomes. Our 2024-25 roadmap builds on the work already underway and highlights the progress we are making towards our three Māori representation goals. These are to increase Māori joining our organisation, increase Māori in leadership roles and increase Māori representation across higher level/higher paid technical roles. We will continue to focus on four key areas that will help us meet our Māori representation goals as follows: • attraction and recruitment • career and development • leadership and the role of people leaders • our wider working environment. The actions outlined in this roadmap continue to support the goals in Kia Toipoto – Public Service Pay Gaps Action Plan relating to Māori representation. While I recognise that many of the actions in this roadmap will take time, I am encouraged by the progress we are making in creating positive change and improving Māori representation across Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake. 4 Developing the Māori Representation Roadmap 5 Our Māori representation roadmap responds to the insights we have gathered from our people to identify tangible actions that can support meaningful career outcomes for Māori. This roadmap continues from the 2023 Māori Representation Roadmap, which was created with engagement and partnership with Māori from across Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake. Many of the actions on the journey to create positive change in Māori representation are longer term and systemic - therefore this roadmap provides an update on progress on the actions to date, and the impact of these. Specifically, this year we have: • Held an open hui with Whānau Māori, followed by opportunities to share thoughts and feedback • Updated our unions and invited specific feedback from PSA Rūnanga • Worked with Te Kāhui Tūhono (our Māori/Crown team) to ensure that their work programme is reflected accurately, and that we are considering a broad range of factors that contribute to Māori representation. Developing the Māori Representation Roadmap 6 Diversity, equity and inclusion has had a dedicated focus at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake since 2017. When developing our 23/24 roadmap last year, we committed to understanding the experiences of Māori, in terms of career development and the barriers that have been faced. Through on-going kōrero, and kanohi-ki-te-kanohi (face-to-face) engagements, Māori have shared their experiences and insights. We have worked in partnership to establish the actions that will create a positive impact on Māori representation, and in turn reduce the pay gaps. This focus is supported and reinforced through Kia Toipoto – Public Service Pay Gaps Action Plan guidance, from Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission. Over the last 2 years we have taken an active approach in working with Māori to understand lived experiences. This has been through wānanga, hui and leveraging existing insight and resources. Understanding our peoples’ experience This helped us to establish the high-level areas of focus of: • People leaders - leaders gaining a better understanding of the cultural needs, practices and value of Māori. • Recruitment practices – focused on Māori cultural practices and enabling Māori to be unapologetically themselves. • Individual skills and support – support and empower the individual to realise their potential. • Promotion and visibility of Whānau Māori networks – increase feelings of inclusion and provide opportunities for capability growth. • Māori career pathways – supporting the overall increase of Māori representation at senior level and in technical roles. Our engagement with Māori also helped us to shape up the approach to work on Māori representation in partnership with Māori, in parallel with work undertaken as part of the Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Roadmap. 7 Our focus on Māori representation supports our public sector priorities, with Kia Toipoto reflecting specific outcomes relating to Māori. Our Diversity Equity and Inclusion roadmap reflects our other Kia Toipoto actions. Kia Toipoto comes from the saying: “Waiho i te toipoto, kaua i te toiroa Let us be united, not wide apart.” The name speaks to closing gaps and creating unity and fairness for all peoples. Launched in November 2021, Kia Toipoto - the Public Service Pay Gaps Action Plan 2021–2024, has 3 goals relative to Māori representation mahi: • make substantial progress towards closing Māori pay gaps • accelerate progress for wāhine Māori • create fairer workplaces for all, including disabled people and members of rainbow communities. Public sector priority 8 Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake collects data through our People Experience Pulse (PXP), and through our employee management system. This roadmap uses data and insights collected about gender, pay, representation of Māori across the organisation and within roles. We use this data to help shape our organisational work programmes and provide insights into our representation and pay gaps. We use longitudinal data to help understand the changes and incremental shifts, and to show our progress to date. When referring to gender pay, the measurements do not include employees that identify outside the gender binary, due to limited numbers and the risk associated with publishing figures that may cause individual employee data to be identified. Māori data sovereignty The data in this roadmap is collected from our internal communities in accordance with the Privacy Act 2020. Māori data is collected in partnership with our Māori communities, and is treated with the respect and care of other taonga. Data and insights 9 Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake has been working over several years to ensure gender and ethnicity are not a determining factor in what people get paid. Measuring progress and change 10 Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake has been working over several years to ensure gender and ethnicity are not a determining factor in what people get paid. The drivers of our gender and ethnic pay gaps relate to representation. This means that although we have diversity within our frontline roles and lower paid roles, the level of diversity reduces in higher paid, more senior or influential roles. As of 30 July 2024, Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake has a Māori pay gap of 8.06%. This pay gap is driven by representation, although we have high representation within our frontline and lower paid roles, the levels of Māori reduce in higher paid, more senior or influential roles. The average pay for tāne Māori is $103,171 and for wāhine Māori is $81,286. • Data collected over the last 3 years on pay and ethnic identity, indicate average Māori pay has increased for both wāhine and tāne Māori. • Considering Māori representation has remained relatively steady at around 12%, the increase in average pay (and decrease in pay gaps) indicate positive progress, therefore we want to maintain the momentum. Māori pay gaps average pay for tāne Māori $ 103,171 average pay for wāhine Māori pay gap for Māori 8.1% $ 81,286 11 Māori pay gaps year on yearAverage pay gaps by ethnicity 2023-2024 European Māori MELAA Asian Pacific Peoples -0.3-0.2- 0.100.30.20.1 Our analysis shows that there are no unexplained pay gaps within same or similar roles. We continue to periodically review this data as the population shifts to ensure no pay gaps are created. 13.5% 13.3% 16.6% 12.7% 9.4% 9 .1 % 8.1% 8.7% -26.2% -21.4% July 2023July 2022July 2024 0% 5% 10% 15% Māori 10.9% 8.7% 8.1% 20242023 Average remuneration for Māori 2023 Wāhine Māori Tāne Māori 20242023 020,00040,00060,00080,000100,000120,000 $79,820 $81,286 $100,150 $103,170 12 The graph below indicates reported feelings of inclusion for Māori at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake. This dimension has continued to trend in a positive direction since the People Experience Pulse (PXP) survey was introduced in 2020 with 86% of employees (non-Māori included) who responded in 2023 indicating they felt ‘mostly included’ (4) or ‘really included’ (5) in their day-to-day experience at work. Since 2020, reported feelings of inclusion for Māori have trended positively, with a minor decrease in May 2023. Completion rates for Māori were very similar to other groups, with equal rates or less than 3% difference in completion. Inclusion & people experience OF ALL SURVEY RESPONDENTS: felt ‘mostly included’ or ‘really included’ in their day- to-day experience at work 86% PXP results for Māori for the Inclusion Dimension from 2020–2024 3.8 3.9 4.0 4 .1 4.44.3 Nov 2020Mar 2021Sep 2021Jun 2022Nov 2022May 2023Sep 2023May 2024 4.34.4 13 Māori representation goals What are we trying to achieve? 14 Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake aims to improve Māori representation across all levels of our workforce to reflect New Zealand’s population. Our three representation goals are to: • increase Māori joining our organisation. • increase Māori in leadership roles, focusing on Team Lead roles and senior leadership, with a particular focus on wāhine Māori. • increase Māori representation across higher level/higher paid technical roles, with a particular focus on wāhine Māori. Since 2020, Māori representation has increased from 12.3% to 12.47%. Aotearoa New Zealand working Māori population is 15% (Statistics New Zealand Household Labour Force Survey March 2024). Māori representation Māori representation by gender Māori representation across organisational roles Māori representation 12.4% Wāhine Māori representation 9.28% Tāne Māori representation 2.75% Senior management 06%10%12% Management Team leader Staff 4%8%14%2% \*Population data from Statistics NZ, Census 2018 8% 9% 13% 13% 15 When looking at the representation of Māori within job roles, there is a higher representation at level 1 roles compared to higher level roles for technical and specialist roles. There is a higher representation of Māori in level 3 Customer Compliance roles than at level 1 or 2. At senior leadership level (tiers 1-3) Māori representation is 8%, management (tiers 4-5) is 9%, and team lead level is 13%. Māori representation within role L1L2L3 Community Service Officer 13.1% 13.3% 4.5%4.5% 11.1% 24.9% 26.9% 13.3% 10.7% 4.5% 4.8% 3.3% Customer Compliance Specialist Community Compliance Officer Domain Specialist/ Principal Technical Specialist 16 Representation for Māori in Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake has remained relatively steady for the past three years, at around 12%. In the past year we saw a minor drop in tāne Māori representation, counteracted by a slight increase in wāhine Māori representation. Exploration of attraction campaigns intentionally designed to attract Māori may help to further increase Māori representation, however we understand bringing more Māori into our entry roles is likely to negatively impact the pay gap data until we increase representation in senior leadership and technical roles. Representation changes 2022 to 2024 Longitudinal data on Māori representation by gender 202320222024 0% 2% 4% 6% 8% 10% 12% 14% Māori 12.34% 12.42% 12.47% Wāhine Māori 9.40% 9.32% 9.49% Tāne Māori 2.84% 2.96% 2.80% 17 Our roadmap for creating change 18 This focus includes actions that contribute to increasing the overall representation of Māori at Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake. Insights can improve our processes to attract more Māori to want to work here. Leveraging multiple different sources and partners to source Māori candidates with the capability we need can create awareness of our organisation as an employer. Attracting more Māori to a range of roles – not specifically ‘Māori roles’ will support a positive shift in representation. Attraction and recruitment FOCUS AREADETAILMILESTONES Targeted Recruitment Recruitment sourcing targets Māori talent and hiring leaders and our Talent Acquisition team are having deliberate conversations about the type of capability they need, including cultural capability. • Leverage job boards, talent pools and non- traditional sourcing channels to encourage more Māori talent to apply for a range of roles, not just ‘Māori’ specific roles. • Explore partnerships with external agencies to attract more Māori. • Explore mechanisms to target recruitment for technical and leadership roles, aligning to our representation goals. • Continue to have pathways for graduates and explore other opportunities for Māori that are early in career. Q2 2025 Targeted recruitment approach/approaches. Cultural capability in Talent Acquisition Talent Acquisition team are confident having proactive conversations about sourcing with hiring managers and are able to influence leaders to consider broader capability (including Māori) when hiring externally. • Grow the Talent Acquisition team’s cultural capability and understanding of Te Ao Māori. • Work with hiring managers and panel members to ensure they have an understanding and knowledge of Te Ao Māori to provide a positive experience for Māori candidates. 19 This focus supports the development of our internal people, through active partnership and working together, ensuring that our practices and processes like Whanake and learning assist Māori to achieve career goals. Supporting non-Māori to grow their Māori cultural capability creates a supportive environment for Māori. Improving our talent management processes increases how visible Māori talent is for career advancement. Over time, this focus supports our representation goals to increase Māori in technical and leadership roles. The actions listed are specific targeted examples that relate to Māori and/or underrepresented communities in general. Our enduring approach to supporting the development of our people, includes a focus on supporting leaders to develop their skills to lead diverse teams. Career and development FOCUS AREADETAILMILESTONES Workforce development system From individual performance and development conversations (Whanake) through to broader talent conversations - Māori are visible and supported to achieve career goals and outcomes in a way that works for them as Māori. • Create talent management tools that create more visibility of Māori talent. • Leaders and leadership teams are having purposeful conversations about Māori talent. Development opportunities Leverage development programmes that support our focus to increase Māori in our leadership pipeline alongside other equitable development opportunities. • Work with Māori to promote and increase the visibility and requirements of existing programmes, making it easier to apply. • Review the wrap-around support and approach to enable people to plan and prepare alongside their leaders. • Conduct a scan of the external offerings and ensure that we are maximising the opportunities for Māori to develop. 20 FOCUS AREADETAILMILESTONES Te Awatea Learning programme to support Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake’s approach to building Māori cultural capability. This focuses on individual capability, which supports us as an organisation to provide better outcomes to our Māori customers and our communities. • Learner pathways will be available for individuals to choose from based on their own needs, aligned to key kaupapa – Worldviews, Relationships and Responsibilities, Tikanga Māori and te reo Māori, in line with our commitment to Whāinga Amorangi. Q4 2024 Foundational level learning released across the organisation. Tuakana-Teina• Whānau Māori have a kaupapa as part of their moemoeā. Career and development (continued) 21 This focus brings together actions that specifically relate to how people leaders should support their people, with the wider focus on leadership as a capability. Leaders are crucial to how we recruit and develop Māori and support careers. They role model inclusive practices and behaviours and can influence change across the organisation. Leadership and the role of people leaders FOCUS AREADETAILMILESTONES Hiring leaders Hiring leaders have the right guidance and capability to provide a positive candidate experience for Māori and decision-making is free from bias. • Update guidance and tools to support people leaders and panel members to make non- biased decisions. • Include cultural considerations protocol throughout recruitment processes. • Hiring leaders/panel members provide a culturally appropriate candidate experience. Q2 2025 Review and update hiring leaders’ guidance to set a tone of inclusion and cultural understanding. Leadership model Continue to focus on building inclusive leaders, through adding resources and materials to support decision making and inclusive practices. • Share tools, resources and research to help leaders understanding of what it means to be an inclusive leader. • Reinforce the responsibility of leaders to role model Te Pou o te Tangata (Whanaungatanga, Manakitanga and Mahi Tika) in how they lead. 22 Leadership and the role of people leaders (continued) FOCUS AREADETAILMILESTONES Te ao Māori capability of leaders All leaders are working to build their own capability and understanding and can effectively role model inclusive practices and behaviours. • Te Awatea learning will provide learning for people to build their te ao Māori capability, including leaders. This will enable people leaders to support team members to engage and upskill their capability to engage with te ao Māori. • Consideration of other learning and development opportunities for leaders in addition to Awatea. 23 This focus brings together actions that create an environment that supports and enables Māori. Working towards becoming a te Tiriti-based organisation and incorporating te ao Māori into our wider working environment supports Māori to want to work here and stay. Our wider working environment FOCUS AREADETAILMILESTONES Te Kāhui Tūhono work programme• Build capability to support the Māori Crown relationship – te Whainga Amorangi. • Bring te Tiriti-based thinking into enterprise strategy and planning. • Inform the design and delivery of Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake services. Tuitui te hono Māori outcomes Support Māori-specific outcomes that Māori aspire to achieve for themselves. • Continue with communications plan to end of October. • Gather feedback from engagement activities in November and consider next steps. • Design maturity model to help embed insights from Tuitui te hono. • Ensure actions resonate with contributing to Māori outcomes. Q3 2024 Evaluation of engagement activities. Q3 2025 Design maturity model to progress mahi to Phase 2. 24 Our wider working environment (continued) FOCUS AREADETAILMILESTONES Te Māra Māori data governance and sovereignty Provide a Māori perspective of how Māori data should be treated with respect and integrity within Inland Revenue Te Tari Taake. • Gather insights from literature review. • Consider insights and current political climate on next stage of Te Māra. • Seek endorsement to conduct internal and external interviews. Q2 2024 Literature review completed and insights presented to Māori data governance and sovereignty steering group. Māori measures Measure contributions towards Māori-specific outcomes in a tikanga Māori based way. • Continue to refine the values within the Māori perspective of the Performance Measurement Framework • Consider themes from the literature review of Te Māra in how we monitor outcomes for Māori • Identify a set of measures to trial that represent coverage across Māori-specific outcomes within the Theory of Change model. Q2 2024 Draft framework for Māori measures to be completed. Q2 2025 Collaborate with Strategic Portfolio Stewardship and Te Mana Rangahau to pilot the Māori measures framework. 25 FOCUS AREADETAILMILESTONES Data and insights Leverage the opportunities to maximise our understanding of the experiences of Māori. • Encourage the participation of our people in the second Te Taunaki Public Service Census survey. • Analyse findings relating to our people demographics and their inclusion and wellbeing at work, and their experience of working for the Public Service. Our workplaces and spaces Enable a space where Māori are free to be unapologetically themselves. • Developing the cultural awareness, understanding and capability to ensure a safe space for tikanga Māori is provided whenever entering into a new build, vacating floors/ buildings, and resting or re-awakening taonga.