Page 1 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] BT Release 4 Integrated Deployment Approach & Plan Prepared By Technical Cutover Manager and Henry Law, Technical Cutover Analyst Prepared For BT Deployment Lead Date April 2020 Version V1.0 (HURINGA REFERENCE DOCUMENT) Status FINAL BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 2 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Document Review History No Date Author Change Description 0.1 08/03/2020 Initial creation of draft document based on the Release 3 Deployment Cutover Plan template 0.2 02/04/2020 Review and update document 0.3 10/04/2020 Review and update document 0.4 20/04/2020 Review and update document 1.0 22/04/2020 Final version Document Contributors Name Role BT Release 4 Deployment Lead BT Deployment Lead BT Deployment Workstream Manager BT Business Deployment Lead BT Business Deployment Analyst START Workstream Deployment Lead Heritage Workstream Deployment Lead Document Approvers Name Role Approval BT Release 4 Deployment Lead Documents Referenced Name Author D3091 - BT Release 4.0 Deployment Strategy D3091 - BT Release 4.0 Deployment Strategy - SUMMARY BT R4.0 - Cutover Sequence Diagram BT R4.0 - Master Cutover Schedule BT R4.0 - Cutover Issue Register BT R4.0 - Master Deployment Register BR R4.0 – Communication Strategy BT R4 Deployment Application Shutdown and Start-up Process BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 3 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Contents 1 Executive Summary ......................................................................................................................... 5 Document Purpose ................................................................................................................. 5 Overview ................................................................................................................................. 5 Document Audience ............................................................................................................... 6 Deployment Overview ............................................................................................................ 6 2 S cope and Assumptions .................................................................................................................. 8 In Scope ................................................................................................................................... 8 Out of Scope:........................................................................................................................... 8 Assumptions ............................................................................................................................ 9 3 B T Release 4.0 Cutover ................................................................................................................. 10 Proving the Cutover Schedule via Mock Go Lives ................................................................. 10 Cutover Overview ................................................................................................................. 11 BT Release 4 Cutover Sequence ............................................................................................ 11 Product Specific Deployment Approaches............................................................................ 13 Key Cutover Milestones ........................................................................................................ 13 Cutover Response to COVID-19 ............................................................................................ 14 4 S uccess and Exit Criteria ............................................................................................................... 15 Cutover Success Criteria ....................................................................................................... 15 Core Cutover Deployment Tasks to Meet Exit Criteria ......................................................... 15 5 C utover Control Centre (CC) ......................................................................................................... 17 Control Centre Responsibilities ............................................................................................. 17 5 .1.1 Agreeing and Executing the Cutover Plan ..................................................................... 18 5.1.2 Cutover Task Initiation .................................................................................................. 18 5.1.3 Responsibilities of Cutover Task Owner ....................................................................... 18 5.1.4 Cutover Status Updates ................................................................................................ 18 5.1.5 Report & Manage Deployment Issues .......................................................................... 18 Cutover Issue Resolution Process ......................................................................................... 19 5 .2.1 Cutover Issue Severity & Escalations ............................................................................ 21 5.2.2 Escalation Groups ......................................................................................................... 22 Business Severity of open issues ........................................................................................... 23 6 R ollback ......................................................................................................................................... 25 Overview ............................................................................................................................... 25 Rollback Triggers ................................................................................................................... 25 6.2.1 Rollback Checkpoints .................................................................................................... 25 Rollback Scope, Sequence, and Timings ............................................................................... 26 7 C ommunications ........................................................................................................................... 28 BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 4 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Cutover Communications Plan .............................................................................................. 28 7.1.1 Cutover Stand-up meetings .......................................................................................... 28 7.1.2 Cutover Progress Update Communications .................................................................. 28 Scheduled Cutover updates .................................................................................................. 29 Issue notifications ................................................................................................................. 30 8 P ost Cutover activities .................................................................................................................. 31 Early Life Support – Pou Whirinaki ....................................................................................... 31 Deployment Close-out & Lessons Learned ........................................................................... 31 9 Cu tover Risks & Issues .................................................................................................................. 32 Cutover Risks ......................................................................................................................... 32 Cutover Issues ....................................................................................................................... 32 10 A ppendix A: BT Release 4.0 – High Level Cutover diagram ...................................................... 33 11 Appendix B: BT Release 4.0 Cutover – Contact List .................................................................. 34 12 Appendix C: BT Release 4.0 BPIV Remote Working Approach ................................................. 35 13 Appendix D: BT Release 4.0 – High level rollback diagram ....................................................... 36 14 Appendix E: Product Specific Deployment Approaches ........................................................... 37 BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 5 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 1 Executive Summary Document Purpose The purpose of this document is to set out the Production Cutover Plan for the technical cutover of the BT Release 4 solution into the IR production environment, scheduled from Thursday 9 th to Thursday 16 th April 2020. This document describes the scope, approach, and planned execution timeline for all the technical cutover activities. This document also describes key information about entry and exit criteria, escalation processes, communications, roles and responsibilities, stakeholders, rollback/contingency plans, and the support/handover plan during the pre- and post-deployment process. The activities associated with the stopping/starting/ramping down of business activities to support the cutover will be covered in the Business Deployment Plan. The details around the internal and external communication will be covered in the Release 4 Comms Plan. Overview Business Transformation (BT) is a multi-year / multi-release transformation of IR’s core operating model and involves significant changes to its people, processes and technology. Stage 1 was successfully deployed in February 2017, focussing on improving the GST product and service for taxpayers and included the first use of the START core tax system, enabling new secure digital services to IR’s customers, New Zealand Business Number digital registration, and digital registration for migrants. Release 2 further extended the number of the tax products managed in START and introduced key legislative changes. R2 included: • Moving Withholding Tax, Gaming Machine Duty and Fringe Benefits Tax core tax services from FIRST to START (17 tax types were migrated to START, compared to only one tax type during Stage 1). • The collection of provisional tax information and payroll data in START, while the processing remains in FIRST. • Introduction of the new Accounting Information Method (AIM) and PAYE Pay-Period Reporting services for software vendors to provide to customers. • Delivery of New Zealand’s contribution to the Automatic Exchange of Information (AEOI) to reduce offshore tax evasion. Release 3 further extended the number of tax products managed in START and supported more key legislative changes introduced by the ARMTARM Bill - Taxation (Annual Rates, Modernising Tax Administration, and Remedial Matters) and includes: • Moving income tax services from FIRST to START, including the introduction of new approaches to meeting tax obligations and paying tax. • Working for Families products will be administered from START. • Moving the Customer master from FIRST to START. • Improvements to the collection and use of Investment Income information. • Enabling auto-refunds and electronic submission of Tax Donation Credits. • Several digital changes including a revamped IRD.govt.nz as well as gateway services including customer onboarding capability and a new MyIR landing page (eServices). Release 4 is focused on extending the START capabilities further to continue making tax simpler for New Zealanders including: BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 6 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] • Moving KiwiSaver from FIRST and CAS into START. • Moving Student Loans from FIRST into START. • Moving Reserve Scheme processing from IERS into START. • Moving the Heritage Customs and StudyLink interfaces to START. • Implementing several changes to Tax at Source including moving end-to-end processing of employer obligations from FIRST to START. • Several digital changes including fully transitioning IRD.govt.nz to the new revamped website and making additional improvements to gateway services. Document Audience This document is intended for use by the following: • BT Programme Leadership team • BT Programme Deployment team • BT Business Deployment team • BT Deployment leads • BT PMO • BT Early Life Support team • BT Change and Comms team • Impacted IR Technical and business teams • Vendors • Enterprise Change Authority • IT&C • IR Incident Management team Deployment Overview Deployment within the IR BT programme comprises all activities required to implement the new solution in the Production environment and to ensure that the business is ready for the change. Deployment Readiness includes training, communication, Change Management, technical, environmental preparation, etc. The relationship between the Cutover and how it fits into the overall BT Deployment Plan is described in the following diagram: BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 7 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] All the BT Release 4 deployment activities are covered in the overall BT Release 4 Deployment Plan, which describes the different components that make up Release 4.0, and the different deployment phases. The Release 4 Deployment Plan is supported by the various Workstream Deployment plans (e.g. Business Deployment, Heritage, FAST etc.), as well as this document (BT R4 Deployment Approach). The Deployment Approach and Master Cutover Schedule are also supported by the different work stream cutover plans and describe the activities required to move the new Release 4 solution to the IR Production environment. The Deployment Approach does not contain the specific technical details of different cutover tasks, it manages the interactions between Workstreams and describes the complex, high risks tasks required to move from BT Release 3 to BT Release 4. Details of particular technical tasks are covered in the Workstream specific cutover plans. Deployment plan Master Cutover Schedule Business Deployment Plan Microsoft Excel Heritage Deployment Plan(s) Microsoft Excel FAST Deployment Plan Microsoft Excel FCR DES Deployment Plan(s) Microsoft Project Deployment Approach Master Cutover Schedule Business Deployment Plan Microsoft Excel Heritage Deployment Plan(s) Microsoft Excel FAST Deployment Plan START FCR FCR DES Deployment Plan(s) Microsoft Project BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 8 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 2 Scope and Assumptions In Scope All cutover activities from Checkpoint 4a ( 4pm Friday 3 April 2020) through to handover to Early Life Support (midday Thursday 16 April 2020) are in scope for BT Release 4 Cutover, this includes: • System, channel, and interface shutdown necessary to enforce the BT R4 cutover outage window. • Core system deployment activities across FIRST, START, and CAS. • Additional Heritage application deployments • Co-ordination with external partners & government agencies – where their business operations are dependent on an IR interface that is in scope for upgrade with BT R4 (e.g. Charities Commission, Companies Office, Customs, StudyLink, KiwiSaver Providers). • Data Conversion/Migration to move the FIRST, CAS and Reserve Scheme data into START, including the Conversion Reconciliation and approval. • Crown Reconciliation between FIRST, CAS, FMIS, Reserve Scheme and START. • Business Post Implementation Verification Testing (BPIV). • Checkpoint 4b – Go/no go decision ( 6pm on Wednesday 15 April 2020). • Start-up of IR’s systems and channels following endorsement from the IR Executive Group to go-live with the R4 solution • Verification of B2B / Gateway Services connectivity for those external IR interfaces that have had a technical change applied during R4 cutover. Out of Scope: The following items are out of scope for the BT Release 4 Cutover: • Any activities outside the main cutover window (before Friday 3 and after Friday 17 April 2020), including but not limited to: o Business Deployment activities o Pre-deployments o Data cleansing o Post go-live production quality assurance (‘prod QA’) checks o Communications to External Stakeholders (will be done through the Marketing team or IR Relationship Managers). o Training and Change Management activities as per Organisation Change Management team’s scope. o Business Readiness Checkpoints. o Early Life Support. BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 9 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Assumptions The following assumptions have been made for the BT Release 4 Cutover: • All environmental / infrastructure changes to support BT Release 4 will be made as part of the preparation for the cutover. • Where possible, sub-systems and components will be deployed early to reduce the impact on the overall cutover. • Run sheets containing detailed implementation steps are managed by the Workstream Deployment Leads, while only high-level tasks will be tracked in the Master (Integrated) Cutover Schedule. • Any cutover activities performed by the Integration partners (Westpac, Charities, Companies Office, Customs and StudyLink) will have oversight by the IR Digital Ecosystem (DES) team. K ey milestones from these deployment events will feed into the Master Cutover Schedule. • Any cutover activities performed by external vendors (e.g. Exigen, SPK2IR, FIRST mainframe all require vendor support) will have oversight by the Heritage Deployment team. The exception to this are Spark changes, these will require oversight by the START deployment team and START Technical Team. • The Cutover Control Centre will be the source of authority for the duration of the cutover and will control all cutover activities. Decisions around escalations and rollback sit with the BT Deployment Manager in consultation with the BT Release 4 Programme Manager and the BT Programme Director. • The Cutover Control Centre will be fully engaged to gather timings and dependencies (twice daily reporting will be sent to project and Workstream leads and key IR business stakeholders). • Business verification testing (BPIV) will not test the full functionality of the solution but will be a validation of a subset of the high risk, critical business scenarios, to prove the cutover process (that the solution is working end-to-end as expected). BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 10 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 3 BT Release 4.0 Cutover Proving the Cutover Schedule via Mock Go Lives The implementation of the BT R4 cutover plan will be rehearsed via a series of Mock Go Lives (MGL). MGLs allow the BT R4 deployment team to realistically simulate the implementation of the R4 cutover plan in IR’s qual environments. Given the complexity and duration of the R4 cutover plan, the MGLs are viewed as a series of necessary intermediate steps to prove the entirety of the R4 cutover schedule prior to implementation within IR’s production environment. In total, three MGLs will be performed. The lessons learned from one MGL will be incorporated into the cutover schedule for the subsequent MGL. Over the course of the three rehearsals the master cutover schedule will be refined with the intention that a full and complete cutover schedule is ready by the third MGL – such that this rehearsal can simulate the production cutover as closely as possible. Given that MGLs involve rehearsing the end-to-end cutover schedule, they are a lengthy and resource intensive exercise. While many elements of the R4 cutover schedule will not benefit from more than three cutover rehearsals, some cutover tasks are more complex and would benefit from further rehearsals to prove they can be completed to expected levels of quality and timing that will be expected during the production cutover window. In addition to MGLs, a series of smaller Supplementary Mock Conversions (SMCs) will also be run. The purpose of the SMCs is to specifically rehearse the end-to-end START data migration process. The data migration process is a higher complexity and higher risk component of the end-to-end cutover schedule – additional rehearsals of this process is beneficial identifying and resolving data issues ahead of the production cutover. The MGL and SMC approach will result in the integrated cutover processes being refined and success criteria being identified to achieve the most suitable outcome for the eventual go-live cutover. The purpose of MGLs is to rehearse the: • implementation of the end-to-end cutover schedule: completing technical and business cutover tasks in accordance with runtimes and dependencies within the cutover schedule. This extends to also confirm that all required tasks have been identified and sequenced correctly in the master cutover schedule. • running of cutover rituals: notably the status updates that are issued at regular intervals and via multiple channels during cutover. • running of cutover processes: such as issue management and escalation for complex issue triage and decision making, task initiation, and monitoring of task progress. The main lessons learned from the MGL during the previous BT Releases are: • To successfully manage an issue requires a dedicated resource and good communication. The process should include email comms to all parties working on the resolution for updates and letting them know when the issue is resolved, and they can stand down. • The interaction between the different teams around file management requires more handholding to ensure the correct files are picked up, moved and processed. • Spending a few minutes up front to clear old test files will save a lot of time later. • Having dedicated (named) resources from the IR vendors makes it easier to get tasks done and work through issue resolution. • The Cutover Control Centre must manage the coordination of issues to ensure all teams are working together and know what the other ones are/are not doing. BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 11 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Cutover Overview The BT Release 4 cutover window runs from 8am Thursday April 9 to 6pm Thursday April 16. The outage to core systems and channels (i.e. FIRST, START, myIR, contact centre) is planned from 4pm through to 8am on the respective shutdown and start-up days. The high-level sequence of cutover tasks during this window is illustrated in the high level cutover block diagram below. Refer to Appendix A: BT Release 4.0 – High Level Cutover diagram for the detailed block plan of the BT R4 cutover window. BT Release 4 Cutover Sequence The approach for the BT Release 4 Production Cutover is to execute all tasks in the Master Cutover schedule within the allocated cutover window. The Production cutover formally commences on Friday 3 rd April at the Checkpoint 4a meeting where the formal approval to commence the cutover will be sought from the BT Go Live Committee. Once the approval has been received, some of the early/pre-deployment activities will commence. The business ramp-down (which consist of finalising and stopping work) and system shutdown (the actual shutting down of systems and channels, like myIR, CAS, eServices, B2B’s with other agencies, etc.) activities will commence progressively from 5pm on Wednesday 8 April, with the full shutdown completed by 4pm on Thursday 9 April. Any users still working in any of the operational systems by 4pm will be kicked out of the system(s) and lose any work they are in the middle of. At 4pm, a subset of the daily FIRST and START batches will be performed to process the daily transactions and ensure all in-flight transactions and payments are processed prior to any technical changes occurring. Once the START end-of -day production jobs have been completed a backup will be taken, the START system will be upgraded by deploying the latest Release 4.0 code. System changes will then be made to prepare for the Data migration from FIRST. A number of other deployments will also be completed on Thursday. Once the FIRST end-of-day batch run has completed, the changes will be passed through to DPS/START. Once the FIRST changes have been passed through the DataBridge and the two systems are in sync, the FIRST to START Data Conversion can begin. This is expected to be at 12pm on Friday BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 12 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 10 th A pril and continue until 5am on Monday 13 th April. The Data Conversion consists of transforming the FIRST data into a different format, for it to be loaded into START, followed by a reconciliation to ensure both systems are in sync. The successful completion of Data Reconciliation is one of the four main items required for go live. The reconciliation will be followed by the Heritage and START Post Conversion and Co-existence activities. This is where the Release 4 tax products are “zero’ed” out from FIRST as they will now be mastered in START. At the same time the START system will be prepared for the BPIV activities by processing any financial transactions from the Westpac bank files. START will also be updated to be ready for go-live. The Crown reconciliation will be performed in parallel at this time, to verify that the financials between\[Information redacted\] reconcile. Any discrepancies will be investigated, and no unexplained differences are allowed. A successful Crown reconciliation is the second criteria required for go live. The Heritage portal deployments will be performed on Tuesday afternoon; this includes myIR, xPression and LOLA. The Business Verification testing (BPIV) is scheduled for s even hours on Wednesday 15 April, starting from 8am. The BPIV scope not only covers the new Release 4.0 functionality in START and FIRST, but also the transferring of transactions between the two systems as required to support the ongoing co-existence solution. The successful completion of BPIV is the third criteria required for go live. The output of Data Reconciliation, the Crown Reconciliation and BPIV will then be presented to the BT Go Live committee to get their approval to go live. This is the Checkpoint 4b meeting scheduled for 5pm on Wednesday evening. The purpose of this meeting is to give the BT Go live Committee an update on the outcome of the cutover and seek their formal approval to ‘go live’. This go-live decision is the point of no return, as it is thereafter that the backlog will be processed, resulting in large customer data changes. Rolling back past this point will require substantial unpicking of customer transactions across multiple systems. The CP4b review is a formal assessment, based on the below criteria: # Requirement Description Accepted Quality Criteria Accepted By 1 Cutover Data migration / conversion Data Conversion - all data successfully processed into START and the conversion reconciliation approved Has the R4 converted data reconciled against the source/Heritage data within acceptable limitations set by the business (i.e. no P1/P2 discrepancies identified)? 2 Crown Reconciliation Reconciliation of financials between FIRST / START and SAP Have Crown financials, pre- data-conversion, reconciled between FIRST, CAS and FMIS? Have Crown financials, post-data-conversion, reconciled between FIRST, CAS, IERS, FMIS, and START? 3 Business Verification (BPIV) completed successfully Success of the cutover confirmed through series of end-to end verification tests Has BPIV successfully completed with no open Sev 1 or 2 defects and any open Sev 3 defects have acceptable work-around in place? Go Live Committee BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 13 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] # Requirement Description Accepted Quality Criteria Accepted By 4 Go Live completed successfully Cutover completed, all tasks completed and solution ready to use (refer to section 4.2 for further details of these tasks.) Have all cutover tasks been executed? Are there any open Sev 1 or Sev 2 cutover incidents? Go Live Committee Once the Go decision has been received at Checkpoint 4b, the team will commence catch up processing of the backlog work that has been held leading up to and during the Cutover window. The start-up activities will commence on Thursday morning from 6am where, external channels and interfaces will be brought back up progressively throughout the day and access to all systems restored. The support of the new solution will be handed over to the BT ELS team on Thursday 16 th April at the 12pm ELS handover meeting. Product Specific Deployment Approaches In addition to this over-arching deployment approach, detailed deployment approaches are also developed for those products that: • are in scope for migration to START during the R4 window, and a detailed plan is required in order to ramp down BAU activity associated with this product in the Heritage environment prior to cutover, or • require detailed work-around plan to ensure continuity of key business events prior to and/or following the outage associated with the BT R4 cutover window. Each of these product specific deployment approaches have been developed separately from this document, and include: • KiwiSaver • Student Loans • Child Support and Working for Families • Payment Processing • EMP Processing • Income Tax • Disbursements Refer to Appendix E: Product Specific Deployment Approaches for further details on these. Key Cutover Milestones In addition to the detailed cutover sequencing outlined in section 3.3, a series of R4 cutover milestones will also be scheduled. The purpose of these milestones is to track critical path progress and/or status of critical cutover tasks that are require a successful result in order to satisfy the R4 cutover exit criteria. These milestones are as follows: Description Start Date and Time Finish Date and Time Checkpoint 4a Friday 3 rd April at 2pm Friday 3 rd April at 3pm Outage Commence Thursday 9 th April at 4pm Data Reconciliation Checkpoint Monday 13 th April at 10am Monday 13 th April at 11am Extended Outage Checkpoint Monday 13 th April at 4pm Monday 13 th April at 5pm Crown Reconciliation Checkpoint Tuesday 14 th April at midday Tuesday 14 th April at 5pm Checkpoint 4b Wednesday 15 th April at 5pm Wednesday 15 th April at 6pm Outage Over Thursday 16 th April at 8am BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 14 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Description Start Date and Time Finish Date and Time Handover to ELS Thursday 16 th April at 12pm Thursday 16 th April at 1:00pm Cutover Response to COVID-19 Due to the global pandemic and movement being severely restricted with New Zealand under lockdown for all but essential workers, the Release 4 cutover will mostly be performed remotely from the homes of the team members, with some high touch type activities being completed from one of the IRD offices (e.g. Asteron or Te Rapa). This is being done to ensure the wellbeing and safety of all staff involved in the Cutover process. The decision on which activities should be performed remotely was based on: • If system was available to perform tasks remotely • Complexity of the task • Number of people involved • Ease to manage/troubleshoot Based on the above, it was identified we needed to run a remote trial of the following activities prior to the Cutover to prove they could successfully be completed remotely. Task Remote Trial BPIV 1pm on Wednesday 1 st April Data Verification 9am on Thursday 2 nd April START Manual Tasks 11am Thursday 2 nd April Although there were some challenges identified during the remote trials, they were ultimately a success. It was therefore agreed that these activities could be completed with the majority of the resources based remotely. The lessons learned from the trials were applied to improve our remote working approach and ensure everyone is aware of what will be required of them during these three key cutover activities. (Refer to Appendix C: Remote BPIV Approach for further details) BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 15 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 4 Success and Exit Criteria Cutover Success Criteria Going live will constitute a successful cutover but the criteria below will be used by the programme to measure the overall success of the cutover. The general success criteria for the BT Release 4 Production Cutover are defined as: • Successfully completing all planned cutover tasks within the agreed outage window (Thursday 9 th April at 4pm until Thursday 16 th April at 6pm). Refer to section 4.2 for a detailed breakdown of these tasks. • Successful migration and reconciliation of data and financials that is extracted from FIRST & CAS and loaded to START – no unexplained discrepancies. • Crown Reconciliation between FIRST, START and \[Information redacted\] reconcile with no unexplained variances – or with no unaccepted variances specific to KiwiSaver product. • BT Release 4 solution verified to be working as expected through the BPIV activity. • No open severity 1 or 2 defects at the end of the cutover, any open severity 3 defects with a business impact will have a business acceptable work-around in place. Core Cutover Deployment Tasks to Meet Exit Criteria To deem the cutover a success, the following cutover tasks must be completed within the defined R4 cutover window: Deployment Activity Description Successfully Achieved Partially Achieved Not Achieved Checkpoint 4a approval Formal approval in place to commence with the cutover.    Shutdown Successfully completed Business Ramp-down, shutting systems and channels in preparation of the cutover.    FIRST Batch (part A) Overnight batch runs completed to finalise all R4 tax information in FIRST and prepare FIRST for data migration.    START production job stream Overnight START batch runs completed to prepare START to be upgraded.    START Code deploy and Upgrade stream START code and config successfully deployed, while START upgraded in preparation for the Conversion.    DMSII to DPS reconciliation Reconciliation successfully completed between DMSII and DPS.    Data Conversion Complete FIRST 7 CAS data extracts, transform and load into START as well as the Data Reconciliation, with no unexplained discrepancies.    BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 16 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Deployment Activity Description Successfully Achieved Partially Achieved Not Achieved FIRST Application Data Batch Change jobs Complete FIRST Data changes to remove credit/debit balances and close periods/accounts for the migrated tax accounts.    FIRST Code deploy (part 2) Complete the FIRST Code Deploy (part 2).    START manual post conversion tasks and B- PIV prep Complete START post conversion tasks and BPIV prep stream in preparation for B-PIV.    Deploy Heritage Third Party Application changes Complete Code Deploy and System changes for Third Party Applications    Deploy Heritage Satellite changes Upgrade OFM to cater for the R4 interfaces.    Crown Reconciliation Crown Reconciliation completed approved, with no unexplained discrepancies.    START Go-Live stream Complete all activities to “ready” START for go-live.    FIRST Co-existence Complete FIRST co-existence jobs in preparation for B-PIV.    Business PIV Production verification tests must all PASS (no Sev 1 or 2 defects) to prove the solution works end-to- end and in scheduled sequence.    Checkpoint 4b approval Formal approval in place to “go” live.    Backlog processing All backlogged transactions processed into START and FIRST, ready for actions by the different IR business teams.    Start-up Successfully completed start-up activities to allow business operations to resume.    These criteria should be checked as part of a cutover close-out session where the Cutover Lessons Learned will be discussed in preparation for future cutovers. Consideration should be given to: • Were tasks well planned? • Were they completed in the correct time and was duration correctly estimated? • Were dependencies correctly identified? • Were any issues experienced with the group of tasks? • What could have been done better? BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 17 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 5 Cutover Control Centre (CC) During the cutover window, all cutover tasks will be under the control of a Cutover Control Centre Manager. As this cutover spans over several days, the Cutover team will be rostered to ensure the entire cutover period is covered and that there will always be someone present in the (virtual) Control Centre. Additional support people will be on call to attend if required (this includes the IR Major Incident team as well as technical support teams). A formal escalation process will be in place. All tasks that deviate from planned process or duration will be formally escalated so appropriate mitigation can be put in place. The CC Manager is responsible for ensuring the escalation process is activated. Typically, the Cutover Control Centre would be primarily based from meeting room 7.1.01 of IR Headquarters within the Asteron Centre. Given the New Zealand Government’s response to COVID- 19 and enforcing of level 4 lockdown rules during R4 cutover, the Cutover Control Centre will be primarily based online via Microsoft Teams. The CC will perform the following tasks: • Manage and co-ordinate all cutover activities; • Act as the first point of contact for any escalations; • Escalate issues to the BT Deployment Manager (as necessary); • Log any issues arising from the cutover in the Cutover Issues Register; • Assign a Control Centre Issue Owner, and manage the issue to resolution; • Advise the BT Release 4 Programme Manager of any technical issues arising from deployment; • Schedule and run-status update meetings during the cutover period; and • Distribute status/progress updates at key points during the cutover (see section 7.1.1 for schedule of key Progress Checkpoints) The following contact details have been set up for decision points and discussions required during the management of all technical and business-related issues or escalations during the deployment. Contact Name Contact details Teams Meeting As per invite Control Centre email address BTCutoverControlTeam@ird.govt.nz Cutover team email addresses BT R4.0 Deployment Lead BT R4.0 Cutover Manager Control Centre Responsibilities The BT R4 Deployment Lead is responsible for the Cutover Control centre. Key responsibilities include: • Executing the Cutover Plan task by task to completion. • Directing cutover task owners to initiate and execute tasks on the Cutover P lan. • Issuing regular cutover status updates to project stakeholders. • Managing a register of issues/defects encountered during cutover. • Escalating technical issues arising from cutover to the BT R4 Release Manager and others as required. • Escalating business issues arising from the cutover to the IR Lead Business Transformation Manager and the Business Deployment Lead. BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 18 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] • Revising the Cutover Plan as a result of adding new tasks, deleting obsolete tasks, or changes to the scheduling, duration or dependencies of tasks, and executing the updated plan. • Conducting a Lessons Learned sessions post cutover to capture any lessons learned for future cutovers. 5.1.1 Agreeing and Executing the Cutover Plan Prior to cutover commencing, a Cutover Plan must be agreed with both the Technical Cutover teams and Business stakeholders. During the cutover the CC will: • Execute the cutover according to the Cutover Plan. • Update the plan as tasks are initiated and completed. The BT R4 Cutover Manager is responsible for the Cutover Plan. 5.1.2 Cutover Task Initiation Cutover task initiation will be managed by the Cutover Control Centre, this involves: • Sending a task initiation email to advise when the task owner needs to start their task (or a series of consecutive tasks performed by the same task owner). • Follow up with a phone call to the task owner to start a task, if no response has been received within 5 minutes of sending the Task Initiation email. (as required). • Monitor tasks and follow up by phone if a task owner has not advised completion of a task by the scheduled time, to ensure subsequent or dependent tasks are not delayed and can be started expediently. 5.1.3 Responsibilities of Cutover Task Owner Each task (or activity) owner is responsible for completing their tasks during Cutover, as follows: • Do not start a task until they are requested to by the CC. • Advise the CC promptly by return email when they commence the task. • Advise the CC promptly by email when they complete a task (including the actual duration) so CC can kick off subsequent tasks. • Immediately log with the CC any issue that arises during their cutover task(s) that results in/or is very likely to result in a delay or deviation in the Cutover schedule by more than 30 minutes. • Manage to resolution, any issues arising from their cutover task(s), with the assistance of the Cutover Control team. • Execute the task to completion, even if errors, issues and problems cause the task initiator to have to work beyond normal working hours. • Make accurate records/notes of any unplanned or exception issues/events so that they are available should analysis in the context of a future event be required. 5.1.4 Cutover Status Updates The CC will provide regular cutover status updates – for more details on Cutover Communication, see Section 7 - Communications. 5.1.5 Report & Manage Deployment Issues During the cutover, every issue, problem, question or deviation from the Cutover Plan will be recorded in a Cutover Issues Register. Each task initiator will be responsible for reporting any actual or potential deviation (outside of the agreed tolerance/thresholds) from the Cutover Plan to the CC. BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 19 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] The CC will manage all issues/defects arising during cutover, escalate as required, and manage to resolution. The Cutover Issue Register will be reviewed as part of the “Lessons Learned” session, so that knowledge can be learnt prior to future cutovers. During BPIV, the volume of issues under management will rise significantly, so a more agile approach to issue resolution will be employed. This is demonstrated by the diagram below: Key Points to Note: - All issues will be added to the virtual BPIV Issue whiteboard. This will be the source of truth for anyone to monitor where all BPIV issues are at. - BPIV Control Room will remain logged into the BPIV Control Room meeting for the duration of BPIV. - Cutover Control will monitor BPIV Issue whiteboard and add Cutover Issue number as required. - BTM to advise BPIV Control Room once all of their scenarios have been successfully tested. - Issues found during BPIV will be logged directly into FCR as a Production SQR. Any outstanding SQRs at the completion of BPIV will be loaded into SNOW retrospectively to ensure a Production Support SQR is created for resolution post R4. Cutover Issue Resolution Process During the cutover, any task that deviates, or may cause a deviation from the Master Cutover Plan, to the extent that it may put Go-Live (or the Go-Live time) at risk must be escalated to the Cutover Control Centre. The CC will follow the issue resolution framework below to facilitate resolution of cutover issues: Cu tover Co ntr ol Team BPIV Team SME finds is sue w it h sc ne ari o SME, Dev l ead and BTM initial t ri age of iss ue in J el lybe an t eams meet ing Raise PROD SQR, li nk fai led scenarios and assi gn to DEV Le ad DEV t o Invest iga te / Resolve PROD SQR an d adv i se FA ST B PI V Le ad o nc e r ea dy f or m igr ati on Dev action Quick Fix and advise SME & BTM via JB tea ms on ce c om pl et e Qu ic k fi x? N Y Al aena t o sent email t emp la te to C ut ov e r C on tr o l wi th SQR d eta ils : BTCutoverControlTeam @ird.govt.nz SME to Ret est Sce nar i o Passed? N Close C ut ov e r is sue BTM to ad vise B PI V C o nt r ol R oo m sc en ari o has pas sed Y BTM & SME Log into B PI V C o nt r ol R oo m an d adv i se P ROD SQR d eta ils Fix revi ewed/ ap pr o ve d fo r m igr ati on START only is sue ? N Any known Cutover issues that may im p act BPI V wi ll b e c om m un ic ate d to B PI V C o nt r ol t eam b y C ut ov e r Co n tr ol p ri or to BPI V co mm en ci ng Log Cutover i ssue and email int erest ed part ie s C on ti n ue to m on it or /t r ack is sue t o re so lu ti on Y 12 .30pm: BPI V Progress C he ck p oi nt meet ing Ap pr o v ed fi xes m igr ate d to P ro du c ti on BPIV Issue Whiteboard u pd ate d to refl ec t Iss ue h as n o w bee n c losed . Mo ni to r B PI V Iss ue Whiteboard and update Cutover Issue Regi st er wit h o ut co me s Fail ed sc en ari o? Y Rais e P ROD SQR, assi gn to DEV Le ad, c ompl et e testing BPIV sc en ari o N Ol ive a ssigns Te st sce nar i o for Ret est BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 20 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] IR BT Deployment Central Cutover Issue Management Process Cutover Control Issue Identifier Workstream Owner Major Incidents V ers i on 2 – 9 Feb 2018 Issue identified that will result in deviating from plan Raise with Cutover Control 1. Determine and Log Information 2. Send “Tracking Email” to Af fected Workstreams Log Incident in SNOW and Follow Standard BAU Process to Resolve Investigate Issue Major Incidents Resolution Found? BT W orks tr ea m Majo r Incidents/ BT Workstream 4. Work with WS Owner to Fix Determine Resolution Update CC of Pr ogre ss 5. Determine Completion of Resolution Activities No Resolve issue and Update CC 3. Send “Issue Notification”email to relev ant groups ST AR T E ND P1/P2? Yes No Yes After Agreed Ti me Int er val Escalate? Yes 5b. Initiate Handover to ELS No Change Approval Req? Yes Approve Change Request No Implement Resolution Raise Emergency Change A A N ew BT WS Owner/E LS New BT WS Owner E LS 6. Update Issue Register with Closure Information 7. Send “Issue Closure”email to relevant groups P1/P2? Yes No 8. Notify Comms Group Com ms Re q? Yes E ND No This process can be described as follows: Person Activity Deployment lead Identify issue that will result in a deviation from the Master Cutover Plan (can also be as a result of being informed by one of the technical resources performing the task). Notify Cutover Control of the issue. This can be telephonically or via teams, so long as the conversation is followed up with an email confirming: • Task number and name • Details of the issue • Impact or potential impact • Proposed resolution (if one is known) • Recommended next steps Where the issue relates to a BPIV scenario, the following additional information should be supplied: • Number and name of failed B-PIV scenario • The IRD number that is being used to test this scenario • Confirmation the scenario been repeated / re-tested to eliminate user error as a possible cause • Whether or not the scenario has been re-tested with a different IRD number • Any technical requirements for the scenario to complete (e.g. a FAST batch process) Cutover Control Validate issue and log information in the Cutover Issue Register Tracking email is sent to the affected Deployment lead(s) containing • BT R4.0 | ISSUE NOTIFICATION | Issue #<ID>, <ISSUE TITLE> • Severity and details of the issue • Next steps Determine if issue should be managed by the Major Incident team, IT service des, or within the Programme by the Deployment Workstream. Major Incidents will support the Cutover by resolving network and environment issues, as well as facilitating approvals for any emergency change that R4 cutover is dependent on. The IT Service Desk will resolve any desktop related issues. BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 21 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Person Activity Major Incident team When notified of a major incident, the Major Incident team will record the incident in Service Now (SNOW) and follow the standard BAU processes to resolve the incident. During the resolution process, Cutover Control will be updated with the progress towards resolution (these updates in turn will be shared by the Control Centre with the Major Issue Updates comms group) Once Issue has been resolved, Cutover Control will be notified, and the incident will be closed in SNOW. Cutover Control Where issue relates to a programme/cutover issue, Cutover Control will work with the Workstream lead to resolve Workstream Lead Work with direct technical and/or business team to identify root cause. Determine solution, or potential solution options. If more than one option, will work closely with Cutover Control (who in turn will work with business representatives) to determine the impact of the different options and select the most appropriate course of action. Cutover Control will receive regular updates on the progress, (these updates will be shared with the Major Issue Updates comms group). Once the solution has been agreed, the fix (or work-around) will be implemented. Cutover Control Where a fix cannot be implemented (not enough time, or too complex), and a work-around is introduced, the issue will be handed over to the ELS team on conclusion of the Cutover. The Cutover Issue Register will be updated with any progress updates as well as the resolution. All impacted parties, as well as the Major Issue Updates Comms group will be updated with the resolution. Once the issue is closed, a final email will be sent to the Deployment lead(s) that worked on this issue to notify them that the issue should be considered as closed. The same Tracking email will be used throughout to ensure the email trail is clear to all. 5.2.1 Cutover Issue Severity & Escalations The Cutover Control Centre will be responsible to triage the issue with the required programme and/or business resources to determine the severity and impact. The Cutover Control team will make an informed decision on the severity, and therefore escalation, based on the type of issue and potential or actual impact, as per the tabled definitions below: Severity Issue Impact & Control Centre Action Escalation Point (1) Critical Impact: • Cutover is at risk and urgent action required to ensure overall success of the cutover; • Unable to fix within contingency window, will impact timing of official go live; • Rollback might be required. Control Centre Action: • Complex Issue Team engaged to support issue triage and next steps • Cross-workstream issue team organised to work on developing and testing potential fixes Hourly reporting on progress, or earlier if updates are available Deputy Commissioner Transformation OR BT R4 Go-live Committee BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 22 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Severity Issue Impact & Control Centre Action Escalation Point (2) High Impact: • Critical cutover task at risk. Scheduled run-time likely exceeded but fix forecasted to be implemented within allowable contingency window. • Critical path not yet impacted, but will be if fix not identified and implemented within contingency window; • Issue needs to be resolved before we go live; • Workaround may be available. Control Centre Action: • Complex Issue Team engaged to support issue triage and next steps • Cutover Issue Manager assigned • Two hourly reporting, or as updates become available. BT R4 Programme Manager (3) Medium Impact: • Cutover task at risk, but fix expected within the scheduled run-time of that task; • Issue confined to a single workstream and can be managed by that team; • Acceptable workaround available. Control Centre Action: • Cutover Issue Manager assigned to engage with workstream and facilitate resolution. BT R4 Deployment Lead (4) Low Impact: • Negligible impact to cutover task, reported primarily for visibility • No impact to cutover schedule, possibility a post go-live lesson learned to factor into future releases. Control Centre Action: • Issue logged and resolution tracked as a background task (noting that post go-live resolution may be an acceptable approach) • Issue reviewed post go-live for any potential lessons learned. Cutover Control Centre Manager 5.2.2 Escalation Groups Group Role Named Resource Escalation Responsibility Deployment BT R4.0 Deployment Lead • Overall responsible for the deployment of the BT project. • Support Cutover Manager. Cutover BT R4.0 Cutover Manager • Overall responsible for BT R4 cutover. • Escalation and triage for any issues found during deployment. • Communication to internal project stakeholders. Rollback BT R4.0 Deployment • Overall responsible for BT R4 rollback. • Manage rollback plan and activity (if required). BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 23 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Group Role Named Resource Escalation Responsibility Cutover Control Centre Cutover Control Centre Manager(s) • First escalation point for issues during deployment. • Triage and assigning priorities. • Coordinator for escalations. Deployment Leads / Advisors BT Deployment lead(s) • Responsible for specific components of the cutover. • Manage technical (or business) resources required for issue resolution. Project Management Group BT Release 4 Release Manager BT R4 Deployment Lead • Guidance and direction during problem resolution. • Communication to Project Executives. • Final decision on progressing with cutover for severe issues and escalation to Go Live Committee. Complex Issue Team • Assigned issues fro m Deployment Central that are complex, long running or required in-depth analysis. Technical Resolver Group Cutover Control Centre Manager Technical resources Major Incidents TS&O / NSP As required • Trouble shoot / propose solutions to issues. • Assist with resolving complex issues. BT INTERNAL Communications Internal Communications • Responsible for INTERNAL communications. BT EXTERNAL Communications External Communications • Responsible for EXTERNAL communications and marketing. BT Programme Executive Programme Director • Communications to key programme stakeholders and IR Executives. • Escalate to Programme SRO. • Responsible for recommending Rollback decision. Senior Responsible Officer (SRO) Commissioner Inland Revenue • Communications to key external stakeholders (e.g. Minister). Go Live Committee • Final decision on Go/No Go. • Responsible for endorsing a rollback decision. Business Severity of open issues In the event where issues are identified that cannot be resolved during the cutover, the issues will be carried into go live and a Production Support issue will be logged. The following severity definitions will be used: BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 24 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Severity Cutover Control Centre Action (1) High Major business impact, no work-around in place. (2) Medium Large business impact, work-around in place however not sustainable. (3) Low Minor business impact, sustainable work-around in place. (4) Insignificant No Business Impact, or negligible. BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 25 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 6 Rollback Overview Rollback is the process of reverting R4 changes that have been applied to system code, system configuration, and or/or master data. These changes would be reverted to a stable R3 recovery point that was either just prior to the R4 cutover window commencing, or early within the R4 cutover window but prior to any material changes being implemented. Rollback would be invoked as a worst-case scenario during the BT cutover window if one or more business critical issues are identified and cannot be resolved or quarantined within the defined R4 cutover window. In this situation, there is a fundamental flaw(s) with the R4 solution build or data migration process that will compromise IR’s ability to deliver business/mission critical operations or meet legislative requirements – in this situation rollback to a stable, pre-cutover state of both system code/config and data is required before IR re-opens to both internal staff and external customers. The end-to-end BT R4 rollback sequence will require 30 hours to implement. Rollback Triggers Given the legislative and programme pressures to deploy the R4 solution in mid-April, most cutover issues will rely on a fix and roll-forward approach – this includes fixes that need to be applied following go-live and result in the business needing to endure some short-term pain. However, there are a few ‘show-stopping’ cutover issues that could trigger a rollback scenario. In order of their likeliness to trigger rollback, these are: • Converted Data Verification fails: there are multiple P1/P2 data issues that cannot be resolved prior to system and channel start-up. • Crown Reconciliation fails: In previous BT Release the key crown criteria for rollback was that there is no unexplained variance. Most R4 migrated products will be held to this standard, however it is expected that some level of variance is accepted for migrated KiwiSaver products as a result of historical data issues. A failure for KiwiSaver crown reconciliation is that this variance is not accepted for sign-off. • Business/mission critical BPIV scenarios fail: Noting that this would only trigger rollback under exceptional circumstances. Given BPIV runs past the rollback checkpoint; if a fix can’t be implemented within the remainder of the cutover window then it’s more likely that an interim work-around will be implemented, the relevant business units will be advised, and a fix and roll-forward approach be taken. 6.2.1 Rollback Checkpoints In line with the rollback triggers above, progress checkpoints have been built into the cutover schedule. These will be used to assess: • How we are tracking (both from a timing and quality perspective) to key R4 cutover tasks/events within the schedule, and depending on the outcome of this assessment; • Is there a need to invoke the rollback plan? While rollback can be invoked at any time, these checkpoints represent the most likely points in the R4 cutover schedule where are a decision to invoke rollback may be required. Rollback Checkpoint Description of Checkpoint Timing of Checkpoint 1 After completion of the FIRST / START data conversion and reconciliation Monday 13 th April at 4:00pm BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 26 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Rollback Checkpoint Description of Checkpoint Timing of Checkpoint 2 After completion of the Crown Reconciliation Tuesday 14 th April at 4:00pm 3 At successful conclusion of BPIV, just before the Checkpoint 4b go live approval meeting Wednesday 15 th April 4.30pm Rollback Scope, Sequence, and Timings The end-to-end BT R4 rollback sequence takes 30 hours. To meet the start-up requirement of having core systems (i.e. FIRST, START, CAS) online and available from 8am Thursday April 16 th , the drop- dead time to invoke rollback is 2am Wednesday April 15 th . The end-to-end rollback plan comprises the following high-level sequence and run times: • Rollback decision point (1 hour) • Technical rollback (15 hours): Technical rollback includes rollback of system code/config as well as data to an R3 state. Rollback of the DPS/CDC middleware component between FIRST and START is the longest running element of the technical rollback window. Rollback of START is expected to take 7 hours, after which co-ex and catch-up processing within START will kick- off – the start of this process this is not dependent on technical rollback of other systems. The system scope of R4 rollback, including the requirement for code rollback vs data rollback, is as follows: System Code/Config Rollback Data Rollback Comment ✓ ✓ Data recovery: restore from 8am April 10 th Code recovery: restore from 9pm April 9 th ✓ ✓ Data recovery: restore from 8am, April 10 th Code recovery: restore from 12pm April 6 th ✓ Retain latent R4 datasets (with change disabled for R4 datasets) ✓ Manual reversal of FMIS journal file ✓ Re-enable business user access and batch processing ✓ Re-deploy ‘n-1’ version ✓ Re-deploy ‘n-1’ version, retain latent R4 pipes ✓ Re-deploy ‘n-1’ version, includes heritage XIAMS changes ✓ Re-deploy ‘n-1’ version ✓ Re-deploy ‘n-1’ version ✓ Re-deploy ‘n-1’ version ✓ Re-deploy ‘n-1’ version • Co-existence processing (12 hours): Co-ex processing within START is the critical path during this portion of the rollback schedule. A 12hr full nightly job stream will be run, during this all co-ex files for FIRST will be generated and sent to the FIRST pick-up directory. • Rollback verification checks (5 hours): This includes 1hr to bring relevant systems and channels online, followed by 4 hours to test key rollback scenarios across the eServices, BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 27 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] contact centre, returns and forms, payments, and financials jellybeans. If scenarios are completed prior to 4hrs then the next tasks of the rollback schedule will be progressed. • System & Channel start-up (2 hrs): This includes the key technical start-up activities to enable core system access to IR business users, and B2B / Gateway Services accessible to external customers. • Catch-up processing: This runs beyond the R4 rollback window and includes the following events and cross-system exchanges: o processing of consolidated EI file from START (backlog from April 3 rd onwards) o E- File backlog (held since April 7) o misdirected payments o IIT (Individual INC Returns) o Tax Agent EOT, ARP Payments) During the following week, the FIRST contingency solution will be deployed in order to allow for key Legislative changes for R4 products to be support by FIRST. It should be noted that the deployment approach will always be to resolve any technical problem and roll forward. Rollback is the final option if the BT R4.0 solution is not stable, or crown/data reconciliation failed and sign- off is not obtained. The high-level sequence diagram below illustrates the sequencing of the rollback process: BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 28 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 7 Communications Cutover Communications Plan 7.1.1 Cutover Stand-up meetings During the cutover period, there will be two daily stand-up meetings. The purpose of these meetings is to ensure a shared and consistent understanding of current progress, issues under management, and key next steps. The stand-up meetings will be run via the Microsoft Teams App (details will be included in the email invitation). The Cutover team stand-ups will be run daily at 8am and 6:30pm (with the first session planned for Thursday 9 th April at 8am). Duration 15 minutes Purpose Confirm Task Status (started, in-progress, complete) and update on any open issues. Issue management occurs outside of this meeting. Attendance: Cutover Control, Workstream Leads, Programme Manager. Stand-up meetings will also be done for key Progress Checkpoints. The following checkpoints have been scheduled: ID Checkpoint Scheduled time CCP0 PROGRESS CHECKPOINT #0 | Checkpoint 4a 14:00 Fri 3 /04/20 CCP1 PROGRESS CHECKPOINT #1 | Business and Systems Shutdown 08:00 Thu 9/04/20 CCP2 PROGRESS CHECKPOINT #2 | START Upgraded, Data load commences 02:00 Sat 11/04/20 CCP3 PROGRESS CHECKPOINT #3 | Data Migration Complete 09:00 Mon 13/04/20 CCP4 PROGRESS CHECKPOINT #4 | Ready to commence with BPIV 07:00 Wed 15/04/20 CCP5 PROGRESS CHECKPOINT #5 | BPIV debrief 15:00 Wed 15/04/20 CCP6 PROGRESS CHECKPOINT #6 | Checkpoint 4b - Go / No-Go Decision 17:00 Wed 15/04/20 CCP7 PROGRESS CHECKPOINT #8 | Handover to ELS 12:00 Thu 16/04/20 7.1.2 Cutover Progress Update Communications During the cutover period, there will be three types of regular progress updates. Start and End of Day Updates will be an email giving an overall summary of progress. In between these two main updates, interested groups will be able to subscribe to regular WhatsApp Progress Highlight Updates that provide a brief summary of progress made and any issues encountered on a two-hourly basis. 7.1.2.1 Daily email updates (Start/End of day) The BT Cutover Team will issue twice daily email updates at 9am and 8pm (after the morning/evening stand-ups) to selected project and business stakeholders. The email will contain the progress of activities against the plan, issues encountered and next steps. The first email update is scheduled for Thursday 9 th April at 8pm . Format Email from ‘BT Cutover Control Team’ Purpose Update all stakeholders on progress against the plan and any issues that are under management. Content • Progress against the plan (completed, in-flight and next steps). • Any issues that are under management. Recipients: Cutover Control team, Deployment Leads and selected business stakeholders BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 29 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 7.1.2.2 Two-hourly WhatsApp updates The BT Cutover Team will issue WhatsApp updates to subscribed stakeholders every two hours from Thursday 9 th April. Format WhatsApp update from Cutover Control Centre to R4.0 Cutover – updates group Purpose Two-hourly progress update, running 7am – 11pm daily. Content • On Track/Ahead/Behind schedule • Cutover tasks inflight • Any new issues encountered, as well as updates on earlier issues that are still open and being worked through • Next update time Recipients: Cutover Control team, Deployment Leads and selected stakeholders that subscribe to the updates 7.1.2.3 Progress Highlight updates The BT Cutover Team will issue a WhatsApp update to selected project and business stakeholders as key milestones are achieved. Format WhatsApp update from Cutover Control Centre to R4.0 Cutover – updates group Purpose Update on reaching a critical milestone Content Brief message stating that specific key milestone has been reached Recipients: Cutover Control team, Deployment Leads and selected stakeholders that subscribed to the updates Updates will be sent at each of the checkpoints mentioned in section 7.1.1 Scheduled Cutover updates The Scheduled communications are planned updates, outside of the project stakeholder’s updates, and include internal business and external stakeholders. The BT Communications team are responsible for these messages. The following scheduled communication updates are planned around the Production cutover: Date Time Action Audience Thu 2 April 2020 5:00pm Inform Minister of outcome of the CP4a decision External Fri 3 April 2020 9:00am Inform workstream leads and PLT of outcome of the CP4a decision Internal 10:00am Programme update through the Huddle Internal 10:45am Comms to BT Programme about outcome of the CP4a decision Internal 11:00am Comms to key leaders about outcome of the CP4a decision Internal 11:15am People Leader’s brief about outcome of the CP4a decision Internal 11:15am FAQs for conversations with customers re outage Internal 11:45am Email to Unions External 12:00pm Featured news about outcome of the CP4a decision Internal 1:00pm Update to Transformation Reference Group about outcome of the CP4a decision Internal 1:30pm Email to Govt Agencies about outcome of the CP4a decision External BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 30 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Date Time Action Audience 2:00pm Email to Corporate Centre email about outcome of the CP4a decision External Mon 6 April 2020 11:00am Briefing notes for phone calls to Banks, large enterprises, professional associations, payroll intermediaries, software providers, government agencies about outcome of the CP4a decision External Wed 8 April 2020 9:00am Snapshot (system shutdown – 1 day out) Internal Thu 9 April 2020 10:00am Distribute Day 1 information email Internal 12:00m Customer Comms (myIR login page, Phone message, Poster in door of customer drop in centre, Closedown landing page, Homepage carousel, Banner on landing page, Social Media and Call flow Messaging) Internal 2:00pm START Broadcast message Internal Wed 15 April 2020 6:30pm Briefing with the Minister on the outcome of the CP4b decision External 6:30pm Email to the BT Programme on the outcome of the CP4b decision Internal 6:45pm Email to the Senior Leaders on the outcome of the CP4b decision Internal 7:00pm Publish Featured News (operational messages) Internal Thu 16 April 2020 8:00am Publish Snapshot (existing workarounds) Internal 8:00am Publish FAQs regarding post go-live conversations with customers Internal 9:00am Email outcome of Cutover to Transformation Reference Group Internal 9:00am Publish Day 1 key instructions Internal 9:30am Email outcome of Cutover to Government Agencies CE’s External 10:00am Email outcome of Cutover to Corporate Centre External Fri 17 April 2020 9:00am Publish Featured News (results from Cutover) Internal 9:00am Briefing notes for phone calls to Banks, large enterprises, professional associations, payroll intermediaries, software providers, government agencies about outcome of the cutover External Issue notifications In the event that any serious issues are experienced during the cutover, the planned escalation procedures will be followed (See the Section 5.6 - Escalation Process for details). Issue notifications will be sent through email to the stakeholders identified as required for the regular communications and will continue on a regular basis until the issue has been resolved. The content of the email will be: • Unique Issue Tracking number • Deployment Central Issue owner • Severity • Issue description (what went wrong and the impact) • Next Steps: Investigation / Resolution (progress towards the resolution) BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 31 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 8 Post Cutover activities Following go-live of the BT R4 solution and exit of the R4 cutover window, two key streams of BT R4 work kick-off: • Early Life Support: a period of heightened production support to ensure stability of the R4 solution over the months immediately following R4 cutover. • BT R4 Deployment close-out: a retrospective on BT R4 deployment planning and execution to identify opportunities and areas for improvement that can be applied to BT R5 deployment. Early Life Support – Pou Whirinaki At the successful completion of the cutover, there will be a period of Early Life Support (ELS) that will run until the 30 th of September 2020. Included in this is a period of Hypercare, where BT staff will be onsite to support IR staff with the new solution. ELS will be managed by \[Information redacted\] for the agreed period and will provide the processes and support to ensure a smooth resolution of post- implementation incidents, problems, and information requirements by: • Managing and co-ordinating all technical queries and issues while working closely with the programme, vendors’ and Information Technology & Change (IT&C) teams. • Managing and co-ordinating all business process queries and issues while working closely with the SMEs and the business support teams. The ELS Team will also work closely with IT&C over this period to make sure that all the handover collateral is available and understood, and that IT&C are ready to support both the technology solution and the associated business processes as required. Details of the Early Life Support process and procedures can be found in the Early Life Support Strategy document. Deployment Close-out & Lessons Learned At the end of the BT R4.0 Cutover, Lessons Learned sessions will be held by the BT Cutover team with each of the key cutover stakeholders. The purpose of these sessions is to review the success of the cutover process, identify any lessons learned (good or bad), and to come up with remedies to address flaws in the process for future BT cutovers. BT Release 3.0 – Deployment Cutover Plan Page 32 of 41 9 Cutover Risks & Issues Cutover Risks The following open risks might have an impact on the Cutover: \[Information redacted\] Cutover Issues The following open issues might have an impact on the Cutover: \[Information redacted\] BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 33 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 10 Appendix A: BT Release 4.0 – High Level Cutover diagram . R4.0 - Cutover Sequence - MASTER BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 34 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 11 Appendix B: BT Release 4.0 Cutover – Contact List . For details see BT R4.0 - PROD Cutover – People Roster BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 35 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 12 Appendix C: BT Release 4.0 BPIV Remote Working Approach For details see BT R4 Cutover - Remote BPIV Approach BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 36 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 13 Appendix D: BT Release 4.0 – High level rollback diagram For the full working version, refer to BT R4.0 – Rollback Sequence - MASTER BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 37 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 14 Appendix E: Product Specific Deployment Approaches KiwiSaver Deployment Approach. Full version accessible here. \[Information redacted\] BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 38 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Student Loans Deployment Approach. Full version accessible here. \[Information redacted\] BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 39 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Child Support and Working for Families Deployment Approach. \[Information redacted\] EMP Deployment Approach. Full version accessible here . Go/No Go Decision Point 14 April Tues BT R4 – EI Deployment Approach v1.0 FINAL Wed Sat/Sun WedThu rFri Mo nTuesWedThu rFri Mo nThu rFri Sat/SunSat/SunMo nTues 4/5 April 1 Ap ril2 Ap ril3 Ap ril 6 Ap ril7 Ap ril8 Ap ril 9 Ap ril 10 April 13 April 15 April 16 April17 April 11/12 Ap ril 18/19 Ap ril 20 Ap ril 21 Ap ril Last updated: Friday 3 rd Ap ri l 20 20 C S P aym en t R un To be paid 8/04 C S P aym en t R un To be paid 6/04 C S P aym en t R un To be paid 14/04 C S P aym en t R un To be paid 20/04 C S Ear ly Paym en t Ru n To be paid 22/04 Business DayBusiness DayBusiness Day WeekendWeekend Business Day E ast er La st du e dat e for el ec troni c Mar ch E I’s CS Actu als School Holidays (10-27 th April) La st du e dat e fo r p ape r Mar ch E I’s EI P ay me nt D ue Da te EI Payment D ue Da te START F IRS T EI Consolidation Mon th ly p ayers ( IR348) 6pm: Cease sending EI R et ur n s & Li ne Adjustments to FIRST (I R34 4 & I R348 ) WedThu rFri 18 Mar ch 19 Mar ch 20 Mar ch Business Day EI Consolidation Mon th ly p ayers ( IR348) Annual Student Loan C om po u nd I n ter es t Ba tc h Jobs P er io di c P aym en t P ol ic in g run (PAYE & SLS) Rest ar t I nc om e Rep li cat ion & R un E I Con soli dat ion Twice m onthly payers (I R348) Proposed R4 cutover P os t G o D ec isi o n : Proce ss consolidated EI s s en t fr om START 12 pm: Rec omme nc e sending Line Adjustme nts to FIRST (I R34 4 & IR348) Ex tr ac t all remain in g I R3 48 & IR3 45 in error (RPC & CA A) Load FIRST ex tr ac t in to START and reproce ss r et ur n s/li ne adjustments 4p m: Ceas e I nc om e Rep li cat ion 6pm: Cease sending Deduction d eta ils t o FI RST (I R345 ) Errors generat e w or k i te ms. Bus iness to w or k t hr o ugh p ost R 4 NB: Co-Ex will run 12pm and 6pm daily p os t R4 BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 40 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] BT Release 4 – Deployment Approach & Plan Page 41 of 41 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Payment Processing Deployment Approach. \[Information redacted\] Income Tax Deployment Approach. Full version accessible here . INC Return Channels BT R4 Deployment Approach | INC Returns Processing V1.0 FINAL K ey Events Paper eFile eSe rvic es (Authenticated) Returns Generati on 9/ 3: IR526 , 16-18/3: Non Individuals, 23-30/3:Individuals eFile FORM DEFINITION TEMPLATES: • Ac cep t an d Ho l d RE B and I NC2 020 f orms AUT HE NTICA TED: Publish eDocs to myIR, noting: • I NC2 020 Ret u rn s wi ll be avai lab le t o submit from the day they are generat ed La st up d ate d Fr i day 3 rd Ap il 20 20 Decision Point 4a | R ea d y t o commence sh utdo wn and cu tover 4 a Ex ig e n R4 c od e/c on fi g deploy R4 CUT OVER Shutd ownTec hnic al depl oyment / B-PI VStart-up Al l C ha nn e ls available to file & process returns Sat/Sun 14/15 Mar Mo nTue 16 Mar 17 Mar Sat/Sun We 28/29 Mar 18 Mar WedThu rFri 4 Mar 5 Mar 6 Mar Mo nThu r 30 Mar 2 Ap ril Sat/Sun Fri Mo nTuesWedThu rFri Mo nTuesWedThu r Fri Sat/Sun Sat/SunMo n 4/5 Ap ril 3 Ap ril 6 Ap ril 7 Ap ril 8 Ap ril 9 Ap ril 10 Ap ril 13 Ap ril 14 Ap ril 15 Ap ril 16 Ap ril 17 Ap ril 11/12 Ap ril 7/8 Mar 9 Mar TuesWed 31 Mar 1 Ap ril Fri 27 Mar Tue 10 Mar Thu We 12 Mar 11 Mar Fri 13 Mar AR changes deployed (SQR25304) FRC R4 c od e/c on fi g deploy (Re fer BTPCR-94 3) IR52 6 ( Donation T ax Credit): • Electronic IR526 submitted t hr o ugh ou t t he y ear w il l be processed and paid out to C ust o mer s Generate backlog file an d sen d to START for BPIV proce ssi ng Turn on Production d el ive r y sc r ip t • Accept and P roce ss a ll ret urns rec eive d Turn off Production d el ive r y sc r ip t • Ac cep t an d Ho l d all returns rec eived MA INFRAME CERTIFICATION ON: • P ro ce ss I NC20 20 fo rm s rec eived t o START Gateway Servi ce s G AT EWA Y: • INC2020 Returns can be submitted from the day t hey are generate d (16/3 Non Individuals, 23/3 Indiv iduals) Web (Unauthenticated) UNAUT HE NTICA TED: Publish Returns to web, noting: • I NC2 020 Ret u rn s wi ll be ab le t o be su bm it te d fr om t h e d ay t he y ar e generat ed PUBLISH: • I NC2 020 P ap er Form s St agger e d d el ive ry o f m ai l: • P ri nt /ma il sc he du le cr ea ted and owned by Events Team (Refer stagger schedule below) Sat/Sun 11/12 Ap ril Landing page links updated for I NC2 020 ret u rn s. NB: I R3 l in k wil l b e re moved Bus iness c ease scanning p ape r returns