ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. Business Ngā Ūmanga myIR has client subscription services you can use to help manage your clients. Once you’ve set up subscriptions for up to 1,250 client accounts, you can see: • alerts telling you about important tasks to do • email notifications when clients have new letters from us. This guide shows you what subscription services there are and how to use them. Managing client mail subscriptions and alerts – Bookkeepers and other representatives IR1136 | July 2022 Subscriptions To start getting alerts and email notifications for letters we’ve sent to clients you’ll need to subscribe to them. There are 2 areas of myIR that let you manage client subscriptions. The difference is one is for you to manage your own subscriptions, and the other is for managing employees’ subscriptions. Managing your own subscriptions Your own subscriptions are managed here: Intermediary centre > Manage subscriptions Managing employees’ subscriptions Your myIR role needs to be either ‘owner’, ‘administrator’ or 'restricted administrator' to manage subscriptions for employee web logons: Manage agency > By logons tab > \[select logon ‘Staff access’\] > Client mail subscriptions ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. How to unsubscribe and subscribe To subscribe or unsubscribe to a linked client: 1. Search or filter on the client subscriptions screen and use ‘Subscribed’ or ‘Unsubscribed’. 2. Select ‘Unsubscribed’ to subscribe or ‘Subscribed’ to unsubscribe to the customer’s account. For example, using either of the above client subscription screen shots, you would subscribe to all clients with GST accounts using these steps: 1. Filter by key word ‘GST’. 2. You’ll return a list of all the GST accounts linked to the client list you have access to. 3. From the list select ‘Unsubscribed’ next to the GST accounts you want to subscribe to. Alerts After you’ve set up client subscriptions, you’ll get to see the alerts for them. You’ll then know which clients have: • unread letters and messages • payments due or overdue • upcoming and outstanding returns to file. How to view alerts When you’ve set up client subscriptions, their alerts are available in the Intermediary centre: Each alert has a title, short description, and a link to what needs doing. How to dismiss alerts You can dismiss alerts from your alert list by clicking the ‘x’. You may want to do this if you’ve: • already set up reminders for tasks in your own system • completed an alert’s action and you’re waiting before submitting it to us. You can see alerts you’ve dismissed by restoring them. Once a task is completed for an alert it’s deleted. Filtering to find alerts Filtering lists all of your clients’ alerts either by account type or what needs doing (All actions). This can be helpful if you’re working on one account type, such as GST. You can also use the free text filter to search for a client’s name or key word on the screen: Note: You can view alerts for non-subscribed clients from within the client’s account. All client mail service The All client mail service is another way of managing mail instead of using subscriptions. To access the service, go to: Intermediary centre > My clients > All client mail ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. With this service you can create a report that: • includes all your clients, not only those you’re subscribed to, so you never miss mail • shows extra information, such as mail direction to the agent or sent to the client. • lets you export letter PDFs in bulk, saving you time Exporting letters using the All client mail service You’ll need to have a myIR role of at least ‘restricted administrator’ to use all of the All client mail service export options. Exporting letters to your desktop can help with record keeping. It’s also useful if you need to see which letters are ‘read’ or ‘unread’: 1. Enter the date range into the ‘sent from’ and ‘sent to’ fields in the All client mail screen: 2. Export the letters as PDFs to an ‘unread mail’ folder on your desktop. 3. Open your unread mail folder then review, delete, or save the letter to your client management system: We’ve added extra information into the PDF file name. Your PDF file name now includes: • Account ID • Letter type code • Unique letter ID • Period (if it exists) • Client name. You may have to update your client management system so it can handle the extra information. This is usually the case if your agency uses automated processes to file client letters. Note: To assist with identifying what each letter is about go to: https://www.ird.govt.nz/topics/intermediaries/ getting-authority-to-act/managing-client-mail/mail-type-code-reference-list ird.govt.nz The information in this document was current at the time of publication. Refer to our website for the most up-to-date information. ird.govt.nz Go to our website for information and to use our services and tools. • Log in or register for myIR - manage your tax and entitlements online. • Calculators and tools - use our calculators, worksheets and tools, for example, to check your tax code, find filing and payment dates, calculate your student loan repayment. • Forms and guides - download our forms and guides. 'User' access to All client mail service There is a version of the All client mail service you can use if your myIR role is ‘user’. With this version your report: • can be run for any client list you have access to • has a default date range using the date you run the report and the last day a letter was sent (in most cases this will be the previous day) • does not give you the option to open the letters or export them. Using this service only for managing client mail If you choose to only use the All client mail service to manage client mail. You can: • unsubscribe to all client mail subscriptions to stop getting notification emails • leave ‘Mail subscriptions’ unchecked when running the Agency activity report. This stops you getting what can be a large amount of client account data you do not need.