1 Māori Economy Landscape – Interim Report Defining Inland Revenue’s Māori customer base “They’re about growing whānau...growing hapū...growing iwi” July 2019 | Customer Insight & Evaluation IN CONFIDENCE 1 IN CONFIDENCE2 Contents What is the business problem? How can we solve the business problem? What did we learn?What will we do next? Tu a t a h iTuaruaTuatoruTu a w h ā IN CONFIDENCE3 What is the business problem? Tu a t a h i IN CONFIDENCE 3 IN CONFIDENCE4 Inland Revenue wants to better understand Māori customers and their needs Inland Revenue has a constitutional responsibility to the Treaty of Waitangi to work in partnership with Māori, encourage participation of Māori in our work, and protect Māori knowledge, practices and language. However, currently, Inland Revenue does not have a good understanding of how it currently influences outcomes for Māori. This is partly because we don’t have monitoring and evaluation in place for our Māori customers, and it’s also difficult to identify Māori customers in our data. This means that we don’t know who our Māori customers are or what is needed to help meet their tax obligations and access our services. 4 “The first thing to understand for all government agencies is that the demographic makeup of Māori is diverse. You do not have a homogenous Māori population, and you do not have a homogenous Māori economy. So the types of services will actually be variable.” IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE5 How can we solve the business problem? Tuarua IN CONFIDENCE 5 IN CONFIDENCE6 We will produce a customer landscape document to help Inland Revenue make strategic choices about outcomes for Māori, and improving those outcomes Inland Revenue is developing two initiatives focused on Māori: •The Māori Customer Strategy •Māhutonga (Inland Revenue’s strategic approach to working with Māori) These two initiatives will help Inland Revenue: •Meet its constitutional responsibility to the Treaty of Waitangi •Drive activities that support achievement of Māori customer outcomes that are aligned to the Government’s wellbeing outcomes. The Māori Economy landscape will feed into these two initiatives. It will help us to show: •who our Māori customers are, •what their journey and experience is with us, •future changes that may influence Māori customers, and •the direction for improving outcomes for Māori customers. 6 IN CONFIDENCE7 The landscape takes a two-phase approach that starts with Inland Revenue talking with Māori customers PHASE 1 This interim document reports on the outcomes of Phase 1: •Define who Inland Revenue’s Māori customers are. •Identify what Māori customers see as important. •Produce a prioritised list of Māori customer groups to focus on in Phase 2. “You need to understand the cultural understandings of Māori, or else you’ll still be asking ‘Who’s a Māori?’. Māori is about whakapapa.” PHASE 2 A final document will report on the outcomes of Phase 2: •Who our Māori customers are. •What their journey and experience is with us. •Future changes that may influence Māori customers. •The direction for improving outcomes for Māori customers. “If you could get people participating in the formal economy and standing on their own two feet ... whānau wellbeing increases ... But it needs to be integrated ... can’t be doing something fantastic on the IRD side if MSD aren’t on board ... then the whānau will suffer” INFORMS IN CONFIDENCE8 Our research takes a kaupapa Māori approach that is informed by tikanga Māori This is a research project conducted using kaupapa Māori principles. This means that appropriate time and consideration has been given to tikanga Māori in the planning and conduct of fieldwork and reporting. We drew on the approach developed by Te Arawhiti to guide stakeholder engagement. “It’s quite refreshing to have this type of approach, where people are coming out and talking to us from IRD... this is a continuation of the relationship building exercise.” 8 IN CONFIDENCE9 Multiple methods in Phase 1 helped to produce quality insights CUSTOMER INTERVIEWS To identify te ao Māori perspectives important to Māori customers lives. INTERNAL WORKSHOP To present and refine findings from the interviews and literature review. LITERATURE REVIEW To understand how other agencies define the Māori economy. Producing quality insights IN CONFIDENCE10 We consulted multiple parties on issues facing Māori customers 31 CUSTOMER INTERVIEWS Talked with Māori customers from whānau, hapū and iwi across urban and rural locations in New Zealand. 14 INTERNAL STAFF INTERVIEWS Gathered feedback from Inland Revenue staff representing various areas across the organisation. 4 SUBJECT MATTER EXPERTS Consulted internal subject matter experts with regards to taking a kaupapa Māori approach to the research. 5 EXTERNAL PUBLICATIONS Considered publications from other agencies and organisations when defining the Māori economy. IN CONFIDENCE11 What did we learn? Tuatoru IN CONFIDENCE 11 IN CONFIDENCE12 Māori views of the economy are influenced heavily by key values of te ao Māori These values were weaved through their stories about the Māori economy. Below depicts te ao Māori values that our Māori customers identified on as being important for them. A snapshot of individual values can be found over the next few pages. IN CONFIDENCE 13 Below are some views from our Māori customers when describing the Māori economy IN CONFIDENCE 14 Below are some views from our Māori customers when describing the Māori economy IN CONFIDENCE 15 Below are some views from our Māori customers when describing the Māori economy IN CONFIDENCE 16 Below are some views from our Māori customers when describing the Māori economy IN CONFIDENCE17 Whakapapa Māori (Māori ancestry) is an essential indicator when determining who is in the Māori economy Also, whānau are considered most important. Whānau are represented throughout all structures that exist in the Māori Economy. Māori views are that if you grow whānau, then you grow hapū and iwi. IN CONFIDENCE18 Inland Revenue desires a deeper understanding of its Māori customer base Inland Revenue wants to improve its knowledge of te ao Māori. Inland Revenue’s understanding of its Māori customers is limited to those that it can easily identify e.g. iwi entities and Māori Authorities. Inland Revenue wants a better understanding of how Māori place whānau at the centre of Māori wellbeing, and what that means for our services. IN CONFIDENCE19 A definition has been produced that brings the views of our Māori customers together with Inland Revenue’s perspectives: Customers and their whānau with whakapapa Māori (Māori ancestry), who contribute to the cultural, social and economic wellbeing of Aotearoa New Zealand. 19 IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE20 Common themes from the feedback received were: 1. All customers are Inland Revenue’s customers, no need to specify that 2. Need to include those who aren’t technically Inland Revenue’s customers e.g. tamariki, volunteers 3. Having Māori ancestry is essential regardless of whether they are owners, employers, employees, etc 4. Recognise those who contribute by giving or receiving goods and serivces 5. Needs to also include te ao Māori and Māori wellbeing 6. Should show link that improved Māori wellbeing would positively influence the nation Taken from our customers views and literature, a definition was presented to Inland Revenue participants at the internal workshop: “Inland Revenue customers with whakapapa (Māori ancestry) that contribute to the New Zealand economy.” Feedback was taken into consideration and used to refine the definition to: “Customers and their whānau with whakapapa Māori (Māori ancestry), who contribute to the cultural, social and economic wellbeing of Aotearoa New Zealand.” REFINETESTREVIEW IN CONFIDENCE21 Through listening to the voice of the customer, Inland Revenue was able to recognise knowledge gaps and the need to focus on specific priority groups: Māori individuals, whānau and Māori business 21 IN CONFIDENCE IN CONFIDENCE22 Common themes from the feedback received were: 1. Focus on the customer groups that we know the least about 2. A huge gap is that we struggle to even identify certain customer groups 3. Inland Revenue’s understanding of whānau is limited 4. The customer groups shouldn’t be segmented from an Inland Revenue standpoint We presented Inland Revenue with priority groups for further focus. These were decided after listening to what customers told us were important to them during the interviews. The initial groups were: whānau, marae, Māori small business. Feedback was taken into consideration and used to refine the priority groups to: •Individuals, whānau, Māori business These customer groups need to be understood from a te ao Māori perspective and not from the typical Inland Revenue centric view: •Individuals means pēpē, rangatahi, pakeke, kaumātua and kuia. Not salary and wage earners, provisional tax payers, Student Loan borrowers or KiwiSaver customers. •Whānau means the combination of all the Individuals mentioned above. Not a focus on parents and tamariki under our Families customer segment touching products like Working for Families or Child Support. •Māori businesses means te ao Māori and whānau are at the heart of their business models. Not necessarily its growth, size or profitability. REFINETESTREVIEW IN CONFIDENCE23 What will we do next? Tu a w h ā IN CONFIDENCE 23 IN CONFIDENCE24 “Working with them like that, like the whānau ora concept ... working with whānau, it’s not working with that person, so it’s the whole whānau concept. So businesses like ours, we’re a whānau business. So working from a whole whānau perspective.” IN CONFIDENCE Phase 2 will involve another deep dive into our Māori customers world to look for opportunities that contribute to improved wellbeing for Māori The definition and priority groups are now being used to produce a scope for the Phase 2 work. Kaupapa Māori principles will again be followed when designing our approach. The methods we use will help us to gain a deeper understanding of: •who our Māori customers are, •what their journey and experience is with us, •future changes that may influence Māori customers, and •the direction for improving outcomes for Māori customers. The scope will allow us to consider timing, methods and resources and whether we will need to narrow the priority groups further. Now that we have a better understanding of our Māori customers’ views, we will consider if we should relabel the landscape so that it better reflects the all-encompassing nature of our Māori customer base. 24 IN CONFIDENCE25 Disclaimer The views, opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the views of Inland Revenue. Inland Revenue has made every effort to ensure that the information contained in this report is reliable, but does not guarantee its accuracy or completeness and does not accept any liability for any errors. The information and opinions contained in this report are not intended to be used as a basis for commercial decisions and Inland Revenue acceptsno liability for any decisions made in reliance on them. Crown copyright ©. This paper by Inland Revenue is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 New Zealand Licence. Please note that the Inland Revenue emblem and logo may not be used in any way which infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act 1981 or would infringe such provision if the relevant use occurred within New Zealand. Attribution should be in written form and not by reproduction of this emblem. If you publish, distribute or otherwise disseminate this work to the public without adapting it, the following attribution to Inland Revenue should be used: "Source: Inland Revenue and licensed by Inland Revenue for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 New Zealand Licence." If you adapt this work in any way or include it in a wider collection, and publish, distribute or otherwise disseminate that adaptation or collection to the public, the following style of attribution to Inland Revenue should be used: "This work is \[based on/includes\] Inland Revenue's research and evaluation activities which \[is/are\] licensed by Inland Revenue for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 New Zealand Licence." ISBN 978-0-478-42451-5 IN CONFIDENCE26 Ngā mihi For more information, please contact Customer Insight & Evaluation team at customerinsight@ird.govt.nz IN CONFIDENCE 26