myIR v12 Functional Definition V12 Design Approach \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] INTRODUCTION ANDCONTEXT PURPOSE OF THISPRESENTATION Provide BT LT with an overview of the proposed myIRdesign approach for V12 Show how the design approach relates to and is supported by customer testing and business engagement activities Give an overview of the scope of design work related to the myIRV12 upgrade BACKGROUND Customer testing of myIRV12 started in January 2020 and was followed by an analysis of the expected change impact on critical myIRuser groups. Based on the positive outcome of this analysis a recommendation to proceed with the upgrade was endorsed by the TEWC in July 2020. In endorsing the recommendation and in recognition of the extensive scope of the changes, the TEWC requested that BT proactively engage with customers and the wider organisation to validate design and prepare the user community for the upgrade. Work has begun on a unified plan that integrates the design approach with customer and business engagement activities and supports the change management activities associated with the transition to myIRV12. The high-level plan in this presentation sets out the sequencing of various design tasks and the dependencies between these and different customer testing activities. The presentation includes: Scope of myIRV12 design activities Categorisation of in-scope BFDs as the basis for design and testing Proposed design approach Explanation of the various design and testing activities that will be used (including examples) High-level plan for design, engagement and customer testing \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] V12 BUSINESSFUNCTIONALDEFINITIONS 137 BFDS There have been 137 Business Functional Definitions (BFDs) raised in Stage 4.1.2 to successfully deliver START Version 12. Most of these BFDs focus on conversion of existing site specific functionality from the current Version 11. A small number of BFDs represent new functionality included in Stage 4.1.2 scope or required as part of the deployment of Version 12. The broad categories of site specific code addressed by BFDs: Navigation Landing pages Menu’s and account functionality Intermediary client management Most functionality that customers interact with remains unchanged as a result of the conversion from Version 11 to Version 12. This means that beyond the initial navigational changes – customers won’t experience many changes to the services they are used to. DESIGNAPPROACH The design approach used to deliver the Version 12 changes is based on the evolving myIRDesign Approach developed since Release 4 and further refined in Stage 4.1.1. This design approach (explained on the next slide) helps to bring decisions to the appropriate group earlier in the development cycle. The aim being informed decision making about what’s required, what works for customers, and is sustainable in the myIRplatform. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Design Approach myIRBFD •Define outcome / purpose •Define business and user requirements •Establish common use cases, risks and mitigations myIRScope Recommendation •Determine the optimum set of requirements for the service •Where required prepare scope recommendation •Present scope recommendation to Design Group •Record decision on myIRscope myIR Design Session •Design session to develop first iteration that meets agreed requirements and myIRdesign patterns •If multiple design options are identified then prepare mock-up for review and approval Development •\[Information redacted\] begins development based on first iteration of design •SME reviews development alignment against the agreed design and functionality •First review of content Quality Assurance •Pre-development verified demo (myIR team) •Ensuring these requirements are met: •Content, •Pattern application, •Usability, and •Design. • Development task is verified / rejected based on feedback My IR Design Group - review, escalation, arbitration \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] BFD TESTINGGROUPS The myIRteams has been working with the \[Information redacted\] eService architect for the last three years to realise many of Inland Revenue’s requirements as part of the development of START Version 12. This long term work has provided the opportunity for agreater adoption of out-of-the-box configurable functionality over site specific capability. THEOBJECTIVE to move a greater proportion of myIRservices to out-of-the-box functionality THEBENEFITS provides for a more stable platform, capable of upgrade to future versions with reduced conversion effort. As a result, the myIRteam has prioritised the implementation of out-of-the-box functionality over new site specific build. The 137 BFDs have been categorised into test groups based on the extent to which site specific code can be safely converted to out-of-the-box(OTB): Show & tell – Functions for which V12 OTB meets existing design without any change. There is no planned scope for change - communication to customer and business. Consult– Functions for which V12 OTB meets existing design with minimal configuration/pattern options. There is limited scope for change - communication to customer and business, limited customer testing. Co-refine– Functions for which V12 OTB requires extensive configuration to meet existing design, or V12 design will not match V11 design. Design patterns have been established. There is moderate scope for change. Significant customer testing and business engagement is planned. Co-design– Functions requiring redesign as a result of V12 design. No design patterns have been established. There is moderate scope for change and site specific configuration may be required. Significant customer testing and business engagement is planned. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Version 12 BFD test groups Show & TellConsult Co-RefineCo-Design NoYe s Ye sNo Ye sNo Is out-of-the-box functionality available in V12 to replace site specific component? Is minor design change needed to match V11 capability? Are there established design patterns to support this functionality? Where V12 delivers an equivalent capability to site specific functionality in V11, myIRwill utilise core V12 functions over site specific code. 691140 1 16 System and non-customer functionality New/Site specific to Site specific New/Site specific to out-of-the-box 125+ V12 BFDs (Existing site specific functionality) 12 V12 BFDs (New functionality) \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] myIRV12 Factory 833 SCREENSTOBEUPDATED The majority of functionality in myIRwill be converted through the myIRV12 Factory. Because most features in myIRhave been delivered through configuration rather than site specific code, and because Version 12 does not change the underlying systems myIRrelies to operate it is possible to easily convert these features. This means the 833 screens that need to be converted from Version 11 to Version 12 simply need the ‘new look and feel ’ – defined in the Version 12 Pattern Library – to be applied to them. Despite the apparent simplicity of this change an approach has been established to manage this work. APPROACH The myIRFactory approach has been designed to ensure accurate and successful conversion of existing functionality, identify and minimise the risk of adverse impacts, escalate changes required to V12 design to manage V11 site specific issues. The high-level process for myIRV12 Factory: 1.FAST developer is assigned a screen for conversion, 2.The developer refers to the V12 Pattern library and configures appropriately, 3.myIRSME reviews development as it is assigned, 4.Periodic quality assurance to ensure V12 Pattern Library adherence. Delivery of the myIRV12 Factory conversion has been planned and agreed with FAST to facilitate early customer testing, and stakeholder demonstrations. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] V12 customer testing V11/V12 COMPARATIVETESTING Survey based testing using screenshots of developed functionality, 6 weekly cycle between July 2020 and September 2021, 3 weeks of survey followed by 3 weeks to complete analysis and prepare the report. DESIGNVALIDATION Aligned with the V12 definition and development plan More detailed testing plan will become available as delivery of V12 BFDs progresses Design Validation will utilise differing techniques to collect feedback reflecting the inputs required. This may include such techniques as; Demonstrations, Surveys, Card Sorting, Observational lab testing, and A/B testing. CUSTOMERINTERACTIONTESTING(CIT) At scale customer testing of built functionality Using the existing ‘sandpit’ environment to allow customers to test using their own data Validation of functionality under variable use cases and customer capability Factory converted functionality will be tested in CIT \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] V12 Development & Testing Plan 20202021 AugSeptOctNovDecJanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSeptOct Comparative Testing Design Validation Customer Interaction Testing START V12 timeline Cycle 2 Cycle 3 Cycle 4 Cycle 5 Cycle 6 Cycle 7 Cycle 8 Cycle 9 Co-Design Co-Refine Consult Show & Tell Factory CIT Customer Engagement Business Engagement Testing against V12 Analysis Testing against built V12 functions Factory document conversion V12 BFD sessions V12 BFD Development V12 Business systems testing Factory development verification SBS Testing BFD test group categorisation Appendix \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Show & Tell – page 1 BFD TitleBFD Title Headers and footersV12 Web Menu account structure for RWT on interest GST return updates (prototype)V12 Web Menu account structure for IIT Income tax FAM summary screen (prototype)V12 Web Menu account structure for KiwiSaver scheme Tax preparer (prototype)V12 Web Menu account structure for KiwiSaver Member V12 Web Menu account structure for Approved issuer levyV12 Web Menu account structure for Non-resident withholding tax V12 Web Menu account structure for AIPV12 Web Menu account structure for Portfolio investment entity V12 Web Menu account structure for Multi payment optionV12 Web Menu account structure for Payroll subsidy V12 Web Menu account structure for CRSV12 Web Menu account structure for Payroll V12 Web Menu account structure for Dividend withholding taxV12 Web Menu account structure for R&D Tax Incentive V12 Web Menu account structure for Income EqualisationV12 Web Menu account structure for Donation tax credit V12 Web Menu account structure for Environmental RestorationV12 Web Menu account structure for Residential land withholding tax V12 Web Menu account structure for Working for FamiliesV12 Web Menu account structure for Rulings and determinations V12 Web Menu account structure for FATCAV12 Web Menu account structure for Resident withholding tax V12 Web Menu account structure for FBTV12 Web Menu account structure for Student loan V12 Web Menu account structure for Gaming machine dutyV12 Web Menu account structure for Special Payment V12 Web Menu account structure for GST satisfaction of debtV12 Web Menu account structure for Tax Pooling Account V12 Web Menu account structure for GSTV12 Web Menu account structure for "My profile" V12 Web Menu account structure for ITN Income taxV12 Web Menu structure from the customer level \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Show & Tell – page 2 BFD TitleBFD Title V12 Web Menu account structure for Business loanV12 Other Impacts --> Name and Address updates V12 Web Menu on the "select a customer" screenV12 - Return expectation queries V12 Action Items StandardStandard logon landing page V12 Action Item ConversionContent Update -Confirmation screens V12 Standards (Pattern Library)Display of EDSR Letters (New) User maintenance of logon profilesE- Services - Tax agent transaction report V12 "My Profile" screenTax Preparer Correspondence Reports -eServices Updates to the forgot password processMail Item Notifications (Standard Customer) - eServices What does the unavailable page look like?Mail Item Notifications (Tax Preparer) - eServices Expiration of web requestsMail Item Alerts (Standard Customer) - eServices Web request outage functionalityMail Item Alerts (Tax Preparer) - eServices eServicesmanager access (New)AEOI V12 Doc Conversion Returns V12 eServices UpgradesIncome Tax Returns - eServices Employer returns -eServicesWeb request reviews Email bounceback/read receipt replacement (New) V12 Other Impacts eServices- Tax agent payment transfers - General eServices - Refund bank accounts V12 Other Impacts -> Changes to tblWebLogonToAccount/Customer \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Consult BFD Title Updates to creating first party logons on a third party Income profile layout EMP Employee Dashboard and account springboard conversion Use of favourites functionality (New) Tax preparer consolidated action items Property Tax Decision Tree (New) V12 Display of account balances (New) eServices - Payment types and payment channels eServices - Direct Debits eServices- Unauthenticated credit card payments (New) \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Co-refine BFD TitleBFD Title V12 Account panels standardV12 Account panels for IIT Income tax V12 Summary panel for customer levelV12 Account panels for RWT on interest V12 Account panels for Approved issuer levyV12 Account panels for ITN Income tax V12 Account panels for AIPV12 Account panels for KiwiSaver scheme V12 Account panels for Multi payment optionV12 Account panels for KiwiSaver Member V12 Account panels for CRSV12 Account panels for Non-resident withholding tax V12 Account panels for Dividend withholding taxV12 Account panels for Portfolio investment entity V12 Account panels for Income EqualisationV12 Account panels for Payroll subsidy V12 Account panels for Environmental RestorationV12 Account panels for Payroll V12 Account panels for Working for FamiliesV12 Account panels for R&D Tax Incentive V12 Account panels for FATCAV12 Account panels for Donation tax credit V12 Account panels for Student loanV12 Account panels for Residential land withholding tax V12 Account panels for Special PaymentV12 Account panels for Rulings and determinations V12 Account panels for Tax Pooling AccountV12 Account panels for Resident withholding tax V12 Summary panel for large customersRemoval of tax preparer workspace V12 Summary panel for Business LoanStructure of Intermediary Centre (New) V12 Account panels for FBTReplacement of "I want to..." V12 Account panels for Gaming machine dutyHome screen (New) V12 Account panels for GST satisfaction of debtBankrupt customers (New) V12 Account panels for GSTeServices- Customer level payments (New) \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Co-design BFD Title V12 Web Menus Standard V12 Web Menus Standard– customer V12 Web Menus Standard – account level V12 Web Menus Standard– intermediaries “Factory” conversion customer testing scope Appendix \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] V12 “Factory” scope –Part 1 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] V12 “Factory” scope –Part 2 Cycle 2 v11/v12 comparison testing report Appendix \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Z Z n/a Z Z 121 Customers 80% preferred V12 Web sessions over time Order of compliance action % of customers that call This cycle - total customers per area 79.5% preferred V12 customers 281 This cycle Annual individual 77 Customers SocialPolicy Intermediary 88% preferred V12 Frequent business Complex CIT V12 Comparative Analysis –Cycle 2 Report 83 Customers 72% preferred V12 In order to better understand the customer impact of myIRchanges, customer testing of V12 in regular cycles is conducted to assess customer satisfaction with V12 design in comparisonwith V11. Using screenshots of V12 and V11 customers were asked to identify their preferred option and offer qualitative feedback as to why their choice better meets their needs. Z n/a IR account manager Area Total Prefer V12 Calls to action28169% Action selection28075% Mobile experience14179% Logon settings28177% Top 10 WRQ All cycles - total customers per area 68.8% preferred V12 total customers 554 All cycles Area Total Prefer V12 Access/Single Sign On11955% Summary views & Balances17459% Navigation24259% Calls to action33869% Action selection28075% Facilitated action flows Intermediary functions-- Feedback/assurance/guidance Mobile experience14179% Logon settings28177% Customers by region 0 50 100 150 200 250 Access Summary Navigation Calls to action Action selection Mobile experience Logon settings No. of Customers Preference over cycles V12 (previous cycles)V12 (current cycle)V11 (previous cycles)V11 (current cycle) Review content Explore functionality Testin environment Next steps Content/wording to be reviewed 5 Explore available functionality in V12 Re-test in working test environment 2 4 Known Issue Other Known issue, in review - Other 1 20 n/a Out of scope Out of scope 11.7% from last cycle 2 nd cycle Customers 0 >45 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Frequent Business 69% preferred V12 43% Calls to action “\[V12\] uses less information on the screen that then allows the focus to go directly to the important actions required. Less cluttered and clear, simple language” “\[V11\] is a "hunt and peck" look. I'd make more clicks than I needed to find what I wanted. \[V12\] promotes a quick decision on where it is relevant to click” Mobile: “I can see alerts straight away, don't have to look for other links to click to find out info.” “\[V12\] gave the most information at a glance. It also felt closer to social media with the tab layout and more applicable to the majority of present-day users.” “I like the list of alerts/things to do, which allow me to work through them one by one. Also if the alert list is empty, it would clearly indicate that there is nothing to do.” “This is much clearer and cleaner. However the instructions are not time bound. The word "late" is used but what date is late? Late is subjective.” "Does not seem like every task I need is available” Z Annual individual 27% 80% preferred V12 “There is a lot of info that doesn’t require my attention” “Not convinced having to scroll so far down is good, so much more to read to find what you are after” “...different coloured font so the user knows they need to complete an action.” “The lack of difference in colour that \[V12\] had makes things seem less important. If I were in a hurry I might skim read these items quickly and think they are optional things I can worry about later.” “You can see there is an alert/s by the colour dot. The overall whole page view is good and easy to see. I wonder if I would notice that they were alerts though? But you get a good view of what you need to do. “It would be much easier if the screen default was set on Alerts, then I would see what I needed to do and could click on Summary for other when necessary.” “This option is better in that it tells you why it is important to read the new message. But, I didn't notice the 'Alerts' tab on the first screenshot. That may have been because it is an unfamiliar layout, but it may also be that it needs to be more prominent.” “The first page clearly suggests action needs to be taken under the alerts section, but it's not completely clear on that action until you select the actions tab.” “better than \[V11\], but does not show what the due payment is for or when it was due.” “I feel it has been broken down into bite size information that I can process.” “It is immediately apparent what needs to be done. There are 3 tasks to complete, and it is straight forward as to which accounts those tasks are for.” “The alerts and my immediate obligations are very easy to see, but I had to look hard to see where to click if I really wish to do something else first.” Simplifies how customers determine what they need to do Most customers liked the simplicity of the alert tiles in V12. They felt that it enabled them to quickly assess what needed attention on their account and what they needed to do. Since they were given more relevant information up front, they were able to decide whether they needed to perform an action or dismiss the notification with less clicks. Not immediately clear where to go Some customers found they would not have thought to click on the alerts tab as their first port of call. They felt the alerts tab wasn’t sufficiently highlighted to signify its importance and therefore they may have missed some of the notifications or deemed them unimportant. Note this was mainly due to familiarity with V11 and customers noted they would need to get used to going to the alerts screen when they first log in. 21 How required tasks are presented to the customer, and how the customer recognises that an action is required. Customers were presented a V12 landing page and notifications centre; and a V11 landing page and account page. Both displayedoutstanding notifications/alerts. They were then asked choose which option they felt gave them a clearer understanding of what actions needed to completed. customers 281 Difficult to determine importance of alerts Some customers felt there was no indication of a hierarchy of alerts and therefore the importance of the notifications was difficult to determine. They thought the alerts screen needed to highlight the most important notifications or display a clear hierarchy such as order of due date so that they could quickly identify and perform the most important actions first. They also suggested adding or highlighting due dates and the relevant period would help in assessing the priority. SocialPolicy 59% preferred V12 30% “It's generally clear, but messages shouldn't be lumped in with things you must do. Should show when those actions are due by.” 69% preferred V12 Review content Review content Test in environment Explore functionality 49.8% PC view 50.2% Mobile view Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile MobileMobileMobile \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Frequent Business 75% preferred V12 43% Action selection “It's very straight to the point and easy to read. Like really easy to read.” “Because of the headings, the category I needed was easier and faster to locate.” “Titled better, categorised logically. Looks easier to navigate” “The subheadings and organisation of \[V12\] make it easier to skim through to find what I need.” ‘“Much easier than \[V11\]. I like how the list is ordered by categories, I don't need to scan the whole list, I first scan the headings, find the appropriate one (register, apply and enrol), then just scan through those.” “I would not want to do this on my phone. It would have to be done on a PC as you have so much too choose from.” “There are so many things that a user might want to do that to put every action in one place just looks messy. It is quite easy to miss a link as you read the page as it is so full of clutter.” Z Annual individual 27% 79% preferred V12 “No summaries of the headings are provided. People who don't use the system often, such as those that might be using a mobile device to access it, will find it more difficult to find exactly what they were looking for” “\[V12\] assumes I would know what the links mean or that I am happy to click a link, discover that it was not what I wanted and to go back to previous page.” “The “I want to” is hidden on the front page.” “I had to go back and see where the “I want to" icon was.” “The 'I want to' option on the first page is not particularly obvious at first glance.” “...the search bar assures me that I don't have to wade through the list to find what I want.” “The search bar stood out more...” “I like the search area in V12. I just went back and see V11 does have a search area, but I didn't see it” “"I want to..." doesn't stand out” “I like the lens for the search field.” “...the sample of actions is helpful as it gives you a clue as to what sort of things are there whereas \[V12\] has none of those visible” “...but no indication of what each heading relates to - may require a bit of "seek & find" before getting to the right one.” “Obvious headings and subheadings. Makes it easier to sort out what needs to be done” “Far easier to find what you are looking for, as the options and section headers are organised properly.” “I like the placement \[of the\] search option which is easier to see and use.” “The light grey has a tendency to blend in and not be as easy to spot” “The i want to button isn't obvious Customers preferred the layout and categorisation of V12’s ‘I want to’ menu​ Across all user types and devices, customers preferred the layout of the V12 ‘I want to’ screen. They felt the display was clean and modern, and that finding actions would be easier. Many respondents noted that the subheadings/groupings of the ‘I want to’ menu were much more helpful in V12, allowing them to quickly scan and find the action they required. V12’s search option was more noticeable While both V11 and V12 provide a field for searching the ‘I want to’ menu, customers found the V12 version better drew their attention and was more easily recognisable as a search box. ‘I want to’ tab not prominent Some users found that the ‘I want to’ tab on V12 was not prominent enough. This was often combined with the misconception that V12 had less options available as V11 displays a selection of ‘I want to’ options on the landing page. Customers familiar with V11 would need to get used to accessing all ‘I want to’ options from that tab. 22 Findability, layout and usability of the ‘I want to’ menu. Customers were presented with both the V11 and V12 landing & customer level ‘I want to’ screens. They were asked to choose whichoption they felt provided a better way to find actions that they want to complete. Social Policy 71% preferred V12 30% customers 280 “Although there is the same detail on the page, it is broken into sections which makes it more digestible and less daunting.” “I like that subheadings are used to organise the actions and this would no doubt make it easier to find the action I am looking for.” 49.6% PC view 50.4% Mobile view 75% preferred V12 Mobile ‘I want to’ list more difficult Some customers felt that the ‘I want to’ would be difficult to navigate on mobile due to the long list to scroll through. This was made more difficult by the lack of descriptions for actions when viewed on mobile. Therefore they felt that there needed to be a balance between being able to identify and understand actions without having to read a large amount of text. Review content Explore functionality Review content Test in environment Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Frequent Business 78% preferred V12 35% 79% preferred V12 customers 141 Mobile experience “\[V12\] had a much simpler and easier to follow lay out in comparison to \[V11\]. Visually it seemed to be more concise, used bigger font, displayed fewer options and was better categorised” “The format of most \[V12\] are more mobile friendly, \[V11\] felt more like a desktop format; \[V12\] had easier to find options and fewer pages to go through to get to desired page.” “\[V12\]is much easier to navigate. \[V11\] is hard to find edit buttons etc, as they are not immediately obvious.” “I think \[V12\] appeared more straightforward and less complicated with ambiguity and distraction.” Z Annual individual 26% 84% preferred V12 “... there is a lot of info that doesn’t require my attention” “The menu design is cleaner, but the menu is still too long for a mobile screen.” N/A“\[V12\] overall seems to be more intuitive, and more like other apps which should make it easier to pick up to a new user.” “\[V12\] gave the most information at a glance. It also felt closer to social media with the tab layout and more applicable to the majority of present-day users.” “\[V12\] seems to have more in depth information about all parts of your account which is a little visually overwhelming.” “\[V12\] is approximately 1000% better than \[V11\]. This will ease some of the trepidation when logging into the IRD website to do some basic client work. On a mobile app it will help to respond faster when you are asked things while out of the office.” “Much cleaner interface, easier to work with/type etc” “Easier and more consistent with other websites” “...too much text, making things look cluttered and therefore complicated.” Simpler, more streamlined mobile experience Most customers preferred the mobile experience of V12 as they found the display simpler and less overwhelming. This meant they could quickly identify relevant information about their accounts and see a clear path when needing to complete an objective. They felt V12’s display fit better on a mobile screen and due to it providing an account ‘snapshot’, made it easier for customers to read the page details and assess what actions they might need to perform without needing to log on to myIRthrough their PC. Consistent with other websites and web standards Some customers felt V12 had a more ‘modern’ approach which matched other modern-day websites. This gave them confidence they would easily learn to navigate through myIRwhen using their mobile device. Too much unnecessary information which results in excessive scrolling At times customers felt that pages still had too much information that was irrelevant to them. When viewed on a mobile this resulted in too much scrolling to find what they were after. Optimisation 23 Due to the increase in mobile usage, we need to focus on maximising the user experience on smaller screens. Customers were presented with a mobile view of each other task in the cycle (Calls to action, Action selection & Logon Settings)and asked to provide their feedback for each. After viewing and completing each task, they asked about their overall perception of the mobileexperience. Social Policy 76% preferred V12 39% “Overall, \[V12\] has an easier interface such as simplicity of accessing things. Furthermore, the fonts are much better for reading the information.” “\[V11\] feels dreary and ancient, it's difficult to use, and it doesn't work toward the interests of the person using it. \[V12\] seems to streamline the process more.” “Fits well on mobile screens, not too many scrolling and multiple pages involved.” “Because everything is more clear and on the same screen” “\[V12\] kind of give alotof information at one go and alotof it is repeating so its alotharder to skim through to find what you need.” “More designed like an app” “Less clutter and easier to find what you want” “Simpler, more concise, obvious and direct” “It gets you where you want to go easier, is easier to read and follow. More up to date format for the mobile worlds.” Social Policy Social Policy \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Frequent Business 75% preferred V12 43% Logon Settings “The \[V12\] label ‘Manage my profile’ seemed to me to be the logical location to access the email address etc.” “’Manage my profile’ very clearly indicates to me that this is where I would go to update contact details / passwords. I like that this is only a 1 click to see my details with "change email" etc directly underneath the existing one.” “My eyes immediately went to 'manage my profile'. The wording tells you exactly what it does, and it is displayed in a manner and position on the screen where it is easy to find.” “The ‘Manage my Profile’ button makes it clear to me where I would find related details.” “I like how there isn't a general edit tab (which was small in \[V11\]), so you can update/change specific information.” “\[V12\] is easy to see from the home screen and gives you an option to edit information from there, rather than going through settings” Z Annual individual 27% 83% preferred V12 “This is an improvement, all the anticipated options for editing your profile are available in one section.” “There are fewer clear options about the changes I want to make - I guess means need to input a search in the search box” N/A N/A“Much shorter process which is good, but I wouldn't have thought to look at ‘Manage my profile'” “Although quite easy to figure out, the "Manage My Profile" link is small and easy to miss” “One screen and you are where you need to be. Note that it no longer requires a physical address.” “I did not see the ‘Manage my profile’ until the question pointed out that it was there. Maybe it would be better closer to the other options on the page.” Where is the change postal address? Do we not use that anymore?” “'Manage my profile' is a clear statement. I'd do that. Settings is too broad an option.” “’Manage my profile’ is good BUT its not prominent. Perhaps on the same line as ‘Summary’.” N/A ‘Manage my profile’ is more obvious and intuitive for customers, reducing clicks Most customers felt that the wording of ‘Manage my profile’ gave them a clearer understanding of what options would be available to them rather than V11’s ‘Settings’ option. They felt that the options displayed under ‘Manage my profile’ is more in line with what they would expect to see. This meant they were able to find what they were looking for with less clicks. ‘Manage my profile’ could be more prominent on the landing page. Some customers felt the ‘Manage my profile’ link was not immediately obvious and could possibly be missed. It was suggested it needed to be more prominent. Some expected options not included A few customers thought there were some options missing that they would expect to see on the ‘Manage my profile’ page. Most of this confusion was a result of familiarity with V11, as additional options are now found under the ‘I want to’ tab. They also questioned why changing their address was not found here. 24 Where to go to manage password, email address and logon details. Customers were presented both the V11 and V12 versions of the relevant landing page, V11’s settings and V12’s Manage my profile pages along with the navigation involved for each. They were then asked to choose which option they felt gave them a clearer understanding when changing logon details and which they felt would be easier to navigate. Social Policy 73% preferred V12 30% customers 281 Customers preferred V12’s layout as it made options easier to understand. Most customers were happy with the presentation of the ‘Manage my profile’ page as all options were clearly visible and on one page. They could easily identify what each option was and how to make necessary changes. “This is WAY better. I would definitively have followed the path to get to this final page and then can easily see what I can do next.” “Nothing complicated about it, no need to do any research on how to videos. When I wanted to edit my profile some time ago, I researched on Internet on how to edit my profile on myIR \[V11\].” “The logic of having personal details in a Profile section is better and follows the way many other sites group this type of information.” “Easier to follow. Obvious label at very top ‘Manage my profile’.” “More user friendly, can clearly see details and how to change them. Would be a lot easier for older generation to navigate if they had to..” “\[V12\] is easier because the title "manage My Profile" is more clear to do this changes than only Settings.” 77% preferred V12 Review content Test in environment Explore functionality Test in environment 49.8% PC view 50.2% Mobile view Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile Mobile Customer level ‘I want to...’ Co-design report Appendix \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Order of compliance action all Focus area Individual customers 14 Customer selection Customer level web menu testing What we did and why we did it Defined categories V12 Defined categories V11 Group 1: My ActivityI want to... Group 2: Communicating with IRCustomer and account access Group 3: My detailsOther actions Group 4: Access Management Group 5: Payment, refunds and returns Group 6: Register, apply and enrol 26 • Conducted a series of closed card sorting activities. This method was chosen as a usability technique to identify how customersexpect to see information grouped when searching myIR. • The card sorting activities involved a set of cards that each represented the links shown on the I want to.. menu at the customer level and six defined categories where customers were asked to group the cards in a way that made sense to them. • Overall result showed consistent and repeatable themes. • The objective was to gain insight into how customers identify and associated information to the groups provided. The results canbe used to group and label the menu information in a way that makes the most sense to customer groups. • Analysis of closed card sort results involved looking at the number of times cards were grouped with each category and identifyi ng the most popular category for each card. Further engagement with each customer to understand their thought process / rationale about each grouping and defined headings. Customer selection criteria •Current my IRuser •Individual with one or more account •Self-employed •Family customers Note: We are using the opinion of the general populous rather than tax intermediaries or complex customers \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] V11 verses V12 customer level web menu 27 Currently the V11 web menu has only 3 categories I want to... Customer and account access Other actions Although we are not moving away from the list view, by adding defined categories, we want to assist customers to easily search for what they need to do. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] customers 14 The results 28 High agreement >75% Medium agreement Low agreement < 25% Themes and comments: •Web request titles and descriptions need to be reviewed and possibly included in optimisation • Participants felt that My activity could be a sub category of Communicating with IR and just merge the two categories • Participants felt that access management could also be a sub category of My details • Terminology confusing such as 'access management', not sure what it is so would just click on it being curious • Within the communicating with IR category would include a sub-category that then defined communication from IR and communication with IR •Have specific groups for the type of request that are available 'Families' 'Individual' 'Business’ • If the list changed to a drop down box would need to be mindful when categorising that the list don't get too big - Group 6 (register, apply and enrol) was big • Couldn't make sense of what 'my activity' is so wouldn't use it, it's not relevant \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] We reviewed other websites to understand how they managed categorises of requests and access to them. Thiswas to understand what common practices there were and what we can apply. Website comparison 29 Following websites were reviewed: Gaps withmyIR​: These websites have similarfunctionality withmyIR, i.e. manageaccounts, register and apply. But theterminology differs from IR , and insteaduses more familiar terms and focus onthe general populous. Closing the gaps: •Using familiar terminologies •Category using actions and tasks •Be descriptive •Provide clear description Information redacted \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] In analysingthe data, the results suggest that there is a high agreementacross all the defined categories where the common theme throughout the sorting was the word association, such as register for donation tax credit was placed in the ‘register, apply and enrol’ group. Participants advise that it seemed logical to put it in that group because it had the word ‘register’ in the title. With this in mind, it would be recommended that the web request titles and descriptions be reviewed as part of optimisationand to look at the use of nouns and verbs. If these were removed from the title would it still make sense to a customer if the title just said Donatio n tax credit to look in the register, apply and enrolgroup. When looking at the comparison of websites this indicates that myIRhas similar functionality to them, however the terminology differs where the other websites use more familiar terminology. This provides further support for the need to review terminology. Next steps 30 RecommendationsComments Review terminology of web request titles and descriptions Work with content hub to provide the wording of each title Review terminology of categories‘Access management’ was confusing to customers, some of the terminology did not resonate with them Complete additional testing once system is available, focusing on the navigational aspect Suggested categories: My Activity Communicating with IR My details Access management Payments, refund and returns Register, apply and enrol