UNCLASSIFIED DETERMINATION > LIVESTOCK> NATIONAL AVERAGE MARKET VALUE National Average Market Values of Specified Livestock Determination 2024 Issued: 24 May 2024 NAMV 2024 NAMV 2024 | 24 May 2024 Page 1 of 5 Note to this determination This note does not form part of the national average market values of specified livestock determination 2024 (the determination) but is produced to aid Inland Revenue staff, taxpayers and their agents in their understanding of how the values contained in the determination are arrived at and how they should be used. Section EC 15 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (the Act) requires that the Commissioner of Inland Revenue (the Commissioner) make a determination declaring the national average market values (NAMV) for an income year for each class of specified livestock set out in Schedule 17 of the Act. Historically, this determination has been published in May each year. NAMVs are declared for an income year and used by taxpayers, that are in the business of livestock farming, to value any specified livestock that they have on hand where the taxpayer has elected to use the herd scheme to value that livestock in the income year. As the name of this determination suggests, NAMVs provide the national average market value for the specified livestock classes. They may therefore not always reflect the market value of the livestock of a particular taxpayer, or even of a particular region. Because of this, the values are not intended to be used for any other purpose than that for which they are produced; valuing livestock of taxpayers who have elected to value their livestock under the herd scheme in the income year for which the determination relates. To ascertain the national average market value of the various classes of livestock the Commissioner contracts with highly experienced livestock valuers situated throughout the country. 1 Each valuer is asked to provide the market value of the various specified livestock classes located in a specified region. There is generally more than one valuer contracted for each region. The market valuations required are for “good quality on-farm animals (capital stock) on 30th April”. From these values the CIR then calculates the national average market value for each livestock class. In the case of the sheep, beef, dairy cattle and deer (red, wapiti and elk) classes a weighted average is used against the values produced by each valuer. weighted average is calculated based on total livestock numbers for a type of livestock in a particular region compared to the national herd numbers for that type of livestock. 2 Because of their comparatively low numbers, a straight average is used for the remaining livestock types 1 Thirty-eight valuations were obtained for the 2024 determination. 2 Numbers are based on data collated by Statistics New Zealand. NAMV 2024 | 24 May 2024 Page 2 of 5 (except “other deer”). The value of “other deer” is taken as the mid-point between the “trophy market” values and the “meat market” values. National Average Market Values of Specified Livestock Determination 2024 This determination may be cited as “The National Average Market Values of Specified Livestock Determination, 2024”. This determination is made in terms of section EC 15 of the Income Tax Act 2007 and shall apply to specified livestock on hand at the end of the 2023-2024 income year. For the purposes of section EC 15 of the Income Tax Act 2007 the national average market values of specified livestock, for the 2023-2024 income year, are as set out in the following table. National Average Market Values of Specified Livestock Type of Livestock Classes of Livestock Average Market Value per Head $ Sheep Ewe hoggets 101.00 Ram and wether hoggets 101.00 Two-tooth ewes 159.00 Mixed-age ewes (rising three-year and four- year old ewes) 134.00 Rising five-year and older ewes 106.00 Mixed-age wethers 79.00 Breeding rams 309.00 Beef cattle Beef breeds and beef crosses: Rising one-year heifers 671.00 Rising two-year heifers 1145.00 Mixed-age cows 1304.00 Rising one-year steers and bulls 855.00 Rising two-year steers and bulls 1292.00 Rising three-year and older steers and bulls 1633.00 NAMV 2024 | 24 May 2024 Page 3 of 5 Breeding bulls 2878.00 Dairy cattle Friesian and related breeds, Jersey and other dairy breeds: Rising one-year heifers 676.00 Rising two-year heifers 1433.00 Mixed-age cows 1609.00 Rising one-year steers and bulls 585.00 Rising two-year steers and bulls 1017.00 Rising three-year and older steers and bulls 1321.00 Breeding bulls 1813.00 Deer Red deer, wapiti, elk, and related crossbreeds: Rising one-year hinds 282.00 Rising two-year hinds 454.00 Mixed-age hinds 510.00 Rising one-year stags 302.00 Rising two-year and older stags (non- breeding) 697.00 Breeding stags 2588.00 Other breeds: Rising one-year hinds 226.00 Rising two-year hinds 295.00 Mixed-age hinds 325.00 Rising one-year stags 228.00 Rising two-year and older stags (non- breeding) 416.00 Breeding stags 1115.00 Goats Angora and angora crosses (mohair producing): Rising one-year does 153.00 Mixed-age does 213.00 Rising one-year bucks (non- breeding)/wethers 77.00 Bucks (non-breeding)/wethers over one year 84.00 NAMV 2024 | 24 May 2024 Page 4 of 5 Breeding bucks 418.00 Other fibre and meat producing goats (Cashmere or Cashgora producing): Rising one-year does 112.00 Mixed-age does 160.00 Rising one-year bucks (non- breeding)/wethers 69.00 Bucks (non-breeding)/wethers over one year 77.00 Breeding bucks 322.00 Milking (dairy) goats: Rising one-year does 162.00 Does over one year 233.00 Breeding bucks 417.00 Other dairy goats (culls) 73.00 Pigs Breeding sows less than one year of age 266.00 Breeding sows over one year 315.00 Breeding boars 371.00 Weaners less than 10 weeks of age (excluding sucklings) 111.00 Growing pigs 10 to 17 weeks of age (porkers and baconers) 180.00 Growing pigs over 17 weeks of age (baconers) 252.00 This determination was signed by me on the 24th day of May 2024. Matthew Evans Technical Lead, Technical Standards, Legal Services Inland Revenue NAMV 2024 | 24 May 2024 Page 5 of 5 References Legislative References Income Tax Act 2007: s EC 15, Schedule 17