Presented to the House of Representatives by Stuart Smith, Chairperson Finance and Expenditure Committee Komiti Whiriwhiri Take Pūtea, Take Whakapaunga Pūtea 54th Parliament March 2024 International treaty examination of the agreement between New Zealand and the Slovak Republic for the elimination of double taxation with respect to taxes on income and the prevention of tax evasion and avoidance DOUBLE TAX AGREEMENT WITH THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC 2 Contents Recommendation .................................................................................................................. 3 Appendix A: Committee procedure ........................................................................................ 4 Appendix B: National Interest Analysis .................................................................................. 5 DOUBLE TAX AGREEMENT WITH THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC 3 Agreement between New Zealand and the Slovak Republic for the elimination of double taxation with respect to taxes on income and the prevention of tax evasion and avoidance Recommendation The Finance and Expenditure Committee has conducted the international treaty examination of the agreement between New Zealand and the Slovak Republic for the elimination of double taxation with respect to taxes on income and the prevention of tax evasion and avoidance. The committee has no matters to bring to the attention of the House and recommends that the House take note of its report. DOUBLE TAX AGREEMENT WITH THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC 4 Appendix A : Committee procedure Committee procedure This treaty was referred to us on 5 February 2024. We met between 14 February and 20 March 2024 to consider it. We received written evidence and heard oral evidence from the Inland Revenue Department. Committee members Stuart Smith (Chairperson) Jamie Arbuckle Hon Barbara Edmonds Nancy Lu David MacLeod Hon Grant Robertson Hon Dr Deborah Russell Todd Stephenson Chlöe Swarbrick Rawiri Waititi Catherine Wedd Related resources We received the following document as evidence for this international treaty examination. It is available on the Parliament website , along with a recording of our meeting on Wednesday, 6 March 2024. • Letter from Inland Revenue (Cover notes for Slovak tax treaty) DOUBLE TAX AGREEMENT WITH THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC 5 Appendix B: National Interest Analysis National Interest Analysis The National Interest Analysis, prepared by the Inland Revenue Department, is attached. ANNEX III NATIONAL INTEREST ANALYSIS: Double Tax Agreement with the Slovak Republic 1.Executive summary 1.On 26 September 2023, New Zealand signed the Agreement between New Zealand and the Slovak Republic for the Elimination of Double Taxation with Respect to Taxes on Income and the Prevention of Tax Evasion and Avoidance (the Slovak DTA). 2.Double tax agreements (DTAs) are bilateral international treaties that are designed to reduce or eliminate double taxation and other tax impediments to cross-border economic activity and investment. Businesses and individuals contemplating engaging in cross-border activity can be deterred by the costs, risk and uncertainty. DTAs reduce some of the costs and generally help improve certainty. They tend to be favoured by all relevant stakeholder groups and are expressly recommended by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) as a tool for encouraging growth in economic ties between countries. 3.New Zealand currently has 40 DTAs in force. DTAs are negotiated and administered by Inland Revenue. Inland Revenue’s DTA negotiation programme generally prioritises the negotiation of agreements that will provide the greatest benefits for New Zealand. Sometimes this may mean updating and modernising existing agreements with major trading and investment partners rather than concluding new agreements. However, additional new agreements are also entered into as opportunities arise. 4.A new DTA has now been concluded with the Slovak Republic. A key factor in the decision to negotiate the agreement was the fact that the Slovak Republic is a member of the European Union (EU) and New Zealand was negotiating a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the EU at the time. DTAs can help maximise the benefits of FTAs. Trade and investment with the Slovak Republic have not previously been particularly high but have increased markedly in recent years and potential for significant future growth in trade and investment exists. A.15A ANNEX III 2. Nature and timing of the proposed treaty action 5. The Agreement between New Zealand and the Slovak Republic for the Elimination of Double Taxation with Respect to Taxes on Income and the Prevention of Tax Evasion and Avoidance (the Slovak DTA) was signed in Bratislava on 26 September 2023. 6. The proposed treaty action is to bring the Slovak DTA into force through an exchange of diplomatic notes, in accordance with Article 28 of the Slovak DTA. The Slovak DTA will enter into force on the first day of the third month following the date of receipt of the later note. 7. Before the treaty action is taken, Standing Orders 397 to 400 require the Slovak DTA to undergo Parliamentary treaty examination. It must also be given the force of law in New Zealand, which can be achieved by means of an Order in Council made under section BH 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007. 8. Like other DTAs, the Slovak DTA will not apply to the Cook Islands, Niue, or Tokelau. 3. Reasons for New Zealand becoming party to the treaty 9. New Zealand entered into its first Double Tax Agreement (DTA) in 1947, and currently has a network of 40 DTAs in force. 10. DTAs are bilateral international treaties that are principally designed to encourage growth in economic ties between countries. They are entered into to foster a more favourable economic environment that will increase cross-border income-earning activity and investment. 11. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has assumed a leading role in promoting the use of DTAs as a way of contributing to the expansion of world trade and developing the world economy. As a member of the OECD, New Zealand is subject to an express recommendation issued by the OECD Council in 1997 for all member countries: ANNEX III ... to pursue their efforts to conclude bilateral tax conventions ... with those member countries, and where appropriate with non-member countries, with which they have not yet entered into such conventions ... 12. At a practical level, DTAs are complex technical documents that provide an interface between two, often conflicting, tax systems. Despite their complexity, however, DTAs are generally favoured by all of the key stakeholder groups that are involved in cross-border economic activity: Taxpayers. A primary concern for any taxpayer contemplating engaging in commercial or employment activity in another jurisdiction is that they must comply with the tax and other legal obligations of two separate jurisdictions. This can be perplexing and obtaining professional advice or tax rulings can be costly and time consuming. Unique issues also arise from cross-border activities, ranging from complex matters such as transfer pricing disputes, to more mundane considerations such as whether taxes paid in the other jurisdiction are creditable against home jurisdiction tax. DTAs help alleviate many of these problems. They establish a framework for the taxation of cross- border activity, prohibit discriminatory taxation, and establish a low-cost mechanism for taxpayers to raise concerns if they have concerns that the DTA is not being correctly applied or interpreted. Investors. Investing across an international border always involves risk. Specific risks arise in respect of tax because of the inherent complexity of tax laws, which can lead to uncertainty as to the actual tax outcome. Tax laws can also change suddenly in some jurisdictions. DTAs assist investors by specifying the maximum rates of tax that can be applied to dividends, interest and royalties. These “headline” rates make it easier for investors to determine the after-tax returns on potential investments. The tax rates are also “locked in” by the DTA, which means that investors can make business decisions with greater confidence. To encourage greater inward investment, New Zealand has unilaterally reduced withholding taxes on certain returns from inbound investment. However, lowering tax rates in a bilateral treaty setting ensures that the rates are also reduced on a reciprocal basis by the DTA partner. This provides benefits to domestic investors. ANNEX III Governments. As double taxation distorts business decisions and generally hinders cross-border economic activity, most jurisdictions unilaterally relieve double taxation of their tax residents. For example, New Zealand tax legislation allows tax residents who derive foreign-sourced income, to credit the foreign tax paid against their New Zealand tax liability. However, DTAs provide more comprehensive relief from double taxation than is possible unilaterally and allow the cost of relieving double taxation to be shared. They do this by allocating taxing rights between the jurisdictions concerned. In addition, DTAs facilitate international cooperation between tax authorities. This is now a less significant role for DTAs than it once was, given that tax cooperation is now also provided for under a multilateral tax assistance treaty. 13. As DTAs are primarily concerned with taxation, they are negotiated and administered by Inland Revenue. Inland Revenue’s DTA negotiation programme seeks to strike a balance between updating and modernising existing DTAs with major trading and investment partners and entering into new agreements as opportunities arise. Generally, negotiations are prioritised on the basis of greatest benefit for New Zealand. Strategic and foreign policy considerations may be relevant to such prioritisation decisions. 14. New Zealand has recently negotiated a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the European Union (EU). DTAs with EU partner countries may help maximise the benefits of the FTA. New Zealand currently has DTAs with 13 of the 27 EU Member Countries, and the DTA with the Slovak Republic is one of several being progressed with the remaining 14. 15. The Slovak Republic is not a major trading and investment partner for New Zealand, though bilateral trade has increased significantly in recent years (albeit from a low base). While exports from New Zealand to the Slovak Republic were less than NZ$1m annually between 2010-2016, exports increased to between NZ$5m to NZ$9m more recently in 2017-2019. The total two-way trade between New Zealand and the Slovak Republic increased from around NZ$65- 85 million between 2014 and 2018, to around NZ$130m in both 2019 and 2020. Investment flows are considerably lower, less than NZ$1m per year in both directions for the same period. ANNEX III 16. There is potential for further growth, particularly if the DTA helps maximise the benefits of the EU FTA. The Slovak Republic is also a fellow small, open trading nation and, like New Zealand, a strong supporter of the multilateral system. The Slovak Republic’s membership in the OECD means that the OECD Council’s recommendation to pursue efforts to conclude bilateral DTAs with other member countries is relevant. 4. Advantages and disadvantages to New Zealand of the treaty entering into force and not entering into force 17. The Slovak DTA involves a trade-off between advantages and disadvantages to New Zealand. On balance, entering into the Slovak DTA is expected to be in New Zealand’s overall interests. Advantages of the treaty entering into force 18. The advantages to New Zealand of the Slovak DTA entering into force can be summarised as follows: • In concert with the recently negotiated EU FTA, the DTA can be expected to foster some forms of bilateral economic activity (such as services, trade and investment). This will benefit New Zealand in terms of employment and business opportunities and offshore earnings. • For New Zealand business interests, the DTA will reduce the cost of importing capital. • For investors in both jurisdictions, the DTA will reduce compliance costs and provide the certainty of low headline withholding tax rates, locked in by the DTA. • For investors, businesses and taxpayers from both jurisdictions, the DTA will provide safeguards such as a mutual agreement procedure, which will facilitate the resolution of tax disputes (including disputes in complex areas such as transfer pricing). ANNEX III • For taxpayers engaged in certain short-term income-earning activities in the other jurisdiction, the DTA will reduce compliance costs and provide cash- flow advantages by eliminating the need to pay tax in that jurisdiction and then claim that tax against their tax liability in their home jurisdiction. • For New Zealand, the DTA will provide an equitable framework for sharing the cost of relieving double taxation between the two jurisdictions. • In some circumstances, New Zealand will no longer need to provide credits for foreign tax paid. • A final advantage of the Slovak DTA is that New Zealand and the Slovak Republic both favour a greater focus on source taxation (as opposed to residence taxation). As a result, New Zealand was able to secure agreement on our key negotiating positions. The Slovak DTA also includes all of the key base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) model anti-abuse provisions. The Slovak DTA therefore represents a good precedent for New Zealand in future negotiations with other countries. Disadvantages of the treaty entering into force 19. As noted above, DTAs offer bilateral solutions to problems that are difficult or impossible to solve unilaterally. However, a potential downside to DTAs is that those solutions are then locked in place by the DTA and can be difficult and costly to change. This can create difficulties if DTA provisions need to be changed urgently. Practical experience indicates that in genuine cases, DTA partners are usually amenable to making necessary changes. However, in extreme cases, if the DTA partner were to refuse to cooperate, the DTA might need to be terminated. 20. A second general disadvantage of DTAs is that they typically give rise to an upfront revenue cost. This is because DTAs allocate taxing rights between the two jurisdictions and lower withholding tax rates on investment returns. The allocation of taxing rights means that New Zealand will lose the ability to tax some income streams to the extent that it could previously (this applies on a reciprocal basis). However, any upfront costs will be mitigated to the extent that ANNEX III the DTA fosters increased cross-border economic activity. Further, as noted below in section 8 “Costs to New Zealand of compliance with the treaty”, in the case of the Slovak Republic, the upfront revenue costs are expected to be negligible. 21. A third general disadvantage of DTAs is the potential for abuse, in particular, as regards “treaty shopping” or use of DTAs in tax planning techniques designed to reduce taxation in unintended ways. However, the Slovak DTA incorporates the key model anti-abuse provisions which have arisen out of the international BEPS work to provide protection against abuse. Advantages of the treaty not entering into force 22. Not bringing the Slovak DTA into force is an option. In that case, the disadvantages identified above will not arise. Disadvantages of the treaty not entering into force 23. If the Slovak DTA does not enter into force the possibilities for increased trade, investment and other economic activity, particularly those that may open as a consequence of the EU FTA, may not be maximised to their full potential. 5. Legal obligations which would be imposed on New Zealand by the treaty action, the position in respect of reservations to the treaty, and an outline of any dispute settlement mechanisms Summary of key legal obligations 24. DTAs do not impose requirements on taxpayers. The obligations DTAs impose only apply to the respective Governments, requiring both to restrict their taxing rights on a reciprocal basis. When income is derived from one country (the source jurisdiction) by a tax resident of the other country (the residence jurisdiction), the residence jurisdiction generally retains taxing rights under the DTA. The main impact of the DTA is to restrict the ability of the source jurisdiction to tax the income in certain circumstances. 25. The key allocation of taxing rights in the Slovak DTA is as follows: ANNEX III • Business profits of an enterprise will be taxable only in the jurisdiction in which the enterprise is resident, unless profits are derived through a permanent establishment in the source jurisdiction. In that case, the profits may also be taxed in the source jurisdiction (Article 7 refers). The term “permanent establishment” is generally defined in the Slovak DTA as meaning a fixed place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on. However, this general rule is supplemented by a number of clarifications and deeming rules which follow New Zealand’s preferred formula, and which will ensure that New Zealand can continue to impose tax on significant business activities such as natural resource exploration or exploitation (Article 5 refers). • Investment returns (dividends, interest and royalties) may generally be taxed in both jurisdictions. However, the amount of withholding tax that can be imposed by the source jurisdiction is limited to 5% for dividends if the dividend is paid to a company that directly owns at least 10% of the voting power of the company paying the dividends, 15% for all other dividends (Article 10 refers), and 10% for interest and royalties (Articles 11 and 12 refer). The limitation does not apply if the dividends, interest or royalties are derived in connection with a permanent establishment in the source jurisdiction. Article 11 of the Slovak DTA also contains an exemption for interest derived by certain government entities, provided the government entity does not directly or indirectly hold more than 10 per cent of the voting power in the payer of the interest. This is in line with New Zealand’s policy to provide sovereign immunity from tax only for passive investment activity, where the investment itself is not in competition with private investment. New Zealand’s DTA policy is that sovereign immunity from tax should not be available where the Government owns an active business to ensure the exemption cannot be used to strip profits out of New Zealand through interest payments. • Income from employment will be taxable only in the jurisdiction in which the employee is resident unless he or she is present in the source jurisdiction ANNEX III for more than six months in a twelve-month period or the employer is a resident of the source jurisdiction (or is non-resident but the employee’s remuneration is borne by a permanent establishment in the source jurisdiction). In those latter cases, the employment income may also be taxed in the source jurisdiction (Article 14 refers). • Pensions will generally be taxable only in the jurisdiction in which the recipient is resident (Article 17 refers). 26. A number of exceptions to the above rules also apply. These include: • Income from real property (referred to as “immovable property” in the Slovak DTA) will always be taxable in the jurisdiction where the property is situated (Articles 6 and 13 refer). • Profits of an enterprise from the operation of ships or aircraft in international traffic will be taxable only in the jurisdiction in which the enterprise is resident. However, profits from domestic carriage by ship or aircraft will always be taxable in the source jurisdiction (Articles 8 and 13 refer). • Directors’ fees will always be taxable in the jurisdiction in which the company paying the fees is resident (Article 15 refers). • Income from the activities of entertainers and sportspersons will generally be taxable in the source jurisdiction, regardless of whether the entertainer or sportsperson’s residence country also has a taxing right (Article 16 refers). If the visit is wholly or mainly supported by the public funds of either state, then it is taxable only in the residence country. • Salaries and wages for services to a Government of one jurisdiction will generally be exempt from tax in the other jurisdiction. (Article 18 refers.) 27. Where the allocation of taxing rights permits both jurisdictions to tax an item of income, the Slovak DTA will require New Zealand to relieve double taxation of its residents by allowing a credit for the tax paid in the Slovak Republic (Article 21 refers). This is consistent with the unilateral relief mechanism that ANNEX III already applies under New Zealand domestic law. The obligation also applies reciprocally, so the Slovak Republic must allow its residents a credit for New Zealand tax paid. 28. The non-discrimination provision also requires that New Zealand does not subject nationals of the Slovak Republic to a greater tax burden than New Zealand nationals would be subject to in the same circumstances, in particular with regard to residence (Article 22 refers). This requirement applies to both taxation and connected requirements. Additional non-discrimination rules apply with respect to permanent establishments, deductions and New Zealand companies that are wholly or partly owned or controlled by residents of the Slovak Republic. This provision does not apply to rules designed to prevent the avoidance or evasion of taxes. The non-discrimination obligations are reciprocal. 29. In addition to the above obligations, New Zealand will be required to comply with various administrative requirements imposed by the Slovak DTA. These are as follows: • Mutual agreement procedure. New Zealand must comply with the procedures for settling disputes set out in the mutual agreement procedure Article of the Slovak DTA (Article 23 refers). This is discussed below, in the section Dispute resolution. • Exchange of information. The Slovak DTA includes an Article that provides for the exchange of tax-related information between tax authorities, for the purpose of detecting and preventing tax evasion and tax avoidance (Article 24 refers). However, the Exchange of Information provisions in the DTA do not create any new legal obligations beyond those already applying under a multilateral tax assistance convention to which New Zealand and the Slovak Republic are already party. • Assistance in collection. The Slovak DTA includes an Article that provides that New Zealand shall lend assistance to the Slovak Republic in the collection of their revenue taxes. However, the Assistance in Collection provisions in the DTA do not create any new legal obligations beyond those ANNEX III already applying under a multilateral tax assistance convention to which New Zealand and the Slovak Republic are already party. Dispute resolution 30. The Slovak DTA establishes a “mutual agreement procedure” for resolving disputes. Under this procedure, a taxpayer who considers that they have been taxed incorrectly under the DTA, including in transfer pricing cases, can approach their local tax authority under Article 23 to invoke a mutual agreement procedure. If the tax authority considers the case to be justified, and is unable to resolve the case through its own actions, it must approach the tax authority of the other jurisdiction to seek a bilateral resolution. This bipartisan approach is particularly appropriate in the DTA context because a single issue will generally affect a person’s tax position in both jurisdictions. Note that under the mutual agreement procedure the two sides are only obliged to “endeavour” to reach resolution. However, the taxpayer remains free to pursue a case through the Courts (including if they do not agree with the decision reached under the mutual agreement procedure). 31. The mutual agreement procedure also authorises the tax authorities of the two jurisdictions to collectively resolve any difficulties or doubts about the correct interpretation or application of the Slovak DTA. Reservations 32. The Slovak DTA does not allow parties to make reservations upon ratification. Reservations typically only feature in multilateral treaties. When permitted, they effectively enable a party to specify which treaty obligations they are committing to. However, reservations typically do not feature in bilateral treaties like the Slovak DTA. 6. Measures which the Government could or should adopt to implement the treaty action, including specific reference to implementing legislation 33. Subject to the successful completion of the Parliamentary treaty examination process, the Slovak DTA will be incorporated into New Zealand legislation by ANNEX III an Order in Council made pursuant to section BH 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Section BH 1 provides for the giving of overriding effect to DTAs by Order in Council. However, the override relates only to tax matters, and only the Inland Revenue Acts, the Official Information Act 1982 and the Privacy Act 1993 may be overridden. 34. The override of the Inland Revenue Acts is necessary to give effect to the core provisions of the Slovak DTA, which provide relief from tax that would otherwise be imposed under domestic law. The override of the Official Information Act 1982 is necessary to ensure that confidential communications with the other jurisdiction do not have to be disclosed. The override of the Privacy Act 1993 is necessary to ensure that information regarding natural persons can be exchanged according to the terms of the DTA. 35. Article 28 of the Slovak DTA provides for the agreement to be brought into force through an exchange of diplomatic notes between the Contracting States. The Slovak DTA will enter into force on the first day of the third month following the date of receipt of the later diplomatic note. New Zealand will be able to notify the Slovak Republic that all procedures required by domestic law have been completed once the Order in Council has entered into force, which will be 28 days after its publication in the New Zealand Gazette. 36. Thereafter, the provisions of the Slovak DTA will have effect from various dates, according to the terms of the DTA. In New Zealand, the provisions relating to withholding taxes will take effect on the first day of January of the calendar year following the year in which the DTA enters into force. The provisions relating to other taxes will have effect for income years beginning on or after 1 April next following the date on which the DTA enters into force. 37. As an alternative to the above Order in Council mechanism, the Slovak DTA could be given legislative effect by means of the enactment of a dedicated statute. However, this option would unnecessarily increase the amount of primary tax legislation required and is not preferred. ANNEX III 7. Economic, social, cultural and environmental costs and effects of the treaty action 38. As noted elsewhere in this National Interest Analysis, the overall economic effects of the Slovak DTA are expected to be favourable to New Zealand. This is because the Slovak DTA can be expected to encourage growth in trade and investment between New Zealand and the Slovak Republic. It is not possible to quantify the economic benefits but, as noted below, the costs of entering into the DTA are expected to be negligible, and overall the benefits of the Slovak DTA are expected to outweigh the costs. 39. No social, cultural or environmental effects are anticipated. 8. Costs to New Zealand of compliance with the treaty 40. DTAs constrain New Zealand from taxing certain income and limit the rate at which tax on dividends, royalties and interest can be imposed, and therefore typically can be expected, prima facie, to result in some reduction of New Zealand tax. 41. This potential upfront revenue cost is typically offset by other factors. For example, there will be an offsetting effect to the New Zealand tax base from the reduction of tax in the Slovak Republic, and the reduced need for New Zealand to allow foreign tax credits. There will also be some revenue gains from the expected reduction in tax evasion and tax avoidance resulting from the DTA exchange of information provisions. 42. Data limitations prevent officials from accurately estimating the actual revenue cost of the Slovak DTA. However, due to the limited existing trade and investment flows between the Slovak Republic and New Zealand, any reduction of New Zealand tax is expected to be negligible. 43. In general, as discussed above, DTAs are also expected to give rise to favourable economic benefits, such as increased cross-border services, trade and investment. Again, officials cannot quantify the expected economic benefits of the Slovak DTA but, overall, the benefits are expected to outweigh the costs. ANNEX III 44. Compliance costs for New Zealand businesses are expected to be reduced under the Slovak DTA. 9. Completed or proposed consultation with the community and parties interested in the treaty action 45. The Treasury and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade were consulted about the content of this extended National Interest Analysis. 46. No specific private sector consultation was undertaken. Consistent with international practice, officials generally do not consult on the content of tax treaties. With the exception of a few countries, most jurisdictions do not make their negotiating models public and, therefore, negotiations are also considered to be confidential. 47. The Government sets New Zealand’s strategic priorities in relation to tax treaties and New Zealand’s negotiating model reflects these priorities. 48. New Zealand’s negotiating model is also based on a model tax convention published by the OECD (the OECD Model Tax Convention). As issues are discussed and considered for inclusion in the update to the OECD Model Tax Convention, the OECD seeks feedback from the public, including the OECD’s Business and Industry Advisory Committee (BIAC) which consists of business representatives from around the world. Accordingly, while officials have not specifically consulted the private sector on the Slovak DTA, feedback has been provided (including by interested parties from New Zealand) on the provisions on which New Zealand’s negotiating model is based. 49. There is also a long-standing informal practice whereby practitioners contact Inland Revenue regarding specific issues with New Zealand’s existing DTAs as they arise. This feedback is also used to improve New Zealand’s negotiating model and potentially inform future negotiations. 10. Subsequent protocols and/or amendments to the treaty and their likely effects 50. No further amendments are anticipated at this time. New Zealand will consider future amendments on a case-by-case basis. Any amendments to the Slovak ANNEX III DTA will be subject to the normal domestic approvals and procedures. While there is no amendment clause in the Slovak DTA, amendment would be subject to the usual requirements of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. 51. An accompanying Protocol forms an integral part of the Slovak DTA and was signed at the same time as the main DTA text. Countries often prefer clarifying provisions and departures from their standard DTA model to be located in an accompanying Protocol. 52. While there is no formal review planned for the Slovak DTA, the competent authorities for each country remain in contact to resolve any interpretation and application issues. In addition, taxpayers and practitioners are able to raise such issues with the competent authorities. In the case of New Zealand, the Commissioner of Inland Revenue is the competent authority and the appropriate contact details can be found on the Inland Revenue website. 11. Withdrawal or denunciation provision in the treaty 53. Under Article 29 of the Slovak DTA, after the expiry of five years from the date of entry into force, either party may terminate the agreement by giving written notice of termination through diplomatic channels. The termination would take effect: • for withholding taxes, for amounts paid on or after the first day of January in the calendar year following the receipt of the notice of termination; and • for other taxes, for income years beginning on or after 1 April in the calendar year following the receipt of notice of termination. 54. Article 29 generally follows the approach used in New Zealand’s other DTAs. 12. Agency disclosure statement 55. Inland Revenue is solely responsible for the analysis and advice set out in this extended National Interest Analysis, except as otherwise explicitly indicated. This analysis and advice has been produced for the purpose of informing final decisions to proceed with a policy change to be taken by or on behalf of Cabinet. ANNEX III 56. Inland Revenue has analysed the issue of implementing the Slovak DTA, and the legislative and regulatory proposals arising from that implementation. As part of that process, Inland Revenue considered the option of not entering into the DTA. Inland Revenue is of the view that there are no significant constraints, caveats or uncertainties concerning the regulatory analysis. There are no areas of incompatibility with the “Government expectations for good regulatory practice”. 57. The allocation of taxing rights under the Slovak DTA is consistent with the New Zealand negotiating model, which in turn is based on the OECD’s Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital. The revenue cost to New Zealand as a result of the allocation of taxing rights under the DTA is expected to be negligible, given the limited existing trade and investment flows between New Zealand and the Slovak Republic. 58. If the Slovak DTA is entered into, officials expect compliance costs will decrease, administration costs will increase (but only at the margins), and bilateral trade and investment may increase. However, due to data limitations and, particularly in the case of bilateral trade and investment, uncertainty about behavioural responses, officials are unable to quantify the impacts, although they are likely to be minor or small. 59. The Treasury and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade have been consulted about the content of this extended NIA. However, consistent with standard international practice, no wider consultation was undertaken. 60. Inland Revenue is also constrained in terms of its ability to monitor the impact of entering into the new DTA to determine whether the impacts anticipated, such as reductions in evasion and avoidance activity and compliance costs, actually materialise. 61. Inland Revenue’s view is that the policy options considered will not impose additional costs on business interests; nor impair private property rights, market competition, or the incentives for business to innovate and invest; nor override fundamental common law principles. ANNEX III Prepared by: Inland Revenue Department Date: 4 July 2022