\[UNCLASSIFIED\] Navigational changes in myIR Where it was Where you go now Description Settings link Manage my profile link To edit your name/email address or to create new logons, manage access to the agency’s own account. Alerts tab specific to your logon (unread web messages), view your activity Correspondence tab>Messages Manage my profile link>I want to>Communicating with IR: View messages and Send a message link Send and view secure web messages for your logon. There will also be an alert in the alerts tab if there are any unread messages. Settings>Manage client subscriptions Intermediary centre> Manage subscriptions To subscribe to clients and receive alerts for filing, paying and letters from IR Customer tab No longer applicable There is no longer a workspace, you can access clients using Favourites and Alerts in the Intermediary centre or the enhanced search tool Accounts tab No longer applicable There is no longer a workspace, you can access clients using Favourites, Alerts in the Intermediary centre or the enhanced search tool Tax preparer tab Intermediary centre link To access agency and client functions that were on the Tax preparer tab Correspondence tab >unread letters: View letters Intermediary centre>View messages and View letters links or Intermediary centre> All client mail report To view subscribed client letters, agency letters (if applicable) and web messages, including secure mail (view, reply, send) Client>Correspondence tab> Unread letters: View letters Client>I want to>View messages and View letters links To see all letters from IR to the client/redirected to intermediary. View, reply, send secure web message Submitted tab>Processed: View, more Intermediary centre> Search submissions link To see all draft, processing and processed submissions sent by your logon Client>Submitted tab Client>I want to>Search submissions link To see all drafts (including draft returns saved by the client or any other agency logon), processing and processed submissions for this client \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Where it was Where you go now Description Tax preparer tab>Client access Home>Search tab (IR logo to go home) To find a linked client to access by IRD number, Customer Identifier or Name (new) Client>Income tax tile>Account registration details>More>Additional client attributes Client>Income tax panel> More...>View account registration details link To find balance date, filing frequency, who mail is being issued to, whether they're a paper filer, refund bank account and customer type/sub type e.g. qualifying company, look through company Client>Income tax tile>Periods tab>Select period link>more tab Client> Income tax panel More...>Additional period details link>Period For income tax to find Excess imputation, Losses to carry forward, EOT status, intention to use tax pooling and ICA closing balance for companies Client>Income tax tile>View details>Click year ‘Show history’ Client>Income tax panel More...>View provisional tax To see current and previous provisional tax assessments and methods Client>Income tax tile>Earning summary: View details>I want to... Print income details Client>Income tax panel More...>Print proof of income or Print income details To print income summary/income details (PDF) Client>Income tax tile>Current income types>Manage Client>Income tax panel>More...>My income sources To manage income sources (add and remove) Client Income tax tile>Earning summary: View details>I want to... Update investment percentage Client>Income tax panel More...>Update investment percentage To change the split of joint investment income eg. bank interest for joint accounts Client>Account tile>Periods tab Client>Account>Returns and transactions link To see list of periods and links to file returns Client>Account>Periods tab>Period date link>Transaction details Client>Account panel: Returns and transactions>Period date link To see transactions and navigate between transaction period displays Client>Account>Periods tab>Period date link>I want to..>File or amend return Client>Account panel: More..>File or amend return View or amend already filed returns. You can also file returns and view overdue returns. How to file a previous months Employment information return Client>Account panel:More..File or amend return To find file return function for previous periods. The account panel defaults to the current month. \[UNCLASSIFIED\] What’s New New Intermediary centre Access to agency and client functions. From the home screen or within a client – top right corner. New Last viewed Quick access back into the last client you were in New Favourites tab Allows you to easily access up to 50 clients you have saved as a favourite. New Favourites tab>Manage favourites Allows you to add/remove clients from your favourites list. If you’re not already subscribed to the clients, you’ll need to access the client in that session first for them to show on the list. New Search tab Quick access to your clients from the homepage. You can search using your client’s name. At ID type click on the arrow to change search from IRD no to name or customer identifier. New History tab Quick access to the last 10 clients you have accessed New Intermediary centre>Alerts tab Consolidated view of alerts for all subscribed clients and accounts. New Intermediary centre>Alerts tab> dismissed alerts Consolidated view of alerts dismissed for subscribed clients. Can be accessed and restored. New Client>Alerts tab Alerts will show on each client even if you are not subscribed. New Client> Alerts tab> View dismissed alerts Dismissed alerts on each client can be accessed and restored. Account Summary page Account panels Mini dashboards providing upfront information about the account, alerts for each account type and quick links.