UNCLASSIFIED Supporting our Māori Community through COVID-19 Kia ora koutou In these extraordinary circumstances, ensuring people get their entitlements, including their COVID-19 relief is our top priority. Contacting us All our front office services remain closed and most of our staff are working from home. The most effective way to contact us is to send us a message in myIR. We are still working on all critical matters related to tax entitlements and payment obligations. Kaitakawaenga Māori Our Kaitakawaenga Māori deliver our services in a whānau, hapū and iwi centric way to ensure our Māori customers have the tools to self-manage their tax affairs whether they are an individual, or in business. During Alert Level 2, we can arrange over the phone advisories or virtual meetings if you have the technology. We understand this is a very different way of operating but we want to maintain kanohi ki te kanohi as far as possible. To find out more and to request support from our Kaitakawaenga Māori go to ird.govt.nz/kaitakawaenga-maori COVID-19 Small Business Cashflow (Loan) Scheme (SBCS) Overview To be eligible for the SBCS loan a business or organisation must have 50 or fewer full-time equivalent employees and be eligible for the Wage Subsidy Scheme. They must also have a sound plan to be viable and ongoing, and hold information on file to verify this. • Applications will be open from 12 May 2020 up to and including 12 June 2020. Most will receive funds within 5 working days. • We'll administer the payments and repayments of this scheme. Businesses should speak with their financial advisors before taking this loan. • The loan has a five-year term. • The annual interest rate will be 3% beginning from the date of the loan being provided. Interest will not be charged if the loan is fully paid back within one year. Repayments are not compulsory in the first 24 months. • In most cases, businesses will be entitled to a loan amount of $10,000 plus $1,800 per full-time equivalent employee, to a maximum of $100,000. Details about eligibility criteria and applying for the loan can be found at ird.govt.nz/business-loan UNCLASSIFIED Wage subsidy and leave payment schemes The Ministry of Social Development administer the wage subsidy and leave payment scheme. To find out more about these go to workandincome.govt.nz/covid19support We do not administer these schemes. Support for whānau Working for Families Working for Families payments are for families with dependent children aged 18 or under. Entitlements are based on your yearly family income and family circumstances. If you do not currently receive Working for Families payments, you can check if you're eligible and apply online at ird.govt.nz/working-for-families If you are working fewer hours or have had to stop working due to COVID-19, your entitlement may have changed. You can re-estimate your family income in myIR and we will recalculate your entitlement. From 1 July 2020, the in-work tax credit (IWTC) will be available to all families who are not receiving an income tested benefit or student allowance and have some income from paid work each week. There will no longer be a minimum number of hours required to get the IWTC payment. This change will be automatic for those already receiving the IWTC. Child Support If you're unable to make child support payments by the due date, please contact us. If you expect your income to be at least 15% less than the income used to work out your current child support assessment, you may be able to reduce your child support assessment by estimating your income. You can cancel or change an estimate in myIR, by filling in a form, or contact us on 0800 221 221 from New Zealand, 1800 504 042 from Australia, or +64 9 984 2537 from the rest of the world. The Child support - estimating your income - IR151 guide tells you what you need to know about estimating your income, and the following forms are needed to cancel or change an estimate: • Estimate of income for child support assessment - IR104 • Cancellation of child support income estimation - IR111. If you need a form you can call 0800 257 773 to order one, or download it from our website ird.govt.nz/forms-guides Income tax assessments Your income tax assessment will be automatically calculated between mid-May to July if we have all your income information for the tax year (1 April 2019 to 31 March 2020). If you have other income such as joint bank interest or expenses to claim against your income, you will receive a Request for more information – income tax assessment and will have 45 days to confirm the information we hold. Your assessment will show if you are due a refund or have tax to pay. Please check your income tax assessment and contact us if there are any changes. If you received income over $200 with no tax deducted, you will need to file an Individual UNCLASSIFIED tax return - IR3 by 7 July 2020 (or 31 March 2021 if you have a Tax Agent). You can request an extension of time if you are unable to meet the due date. We issue refunds automatically to your bank account, so it is important you keep your details up to date. You can update your bank account information in myIR or by calling us. If you're registered for voice ID, there's no waiting time, you can update your details using self- service. Student loan repayments You can now apply to reduce the loan payments deducted from your salary or wages if you are studying full-time, earning under the annual repayment threshold or the deductions are putting you into hardship. You can also apply in myIR for relief or an instalment arrangement for amounts that are outstanding. More information is available on our website at ird.govt.nz/sl-hardship KiwiSaver contributions If you're having trouble contributing to your KiwiSaver you can reduce your contribution with your employer or KiwiSaver provider, or take a savings break from 3 months to 1 year. If you've been in KiwiSaver less than a year you'll need to provide evidence of hardship and we'll work with you to decide the right length of time for a savings break. You can apply in myIR. If you are suffering significant financial hardship you may be eligible to withdraw your KiwiSaver funds early. More information on all these options is available on our website at ird.govt.nz/covid19 Donation Tax Credits You can now claim your donation tax credits in myIR. We do not send you a paper form to complete. Your receipts can be electronic receipts, photos or scans of paper receipts. Filing your receipts in myIR means you'll receive your refund much sooner. To find out how to submit donation receipts go to ird.govt.nz/donations Thank you Thank you for your patience in what has been a difficult time for all New Zealanders. Ngā mihi