IN CONFIDENCE Payday Filing myIR file upload services Business Use Cases Employee Details, Employment Information and KiwiSaver details Date: 10 th Dec 2019 Version: V2.00 FINAL 2 IN CONFIDENCE Contents Payday filing – myIR File upload business use cases .................................................. 3 How to use this document ............................................................................................ 3 Summary of payday filing use cases using myIR ............................................................. 3 Use Case 01: First time employee – enrol in KiwiSaver, file employee details, file employment information .............................................................................................. 4 Use Case 02: New employee (Existing KS member)– file employee details, file employment information ................................................................................................................ 7 Use Case 03 : Existing employees - File employment information on payday (or within two days of payday) ......................................................................................................... 10 Use Case 04 : Existing employee (opt out of Kiwisaver) - file employment information ..... 12 Use Case 05 : Amend previously filed employment information ...................................... 14 Use Case 06 : Departing employee - file employee details, file employment information ... 16 3 IN CONFIDENCE Payday filing – myIR File upload business use cases A selection of use cases relevant to payday filing business outcomes are provided on this document. They do not comprise a comprehensive list of all required business outcomes, nor are they prescriptive or intended to inhibit software innovation in any way How to use this document The payday filing business use cases show sequences of IR’s myIR file upload services and online forms that can be used to achieve specific business outcomes. The myIR file upload services that can be used include: • KiwiSaver – file upload service or online form • Employee details - file upload service or online form • Employment information - file upload service or online form Summary of payday filing use cases using myIR # Payday Filing use cases Employee Details Employment Information New Amend Departing File Amend 1 First time employee – file employee details (including KiwiSaver enrolment), file employment information 1 2 2 New employee (Existing KS member) – file employee details, file employment information 1 2 3 Existing employee - File employment information on payday (or within two days of payday) 1 4 Existing employee – (opt out of Kiwisaver) – file employee details, file employment information 1 2 5 Existing employee - Amend previously filed employment information 1 6 Departing employee - file employee details, file employment information 1 2 4 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 01: First time employee – enrol in KiwiSaver, file employee details, file employment information Employer files details for first time employee myIR Services Payer Payroll Software Payday Period 5. Confirm Employee Details 6. Output Employee Details file Before next payday End Start 8. Confirm Employee Details filing is accepted 7. Upload Employee Details file 9. Confirm Employment Information details 10. Output Employee Information file 12. Confirm Employee Information filing is accepted 11. Upload Employment Information file On payday 5 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 01 details – File employee details for first time employee Primary actor User Secondary actors Payroll software myIR Employee Details file transfer service myIR Employment information file transfer service Note the myIR KiwiSaver file upload service in no longer used Description An employer’s paycycle is monthly on the 25 th of each month. A new employee starts employment on the 26 th of the month and informs the employee they have never enrolled with KiwiSaver. The new employee is required to be automatically enrolled into KiwiSaver on starting employment. The employer submits the Employee Details (which includes KiwiSaver enrolment details) and on the first payday the Employment Information for all employees paid on that day. Pre-conditions User is authenticated, authorised and logged-in to myIR User is enrolled for Payroll returns account User is registered for PAYE. Post-conditions User’s request is accepted and responded to Constraints Files must conform to the file formats for the • myIR Employee Details file transfer service • myIR Employment information file transfer service Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow On the next payday 1.1 User inputs the Employee Details including the start date, all tax codes, KiwiSaver eligibility and confirming the KiwiSaver status of ‘auto-enrol’ for the employee using the payroll software. 1.2 User uploads the Employee Details file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 1.3 myIR responds with confirmation that the Employee Details file has been submitted successfully. On the next payday 1.4 User inputs the Employment Information for all employees using the payroll software. 1.5 User uploads the Employment Information file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 1.6 myIR responds with confirmation that the Employment Information file has been submitted successfully. 1.7 Use Case Ends. 2. Exception flow – User is not registered for service 2.1 User is not registered for ‘Payroll returns’ account in myIR. 6 IN CONFIDENCE 2.2 User logs into myIR and is not able to access the Payroll returns account to view access the Employee Details or Employment Information file transfer services 2.3 Use Case Ends. 3. Exception Flow – paydate is not a date that exists 3.1 User inputs the Employment Information for all employees using the payroll software. 3.2 User uploads the Employment Information file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 3.3 myIR responds with an error message that the paydate is not a date that exists e.g. 31 st September, 31 st November etc. 3.4 Use case ends. 7 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 02: New employee (Existing KS member)– file employee details, file employment information Employer files details for new employee (existing KiwiSaver member) myIR Services Payer Payroll Software Payday Period 1. Confirm Employee Details 2. Output Employee Details file Before next payday End Start 4. Confirm Employee Details filing is accepted 3. Upload Employee Details file 5. Confirm Employment Information details 6. Output Employee Information file 11. Confirm Employee Information filing is accepted 7. Upload Employment Information file On payday 8 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 02 details - File employee details for new employee (active KiwiSaver member) Primary actor User Secondary actors Payroll software myIR Employee Details file transfer service myIR Employment information file transfer service Description An employer’s paycycle is twice monthly on the 15 th and 25 th of each month. A new employee starts employment on the 10 th of the month and informs the employee they are an existing KiwiSaver member. The new employee is required to be automatically enrolled into KiwiSaver on starting employment. The employer submits Employee Details for the new employee and on the first payday the Employment Information for all employees paid on that day. Pre-conditions User is authenticated, authorised and logged-in to myIR User is enrolled for Payroll returns account User is registered for PAYE. Post-conditions User’s request is accepted and responded to Constraints Files must conform to the file formats for the • myIR Employee Details file transfer service • myIR Employment information file transfer service Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow 1.1 User inputs the Employee Details including the start date, all tax codes and confirming the KiwiSaver status of ‘existing KiwiSaver member’ for the employee using the payroll software. 1.2 User uploads the Employee Details file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 1.3 myIR responds with confirmation that the Employee Details file has been submitted successfully. On the next payday 1.4 User inputs the Employment Information for all employees using the payroll software. 1.5 User uploads the Employment Information file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 1.6 myIR responds with confirmation that the Employment Information file has been submitted successfully. 1.7 Use case ends. 2. Exception flow – User is not registered for service 2.1 User is not registered for ‘Payroll returns’ account in myIR. 2.2 User is not able to access the KiwiSaver, Employee Details or Employment Information file transfer services 2.3 Use Case Ends. 9 IN CONFIDENCE 3. Exception Flow – paydate is not a date that exists 3.1 User inputs the Employment Information for all employees using the payroll software. 3.2 User uploads the Employment Information file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 3.3 myIR responds with an error message that the paydate is not a date that exists e.g. 31 st September, 31 st November etc. 3.4 Use case ends. 10 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 03 : Existing employees - File employment information on payday (or within two days of payday) Employer files employment information for existing employee myIR Services Payer Payroll Software Payday Period End Start 1. Confirm Employment Information details 2. Output Employee Information file 4. Confirm Employee Information filing is accepted 3. Upload Employment Information file On payday (or before 2 days afterwards) 11 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 03 details - Existing employees - File employment information on payday (or within two days of payday) Primary actor User Secondary actors Payroll software myIR Employment information file transfer service Description An employer’s paycycle is twice monthly on the 15 th and 25 th of each month. A recently joined employee starts work on the 18 th of the month. On the next payday (25 th of the month) the employer includes the recently joined employee’s payday details as part of the Employment Information for all employees paid on that day. Pre-conditions User is authenticated, authorised and logged-in to myIR User is enrolled for Payroll returns account User is registered for PAYE. Post-conditions User’s request is accepted and responded to Constraints Files must conform to the file formats for the • myIR KiwiSaver file upload service • myIR Employment information file transfer service Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow On the next payday 1.1 User inputs the Employment Information for all employees using the payroll software. 1.2 User uploads the Employment Information file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 1.3 myIR responds with confirmation that the Employment Information file has been submitted successfully. 1.4 Use case ends. 2. Exception flow – User is not registered for service 2.1 User is not registered for ‘Payroll returns’ account in myIR. 2.2 User logs into myIR and is not able to access the Payroll returns account to access the KiwiSaver, Employee Details or Employment Information file transfer services 2.3 Use Case Ends. 3. Exception Flow – paydate is not a date that exists 3.1 User inputs the Employment Information for all employees using the payroll software. 3.2 User uploads the Employment Information file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 3.3 myIR responds with an error message that the paydate is not a date that exists e.g. 31 st September, 31 st November etc. 3.4 Use case ends. 12 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 04 : Existing employee (opt out of Kiwisaver) - file employment information Employer files employment information for existing employee (Opt out of KiwiSaver) myIR Services Payer Payroll Software Payday Period 2. Confirm KiwiSaver optout details 3. Output Employee details file 4. Confirm KiwiSaver opt out details are accepted End Start 3. Upload KiwiSaver opt out details 5. Confirm Employment Information details 6. Output Employee Information file 8. Confirm Employee Information filing is accepted 7. Upload Employment Information file On payday 1. Employee confirms Opt out (between 12 days and 3 months of employment) 13 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 04 details- Existing employee (opt out of Kiwisaver) - file employment information Primary actor User Secondary actors Payroll software myIR Employee Details file transfer service myIR Employment information file transfer service Note the myIR KiwiSaver file upload service in no longer used Description An employer’s paycycle is twice monthly on the 15 th and 25 th of each month. A recently joined employee informs the employer they are opting out of Kiwisaver and this is after 12 days of working for the employer and less than 56 days. The employer submits the Employee details file that includes the opt out. On the next payday the Employment Information for all employees paid on that day. The employee who has opted out of KiwiSaver has no KS contributions deducted. Pre-conditions User is authenticated, authorised and logged-in to myIR User is enrolled for Payroll returns account User is registered for PAYE. Post-conditions User’s request is accepted and responded to Constraints Files must conform to the file formats for the • myIR Employee Details file transfer service • myIR Employment information file transfer service Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow 1.1 User inputs the KiwiSaver optout details using the payroll software 1.2 User uploads the Employee details file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 1.3 myIR responds with confirmation that the Employee details file has been submitted successfully. On the next payday 1.4 User inputs the Employment Information for all employees using the payroll software. 1.5 User uploads the Employment Information file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 1.6 myIR responds with confirmation that the Employment Information file has been submitted successfully. 1.7 Use case ends. 2. Exception Flow – paydate is not a date that exists 3.1 The paydate is not a date that exists e.g. 31 st September, 31 st November etc. 3.2 myIR responds an error message that the paydate is not correct. 3.3 Use case ends. 14 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 05 : Amend previously filed employment information Employer files employment information amendment for existing employee myIR Services Payer Payroll Software Payday Period End Start 1. Amend previously filed Employment Information details 2. Output Employee Information Amendment file 4. Confirm Employee Information Amendment filing is accepted 3. Upload Employment Informa tion Amendment file After payday 15 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 05 details - Amend previously filed employment information Primary actor User Secondary Actor Payroll software myIR Employment Information Amendments file transfer service Description User becomes aware that previously filed Employment Information for a specific paydate is incorrect (eg employee paye amounts or tax codes are incorrect. User submits an amendment to the Employment Information for the a specific paydate. Pre-Conditions User is authenticated, authorised and logged-in to myIR User is enrolled for Payroll returns account User is registered for PAYE. Post-Conditions User’s request is accepted and responded to Constraints Files must conform to the file formats for the • myIR Employment Information Amendments file transfer service Use Case Scenarios 1. Normal Flow 1.1 User inputs amendments to the Employment Information for employees using the payroll software. 1.2 User uploads the Employment Information amendments file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 1.3 myIR responds with confirmation that the Employment Information file has been submitted successfully. 1.4 Use case ends. 2. Exception Flow – User is not registered for service 2.1 User is not registered for ‘Payroll returns’ account in myIR. 2.2 User logs into myIR and is not able to access the Payroll returns account to view the Employment Information file transfer service via the file return ot file transfer link in myIR 2.3 Use case ends. 16 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 06 : Departing employee - file employee details, file employment information Employer files details for departing employee myIR Services Payer Payroll Software Payday Period 1. Confirm departing Employee Details 2. Output Employee Details file Before next payday End Start 4. Confirm Employee Details filing is accepted 3. Upload Employee Details file 5. Confirm Employment Information details 6. Output Employee Information file 11. Confirm Employee Information filing is accepted 7. Upload Employment Information file On payday 17 IN CONFIDENCE Use Case 06 details - Departing employee - file employee details, file employment information Primary actor User Secondary actors Payroll software myIR Employee Details file transfer service myIR Employment information file transfer service Description An employer’s paycycle is twice monthly on the 15 th and 25 th of each month. An existing employee confirms they are finishing employment on the 30 th of the month. The employer submits Employee Details for the departing employee and on the last payday of the month the Employment Information for all employees paid on that day including a final pay for the departing employee. Pre-conditions User is authenticated, authorised and logged-in to myIR User is enrolled for Payroll returns account User is registered for PAYE. Post-conditions User’s request is accepted and responded to Constraints Files must conform to the file formats for the • myIR Employee Details file transfer service • myIR Employment information file transfer service Use case scenarios 1. Normal flow 1.1 User inputs the Employee Details including the start date, finish date, all tax codes, KiwiSaver status for the departing employee using the payroll software. 1.2 User uploads the Employee Details file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 1.3 myIR responds with confirmation that the Employee Details file has been submitted successfully. On the next payday 1.4 User inputs the Employment Information for all employees using the payroll software including the final payday for the departing employee. 1.5 User uploads the Employment Information file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 1.6 myIR responds with confirmation that the Employment Information file has been submitted successfully. 1.7 Use case ends. 2. Exception Flow – paydate is not a date that exists 2.1 User inputs the Employment Information for all employees using the payroll software. 2.2 User uploads the Employment Information file to myIR under the payroll returns account. 2.3 myIR responds with an error message that the paydate is not a date that exists e.g. 31st September, 31st November etc. 2.4 Use case ends.