(IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Inland Revenue Payday Filing File Upload Specification 1 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 This document is for Payday filing through myIR and is supported by the Payroll Calculations & Business Rules Specification 2025 Date: 02/04/2024 UNCLASSIFIED (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 2 Contents 1 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3 1.1 Caveats ...................................................................................................................... 3 1.2 Intended audience ....................................................................................................... 3 1.3 Supporting information ................................................................................................. 3 1.4 Change ....................................................................................................................... 4 1.5 Disclaimer ................................................................................................................... 4 2 Electronic Filing Requirements ................................................................................... 5 2.1 Network connectivity .................................................................................................... 5 2.2 Operating systems ....................................................................................................... 5 2.3 Supported web browsers ............................................................................................... 5 2.4 Messages and validations in myIR .................................................................................. 5 3 Payday Filing .............................................................................................................. 7 3.1 Employee Details Filing ................................................................................................. 7 3.2 Employee Details CSV File specifications ......................................................................... 7 3.3 Employee Details Excel File specification ....................................................................... 15 3.4 Employer Information Filing ........................................................................................ 21 3.5 EI Amendments File Specifications ............................................................................... 34 4 Kiwisaver Online Forms ................................................................................................50 4.1 KiwiSaver Employment Details Form (KS1).................................................................... 50 5 Appendix ......................................................................................................................51 5.1 myIR format and layout .............................................................................................. 51 5.2 Pay Cycle, Paydate, Pay Period..................................................................................... 53 5.3 Table of Tax Codes as at 1 April 2024 ........................................................................... 55 5.4 Table of Countries ...................................................................................................... 55 5.5 Table of Unit Types ..................................................................................................... 63 5.6 Table of Employee Titles .............................................................................................. 64 5.7 KiwiSaver Status Codes .............................................................................................. 65 5.8 Change Log .............................................................................................................. 66 (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 3 1 Introduction The Taxation (Annual Rates 2017-18 Employment and Investment Income and Remedial Matters) Act 2018 requires employers to file employee income and deduction information on a payday basis to Inland Revenue (IR). IR offers file upload services that give employers, tax agents, payroll bureaus and payroll intermediaries secure and convenient methods of filing employment information online. This document provides the detailed specifications for payday filing through the file upload process through MyIR. This process has been available from mid-April 2018. As of 1 st April 2019, payday filing is compulsory, and employer monthly schedule filing is no longer available. Note: Employers will still be able to upload their final EMS and make amendments to EMSs for prior to 1 st April 2019 on or after the 1 st April 2019. 1.1 Caveats Whilst every reasonable attempt has been made to ensure legislation has been correctly interpreted, this document is intended as a technical interface specification only. If you have an enquiry in relation to tax technical matters, please contact us either by: • sending us a secure e-mail through myIR • writing us a letter • calling us on 0800 377 772 (+64 9 952 5912 for overseas) between 8:00am and 6:00pm Monday to Friday If you need to contact Corporate services, please phone 0800 443 773 between 8.00am – 4.00pm Monday to Friday only, or +64 4 831 2286 for overseas calls. Any updates of this specification can be found at the following link: https://www.ird.govt.nz/digital-service-providers/services-catalogue/returns- andhttps://www.ird.govt.nz/digital-service-providers/services-catalogue/returns-and- information/payday-filing/payday-filing-through-file-upload-servicesinformation/payday- filing/payday-filing-through-file-upload-services 1.2 Intended audience This document provides a mechanism for external parties to validate the record formats required by IR for payday filing. 1.3 Supporting information This document is based upon information gathered from; • Payroll Calculations & Business Rules Specification • Payday filing business use cases • IR335 Employers Guide • Inland Revenue’s online PAYE Calculator • IR341 Four-weekly and monthly PAYE deduction tables • IR340 Weekly and fortnightly PAYE deduction tables • KS4 KiwiSaver Employer Guide (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 4 1.4 Change A change log will be kept of all changes to this document (see Appendix 5.8) 1.5 Disclaimer The example test files and myIR test screen examples shown were created specifically for this document, and are to illustrate what is expected and what will display to customers. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 5 2 Electronic Filing Requirements The myIR system enables employers, tax agents, payroll bureaus, payroll intermediaries and others to send electronic versions of the Employment Information (EI) return. The information is sent across the internet to our server and then transferred into our tax system. The following are requirements for using myIR. 2.1 Network connectivity Employers, agents, bureaus and intermediaries can connect to the internet through an ISP as per the current process. It should be noted that employer returns filed through myIR will be able to be viewed and amended as required after the initial filing. 2.2 Operating systems The myIR system is operating system independent. However, a supported browser is required. 2.3 Supported web browsers At the date of publication of this document, the following web browsers are supported for use with myIR: • Apple Safari • Google Chrome • Microsoft Edge • Microsoft Internet Explorer 11 or Newer • Mozilla Firefox A recent version of these browsers should be used. If any issues are experienced using the service, an update and restart of the browser should be undertaken in the first instance. If an unsupported browser is detected accessing the site, a message will display advising that some website functionality may not be available, and that IR recommends switching to a supported browser. 2.4 Messages and validations in myIR Transferred files are validated by myIR and the customer informed of any errors. This validation is designed to provide instant turnaround, ensuring customers are provided with an immediate response of any errors. File validation rules include • file format • mandatory (required) data fields • data fields formats e.g. numeric, alpha numeric • data fields maximum lengths Note this is not the definitive list of all validations – these are in noted in each file specification and in Appendix 5.1 Error messages will be displayed using the current myIR format. 2.4.1 Error messages There are a number of error messages that can be received when transferring files to us. The messages will display clear details of the error or issue that has been found. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 6 Note: Some of the most common issues encountered when uploading a file are the ‘line too long’ and ‘incorrect number of fields’ errors. These errors are usually caused by creating, editing and/or saving a csv file using Excel. Excel will add extra comma(s) to the end of each line when it is saved as a csv file, as it tries to make all lines the same length. This, in effect, adds another column, resulting in the errors. This is not specific to IR files; it’s a feature of Excel in general. To avoid this issue, IR does not recommend opening the file with Excel prior to uploading. If a file needs to be viewed or changed, IR recommends using a programme like Notepad or Notepad++ when opening or changing the file prior to uploading. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 7 3 Payday Filing Payday filing through myIR enables software providers to output compliant employment information files in payroll software and then file transfer on each pay cycle instead of monthly, and to file transfer new and departing employee details. Employment information Employment information includes employee's income for each pay cycle. If businesses are enrolled for payroll returns in myIR they must output the file through their software and upload and submit this to us in myIR within two working days of the payday. Employee details Employers will also need to submit through myIR the details for new and departing employees including Kiwisaver information. This information is expected to be supplied to IR no later than the next filing of Employment Information but can be supplied earlier as per the Tax Administration Act – Section 23L. To support payroll services filing please refer to the payroll calculations & business rules in the Payroll calculations and business rules specification (1 April 2024 to 31 March 2025) Note: As of 1 April 2020, all files submitted by intermediaries require a link to the client listed in the file for the file to be accepted and processed. This validation will require all intermediaries to manage their myIR workspace and link to the appropriate clients. 3.1 Employee Details Filing Providing new and departing employee details is required for payday filing. This information is expected to be supplied to IR no later than the next filing of employment information but can be supplied earlier as per the Tax Administration Act – Section 23L. Employee details • includes information such as the employee’s name, employment start and finish dates, tax codes, KiwiSaver eligibility and status, Employee exempt income, KiwiSaver opt-out information and contact details (email, phone or mailing address). • can be added using a bulk file transfer services design for larger numbers of new and departing employees as required for payday filing, and updates for existing employees, using a file output from payroll software in csv format. This format allows o third parties such as payroll intermediaries and bureaus to file on behalf of the employer and provides the employers IRD number, o allows for multiple tax codes for one employee • can be added using a specifically formatted excel template available for download, and then populated for upload into myIR or • can be input in myIR for each individual employee 3.2 Employee Details CSV File specifications The employee details (ED) csv file enables intermediaries and employers to • File an employee details for new employees by providing o A single header record o One or more new employee detail records o One or more tax code detail records per employee (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 8 • File an employee details for existing employees by providing o A single header record o One or more employee detail records with updates • File an employee details for departing employees by providing o A single header record o One or more departing employee detail records o One or more tax code detail records per employee Refer to section 3.3.3 for examples of the Employee Details csv file. The file can be uploaded in the csv format or multiple csv files (only of Employee Details csv) contained within a compressed zip file via Intermediary Centre for Payroll intermediaries. 3.2.1 HED2 – Employee Details Header Record The Employee Details return is specified in the table below. This version must have the header record indicator of HED2. Note: As this version of the Employee Details now includes fields for KiwiSaver eligibility, employee exempt income and the KiwiSaver opt-out fields, the separate KiwiSaver Employment Details (KED) form is no longer available for use. The header record – HED- holds the summary details and precedes the employee details line records. It will contain data about the employer and number of records in the following format and layout (please also refer to Appendix 5.1): Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 1 Header record indicator ALPHA 4 Required This must have a value of HED2 to indicate the employee details header record. 2 Employer IRD number IRD 9 Required A valid IRD number. This is a 9-digit number. It cannot be 000000000. 3 Payroll package and version no. identifier ANAM 80 Required This field will contain the payroll package and version no. identifier. e.g. Vendor\_Package\_v1.0. This value will be unique for each Payroll software developer/package/version combination. It will not contain any Employer information. 4 Total Employee Lines NUM 14 Required Total number of Employee DED Lines included in the file. 3.2.2 DED – Employee Details – Employee Lines Record The employee lines record – DED- holds the employee details in the following format and layout (please also refer to Appendix 5.1): (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 9 Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 1 Detail record indicator ALPHA 3 Required This must have a value of DED to indicate employee details record. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 2 Employee IRD # IRD 9 Required IRD number of employee, as per Employer pay records. This is a 9digit number, modulus 11 checked. If not supplied, then enter 000000000. 3 Employee Name/ID on EI return ANAM Max 255 Required This is the name provided on the Employee Information Return. Preference is ‘firstname lastname’ with a space between names included in the 255-character total. Must not include embedded commas. 4 Employee Title RANGE Max 50 Optional Must be one of the defined values as confirmed by the employee Refer to section 5.6 for list of valid titles 5 Employee First Name ANAM Max 50 Required 6 Employee Middle Name ANAM Max 50 Optional 7 Employee Last Name ANAM Max 50 Required 8 Date of birth DATE 8 Optional Must be in format CCYYMMDD e.g. 19800815 9 Employment Start date DATE 8 Required Must be in format CCYYMMDD 10 Employment End date DATE 8 Optional Must be in format CCYYMMDD Must be a date that is after the employee start date. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 10 11 KiwiSaver eligibility RANGE 2 Optional Valid values are: • NE – New Employee This must be provided for all new employees. If NE provided then the KiwiSaver status must also be provided. NE will create a KiwiSaver enrolment for the selected KiwiSaver status values: o AE Auto-enrol KiwiSaver status = auto enrolment o OK Opt-in KiwiSaver status = voluntary enrolment) • EE – Existing Employee opt-in (This creates a voluntary enrolment for KiwiSaver) • EA – Existing Employee Autoenrol KiwiSaver This field can be blank. If existing employee is yet to be auto- enrolled in KiwiSaver, then EA must be selected. 12 New employee KiwiSaver status RANGE 2 Optional This field is only required for New Employees (NE). Must be one of the defined KiwiSaver status code values as confirmed by the employee (E.g. AK for Existing KiwiSaver): Valid statuses are one of the following. Only the leading code value must be used in the file: • AE – Auto-enrol • AK - Existing KiwiSaver member • OK - Opting into KiwiSaver • NK - Not eligible for KiwiSaver • CT - Casual/temporary employee This field can be blank. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 11 13 Employee exempt income RANGE 3 Optional Valid exempt income options are one of the following. The leading code value must be used in the file. • BLH - provide board-lodging-use of a house or part house or equivalent allowance • TAO - taxable allowances for accommodation and living costs overseas. • VBS - Some payments under a Voluntary Bonding Scheme • RTA - Retiring allowance (for a full definition of what is included under this code, please see section 4.3 of the Payroll Calculations and Business Rules specification) • OES - Overpayment of an amount of an employer’s superannuation cash contribution • HPT - Some Honoraria payments This field can be blank. 14 Email address EMAIL Max 510 Optional Required if known by the employer. This field will contain the email address of the employee. Acceptable characters are A-Z, a-z, 0- 9 and @ - \_ . Syntax must contain ‘@domain’ string, and not contain double periods 15 Mobile phone country RANGE 3 Optional Required if known by the employer. Must be a valid ISO 3166 alpha-3 standard country code e.g. NZL for New Zealand Refer to section 5.4 for list of valid countries. 16 Mobile phone number NUMERIC Max 30 Optional If a mobile phone is to be provided this is required e.g. 021123456 17 Mobile extension NUMERIC Max 20 Optional Provide only if confirmed by employee else leave blank. 18 Daytime phone country RANGE 3 Optional Required if known by the employer. Must be a valid ISO 3166 alpha-3 standard country code e.g. NZL for New Zealand. Refer to section 5.4 for list of valid countries 19 Daytime phone number NUMERIC Max 30 Optional If a daytime phone is to be provided this is required. This includes the area code. e.g. 041234567 20 Daytime phone extension NUMERIC Max 20 Optional Provide only if confirmed by employee else leave blank. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 12 21 Country\* RANGE 3 Optional Must be a valid ISO 3166 alpha-3 standard country code e.g. NZL for New Zealand. Refer to section 5.4 for list of valid countries. Country code is required if any of the other address fields are provided. \*Postal address must be supplied if none of the following are known by the employer: • Email address • Mobile phone number • Daytime phone number. 22 Unit type\* ANAM Max 50 Optional Must be a valid unit type if provided – Refer to section 5.5 for the unit types for NZL / CAN / USA 23 Unit number\* ANAM Max 10 Optional 24 Floor type\* ANAM Max 30 Optional 25 Floor number\* ANAM Max 30 Optional 26 Building\* ANAM Max 50 Optional 27 Street address\* ANAM Max 510 Optional 28 Suburb/rural\* ANAM Max 60 Optional 29 City\* ANAM Max 100 Optional 30 Post code\* ANAM Max 30 Optional 31 State\* ANAM Max 12 Optional Optional field - do not populate for NZ addresses – leave blank. For other countries, must be a valid ISO3A code for the provided country comprised of the \[Country's ISO2a\]- \[State's ISO3A\]. For example, Colorado's ISO code would be US-CO. If there is no state for this address this should be left blank. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 13 32 Employee opted-out from KiwiSaver ANAM 1 Optional Valid options are: • Yes (Y) • No (N) This field can be blank. Indicates whether an employee who is subject to the automatic KiwiSaver enrolment rules wants to opt out of KiwiSaver. • Select Y if employee is choosing to opt out. • Must be N or blank if KiwiSaver eligibility code is EE • Must be N or blank if New employee KiwiSaver status is AK, NK, CT or OK. 33 Employee’s bank account – bank NUM 2 Optional The bank account number for the employee if they are opting out of KiwiSaver. Required if ‘Employee opted-out from KiwiSaver’ field is Yes, otherwise blank. 34 Employee’s bank account – branch NUM 4 Optional The bank account number for the employee if they are opting out of KiwiSaver. Required if ‘Employee opted-out from KiwiSaver’ field is Yes, otherwise blank. 35 Employee’s bank account – account NUM 8 Optional The bank account number for the employee if they are opting out of KiwiSaver. Required if ‘Employee opted-out from KiwiSaver’ field is Yes, otherwise blank. 36 Employee’s bank account – suffix NUM 4 Optional The bank account number for the employee if they are opting out of KiwiSaver. Required if ‘Employee opted-out from KiwiSaver’ field is Yes, otherwise blank. 37 Employee’s bank account – reference number NUM 12 Optional New Zealand credit union or building society reference number. 38 Name of account holder ANAM 31 Optional The name of the account holder for the bank account number given above. Required if ‘Employee opted-out from KiwiSaver’ field is Yes, otherwise blank. 39 Date opt-out notice signed by the employee DATE 8 Optional The date on which the opt-out notice given to the employer. Format: CCYYMMDD Required if ‘Employee opted-out from KiwiSaver’ field is Yes, otherwise blank. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 14 Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 40 Late opt-out reason RANGE 10 Optional Required if ‘Employee opted-out from KiwiSaver’ field is Yes and the date the opt-out notice was signed by the employee is over 56 days from the employment start date. Valid reasons are one the following (the leading code is what must be used in the file): • INFO- Employer did not provide a KiwiSaver information pack within seven days of starting employment. • IRIS- IR didn’t send an investment statement upon allocation to a default scheme. • ERIS- Employer didn’t provide an investment statement (for the employer chosen KiwiSaver scheme). • EVNT- Events outside of control meant the opt-out application was unable to be submitted within the eight-week time limit. • CRIT- Did not meet the criteria to join KiwiSaver (see Employee information pack (KS3) for criteria) • INER - Incorrectly enrolled under the age of 18. • OTHR - Other explanation This field can be blank. 41 Other late opt-out reason ANAM 500 Optional Free text field. Required if ‘Late opt-out reason’ is OTHR, otherwise leave blank. Must not include embedded commas. 3.2.3 TED - Employee Details – Tax code Lines Record The tax code lines record – TED- holds the employee tax code details in the following format and layout (please also refer to Appendix 5.1): All "TED" records will relate to the employee "DED" record which proceed it. There can be one or more tax code lines per employee line record. Note: A TED record must be included with every Employee details line record (DED) filed, otherwise a validation error will be returned. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 15 1 Record indicator ALPHA 3 Required This must have a value of TED to indicate tax codes associated to an employee record. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 2 Employee Tax code RANGE Max 10 Required Refer to section 5.3 to see the valid tax codes. At least one active tax code record is required for an active employee record. If a new tax code is provided for existing employees it will have a start date on the day the file is uploaded Any tax code not provided for a given employee that already exists in the IR system for the employee account will be assumed to be no longer active and will be ceased as of the day which the file was uploaded If validation finds an error it will represent the first tax code issue found. The error will only display on one of the rows which is in error, not all tax codes that combine to create this error. Note: SLCIR, SLBOR and ESS are no longer accepted as a valid tax code. 3.3 Employee Details Excel File specification The employee details (ED) excel file can only be used for providing details of • new employees where an employment start date is provided • departing employees where an employment start and cease date is provided. • It cannot be used for providing amendments to existing employee details as a duplicate employee warning will be provided. Instead users should either use the online forms in myIR or the ED csv file upload service. The ED excel file has one section in its data structure • One or more employee detail records The ED excel file is designed to be used either as a file output from payroll software or by using the employee details template published by IR. 3.3.1 ED – Excel Employee Lines Record The specification rules for the excel file are • File formats accepted are .xls or xlsx format only • the data sheet needs to be named “sheet1” • In Sheet 1 the data is expected to start from row 5, any rows above will be ignored. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 16 Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes Employee IRD # IRD 9 Required IRD number of employee, as per Employer pay records. This is a 9-digit number, modulus 11 checked. If not supplied then enter 000000000. PAYE should also be made at the ND rate. Employee Name/ID on EI return ANAM 255 Required This is the name provided on the Employee Information Return. Preference is ‘first name last name’ with a space between names included in the 255 character total. Must not include embedded commas. Employee Title RANGE 50 Optional Must be one of the defined values as confirmed by the employee Refer to section 5.6 for list of valid titles. Employee First Name ANAM 50 Required Employee Middle Name ANAM 50 Optional Employee Last Name ANAM 50 Required Date of birth DATE 12 Optional Must be a valid date and not in the future. Can accept all valid excel date formats eg yyyy-mm-dd, dd/mm/yyyy, dd/mm/yy, dd.mm.yy, dd MMM yyyy Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes Tax code RANGE 10 Required Refer to section 5.3 to see the valid tax codes. Note: SLCIR, SLBOR and ESS are no longer accepted as a valid tax code. Additional Tax code 1 RANGE 10 Optional Refer to section 5.3 to see the valid tax codes. Additional Tax code 2 RANGE 10 Optional Refer to section 5.3 to see the valid tax codes. Start date DATE 12 Required Must be a valid date and not in the future. Can accept all valid excel date formats eg yyyy-mm-dd, dd/mm/yyyy, dd/mm/yy, dd.mm.yy, dd MMM yyyy (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 17 End date DATE 12 Optional If this employee is active this field should be left blank. Must be a valid date and cannot be before the Start date. Can accept all valid excel date formats eg yyyy-mm-dd, dd/mm/yyyy, dd/mm/yy, dd.mm.yy, dd MMM yyyy New employee automatically enrolled into KiwiSaver ALPHA 1 Required Must be Y or N. Y = The employee is eligible for KiwiSaver and is subject to automatic enrolment. N = The employee is not subject to automatic enrolment. KiwiSaver status RANGE 2 Required Must be one of the defined KiwiSaver status list values as confirmed by the employee: • Auto enrol • Existing KiwiSaver member • Not eligible for KiwiSaver • Casual/temporary employee • Opt-in to KiwiSaver If answered Y to ‘New employee automatically enrolled into KiwiSaver’ then the KiwiSaver status must be Auto-enrol (AE) Email address EMAIL 510 Optional Required if known by the employer. This field will contain the email address of the employee. Acceptable characters are A-Z, a-z, 0-9 and @ - \_ . Syntax must contain ‘@domain’ string, and not contain double periods Mobile phone country RANGE 30 Optional Required if known by the employer. Refer to section 5.4 for list of valid countries. Mobile phone number NUMERIC 30 Optional If a mobile phone is to be provided this is required Mobile extension NUMERIC 20 Optional Provide only if confirmed by employee else leave blank. Daytime phone country NUMERIC 30 Optional Required if known by the employer. Refer to section 5.4 for list of valid countries. Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes Daytime phone number NUMERIC 30 Optional If a daytime phone is to be provided this is required Daytime phone extension NUMERIC 20 Optional Provide only if confirmed by employee otherwise leave this field blank. Unit type\* ANAM 10 Optional Must be a valid unit type if provided – Refer to section 5.5 for the unit types for NZL / CAN / USA Unit number\* ANAM 60 Optional (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 18 Floor type\* ANAM 60 Optional Floor number\* ANAM 60 Optional Building\* ANAM 60 Optional Street address\* ANAM 510 Optional Suburb/rural\* ANAM 60 Optional City\* ANAM 200 Optional Post code\* ANAM 60 Optional State\* ANAM 12 Optional For NZ addresses – Leave this field blank For other countries – add the state if applicable. If there is no state for the address this should be left blank. Country\* RANGE 30 Optional Refer to section 5.4 for list of valid countries. \*Postal address must be supplied if none of the following are known by the employer: • Email address • Mobile phone number • Daytime phone number Employee’s Exempt income reason RANGE 3 Optional If the employee receives exempt income, this must be one of the defined KiwiSaver exempt income values: • provide board-lodging-use of a house or part house or equivalent allowance • taxable allowances for accommodation and living costs overseas. • Some payments under a Voluntary Bonding Scheme • Retiring allowance (for a full definition of what is included under this value, please see section 4.3 of the Payroll Calculations and Business Rules specification) • Overpayment of an amount of an employer’s superannuation cash contribution • Some Honoraria payments Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 19 Employee opting out from KiwiSaver? ALPHA 1 Optional Required if ‘New employee automatically enrolled into KiwiSaver’ field is Y. If the employee who is subject to automatic enrolment wants to opt-out of KiwiSaver. Y = if employee wishes to opt out N = if employee is not opting out Must be N if ‘New employee automatically enrolled into KiwiSaver’ field is N. Employee’s bank account number – bank NUM 2 Optional The employee’s bank account (bank) number. • Must be a valid bank account number. • Required if answered Y to ‘Employee opting out from KiwiSaver?’. Employee’s bank account number – branch NUM 4 Optional The employee’s bank account (branch) number. • Must be a valid bank account number. • Required if answered Y to to ‘Employee opting out from KiwiSaver?’. Employee’s bank account number – account NUM 8 Optional The employee’s bank account (account) number. • Must be a valid bank account number. • Required if answered Y to ‘Employee opting out from KiwiSaver?’. Employee’s bank account number – suffix NUM 4 Optional The employee’s bank account (suffix) number. • Must be a valid bank account number. • Required if answered Y to to ‘Employee opting out from KiwiSaver?’. Employee’s bank account number – reference NUM 12 Optional New Zealand credit union or building society reference number. Required if answered Y to to ‘Employee opting out from KiwiSaver?’. Name of account holder ANAM 31 Optional Full name of the account holder if the bank account number is supplied. • Required if answered Y to ‘Employee opting out from KiwiSaver?’. Date opt-out notice signed by the employee DATE 8 Optional Required if ‘Employee opting out from KiwiSaver?’ field is Y. Date the opt-out notice was signed by the employee. • Must be a valid date and not in the future. • Can accept all valid excel date formats Example formats: o yyyy-mm-dd o dd/mm/yyyy o dd/mm/yy o dd.mm.yy o dd MMM yyyy (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 20 Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes Employee’s reason for late opt-out RANGE 10 Optional Required if ‘Employee opting out from KiwiSaver?’ field is Y and the date the optout notice was signed by the employee is over 56 days from the employment start date. Must be one of the defined KiwiSaver exempt late opt-out values: • An Employee information pack - KS3 was not provided within the seven days of starting employment • An investment statement was not sent by us when allocated to a default scheme • An investment statement for the employer chosen KiwiSaver scheme was not provided • Events outside your control prevented the opt-out application to be submitted within 8-weeks • Did not meet the criteria to join KiwiSaver. See Employee information pack - KS3 • Enrolled under the age of 18 • Other reason – explain Cannot be more than one late-opt out reason provided. Other late opt-out reason ANAM 500 Optional Required if ‘Employee’s reason for late opt out’ field is Other reason – explain Free text field for other reason for late optout to be provided. 3.3.2 Business rules for specific Employee Details data fields (all input formats) 3.3.2.1 Tax codes The Employee tax codes are subject to the following rules: • An employee cannot have duplicate tax codes. • An employee can only have one primary tax code (one of M, MSL, ME or MESL). • The HED2 file will not accept SLCIR, SLBOR or ESS as a tax code. • If the employee is using tax code NSW, they cannot have any other tax codes. 3.3.2.2 Employee IRD The Employee tax code should be provided as ND (no notification) until an IRD number is supplied for the employee. When an employee IRD number is provided the employer will need to: (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 21 • File an employee details update with the employee name, unknown or incorrect employee IRD number (e.g 000000000) and an employee finish date. • File an additional employee details update with the employee name, correct employee IRD number and the original employee start date. 3.3.2.3 KiwiSaver status As per the KiwiSaver Act 2006 – section 22 – the KiwiSaver status of the employee is the notice given by the employee to the employer whether or not he or she is already a member of a KiwiSaver scheme and, if that person is a member, must either: • give to his or her employer a KiwiSaver deduction notice; or • give or show to his or her employer a copy of a notice given by the Commissioner under section 105 that grants a savings suspension that has not yet ended; or • give his or her employer a non-deduction notice. 3.3.3 Example Employee Details file The following is an example of the ED file in the CSV format (as text for readability, please refer to the Sample files folder on the IR GitHub for more file examples). NB: the example is intended to show the layout of the file – employee details are fictitious. Version HED2: HED2,123250265,SoftwarePlatform,2 DED,123018635,Smith Mary,Mrs,Mary,,Smith,19850614,20191015,,NE,AK,,mary.smith@company.co.nz,NZL,021123456,,,,,NZL,,,,,,12 Small Street,,Springfield,6881,,N,,,,,,,,, TED,M DED,000000000,Hall Brian,Mr,Brian,Jack,Hall,19550308,20191015,,NE,CT,,,,,,NZL,041234567,,NZL,,,,,,23 Tall Road,,Huttville,6547,,Y,08,0456,0123456,0025,,Brian J Hall,20191031,, TED,M SL 3.4 Employer Information Filing Employers can file their EI (employment information) through myIR file upload. The sections below detail the record structures for doing this. Employee income and deduction information for payday filing is to be provided to IR on an Employment Information (EI) return. Amendments to the EI will also be done by payday. Payday filing must start from the beginning of the month, and each payday in the month must be payday reported. Payday filing involves terms such as “pay cycle”, “pay period” and “paydate”. Appendix 5.2 of this document provides an example of how these terms apply. The Employment Information (EI) return: • Replaces the employer monthly schedule (IR 348/EMS), • Holds employment income information from employers and PAYE intermediaries filing on a payday basis. i.e. it must incorporate all payments made to employees (and/or contractors), and ESCT deducted per employee line • Includes new information, such as dates of employers payday Amendments can also be made to previously filed EI returns. Note: ESCT (Employer’s Superannuation Contribution tax) must be supplied per each employee line. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 22 The EI return and EI amendment return detail are shown in section 3.4.1 and 3.5. This data is required when filing though the myIR employer return file upload process. The filing due dates for the EI will either be 2 working days after the paydate for electronic filers or 10 working days after the paydate for paper filers. If the due date falls on a weekend or public holiday (excluding a provincial anniversary day), then the due date becomes the next working day 3.4.1 Employment Information (EI) file specification The employment information (EI) csv file has two sections in its data structure • A single header record • One or more employee detail records The file can be uploaded in the csv format or multiple csv files contained within a compressed zip file. Refer to Appendix 5.1 for file compression rules. 3.4.1.1 HEI2 – EI Filing Header Record The Employment Information return is specified in the table below. This version must have the header record indicator of HEI2. The EI header holds the “paydate” details. Multiple EIs can be filed for the same paydate. Multiple EIs for a single paydate can also be consolidated into a single paydate EI. Various pay cycles may be reported on one EI as long as the cycle paydates are the same. The Header allows for new reporting such as advising IR that this is a “final” return as the employer has ceased employing. The ‘Total Student Loans’ field will be an aggregate total of all SL deductions for all employees. The header record precedes the detail records. It will contain data about the employer including summary totals in the following format and layout (please also refer to Appendix 5.1): Note for Prior period adjustment fields: If you already have a functioning amendment process there is no compulsion to utilise the prior period adjustment fields. You may continue to amend the erroneous returns. The Adjustment fields may only be used for adjustments that do not impact Kiwisaver, Student Loan, Child support or other social policy payments. Adjustments that match this criteria may still be made by amending the erroneous return OR using the prior period adjustment fields. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 1 Header record indicator ALPHA 4 Required This must have a value of HEI2 to indicate the employer header record. 2 Employer IRD number/Account ID IRD 9 Required A valid IRD number. This is a 9-digit number. It cannot be 000000000. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 23 3 Paydate DATE 8 Required Paydate - the day on which an employer makes a PAYE income payment to an employee. Must be a valid date. Paydate must be within the same month as the filing period. Format CCYYMMDD e.g. 20130831 4 Final return for employer ALPHA 1 Required Indicate either Y or N if this is the final employer return. The employer has now ceased employing. 5 Nil return indicator ALPHA 1 Required Indicate either Y or N if this is a nil return. If Y, no other details are required on the EI. 6 PAYE Intermediary IRD number IRD 9 Optional This is a valid 9-digit IRD number for the PAYE Intermediary linked to the employer. It cannot be 000000000. Should be left blank if there is no PI linked to the employer. 7 Name of payroll contact person ANAM 20 Required The name of the payroll contact person for IRD purposes. Preference is ‘first name surname’ with a space between names included in the 20 character total. Must not include embedded commas. 8 Payroll contact work phone number ANUM 12 Required The daytime work contact phone number for the payroll contact person. 12 alphanumeric characters and must not include commas Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 9 Email of payroll contact person EMAIL 60 Required This field will contain the email address of the payroll contact person. Acceptable characters are A-Z, a-z, 0- 9 and @ - \_ . Syntax must contain ‘@domain’ string, and not contain double periods 10 Total Employee Lines NUM 14 Required Total number of Employee Lines included on the EI (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 24 11 Total gross earnings PDEC 14 Required The sum of the gross earnings for all employees for the paydate being reported as calculated from Employer pay records. Do not include Employee Share Scheme payments in this field. See field number 26. 12 Total prior period gross adjustments DEC 14 Required Total prior period gross adjustments. 13 Total earnings not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy PDEC 14 Required The sum of the earnings not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy for all employees for the paydate being reported as calculated from Employer pay records. (This does not include earnings over the maximum liable earnings threshold set for the year) If tax for schedular payments is being deducted then earnings not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy should be equal to Gross schedular payment. Earnings not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy should not be greater than the sum of gross earnings and Employee Share Scheme. 14 Total PAYE / tax PDEC 14 Required The sum of the PAYE and tax on schedular payments deducted for all employees for the paydate being filed. Must be converted to a positive figure if amounts deducted are treated as a negative. Cannot be greater than total gross earnings. Refer to the tax calculations in the Payroll Calculations & Business Rules Specifications. 15 Total prior period PAYE adjustment DEC 14 Required Total prior period PAYE adjustments. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 16 Total child support deductions PDEC 14 Required The sum of the child support deductions for all employees for the paydate being filed. Must be converted to a positive figure if amounts deducted are treated as a negative. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 25 17 Total student loan deductions PDEC 14 Required The sum of all SL repayment deductions for all employees for the paydate being filed. Must be converted to a positive figure if amounts deducted are treated as a negative. 18 Total SLCIR deductions PDEC 14 Required Total SLCIR deductions. 19 Total SLBOR deductions PDEC 14 Required Total SLBOR deductions. 20 Total Kiwisaver deductions PDEC 14 Required The total amount of KiwiSaver deducted from all the employees for the paydate being reported. 21 Total net KiwiSaver employer contributions PDEC 14 Required The total net (excluding ESCT) amount of KiwiSaver employer contributions on behalf of all employees for the paydate being reported. 22 Total ESCT deducted PDEC 14 Required Total ESCT (Employer’s Superannuation Contribution tax) deducted from employees. 23 Total amounts deducted PDEC 14 Required The total of all amounts to be deducted: • Total PAYE & tax on schedular payments deducted. NB: For payroll giving, this amount will be PAYE minus tax credits for payroll donations • Total Child Support deductions • Total Student Loan deductions • Total KiwiSaver deductions • Total KiwiSaver Employer Contributions • Total ESCT deducted • Total SLCIR deductions • Total SLBOR deductions 24 Total Tax credits for payroll donations PDEC 14 Required The total of all employees’ tax credits for payroll donations. 25 Total family tax credits PDEC 14 Required The sum of the family tax credit payments for all employees for the paydate being reported. This will be 0, except when the data is from Work and Income. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 26 Total Employee Share Scheme PDEC 14 Required The sum of the Employee Share Scheme payments for all employees for the paydate being reported. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 26 27 Payroll package and version identifier ANAM 80 Required This field will contain the payroll package and version no. identifier. e.g. Vendor\_Package\_v1.0. This value will be unique for each Payroll software developer/package/version combination. It will not contain any Employer information. 28 IR form version number NUM 4 Required Must be 0001 3.4.1.2 DEI – EI Employee Lines Record The employee lines on the EI return (DEI) are similar to the employee lines on the IR348/EMS. However, the DEI employee lines also hold the “employee pay cycle” and the “pay period” start and end dates for the specific employee. ESCT is also reported per employee line as required. Reporting can be done for various “pay cycles” (e.g. weekly and fortnightly), as long as the paydate, as supplied in the header record, is the same for each cycle. Note: Extra lines are no longer required for SLCIR and SLBOR deductions as this file now has separate fields for SLCIR and SLBOR deductions. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required / Optional Default values/notes 1 Detail record indicator ALPHA 3 Required This must have a value of DEI to indicate employee details record. 2 Employee IRD number IRD 9 Required IRD number of employee, as per Employer pay records. This is a 9digit number, modulus 11 checked. If not supplied then enter 000000000. 3 Employee name ANAM 255 Required Preference is ‘firstname lastname’ with a space between names included in the 255 character total. Must not include embedded commas. 4 Employee tax code RANGE 5 Required Refer to section 5.3 to see the valid tax codes. Position Item description Attribute Field size Required / Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 27 5 Employment Start date DATE 8 Optional Employment start date if this is during the pay period reported (unless already previously reported via the New and Departing Employee Information), otherwise leave blank. Must be in format CCYYMMDD. 6 Employment Finish date DATE 8 Optional Employment finish date if this is during the pay period being reported (unless already previously reported via the New and Departing Employee Information), otherwise leave blank. Must be in format CCYYMMDD. 7 Employee Pay Period Start Date DATE 8 Required The first day of the pay period for which the Employee was paid. Must be a valid date in the format of CCYYMMDD. 8 Employee Pay Period End Date DATE 8 Required The last day of the pay period for which the Employee was paid Must be a valid date in format CCYYMMDD. 9 Employee Pay cycle ANUM 2 Required Indicate if employee is paid: - Weekly (WK), - Four-weekly (4W), - Fortnightly (FT), - Monthly (MT), - Daily (DA) or - Ad hoc/Irregularly (AH), - Half monthly (HM) (twice a month) 10 Hours paid PDEC 8 Required The number of hours the employee was paid for the paydate being reported. This should be entered to two decimal places. E.g. 37.5 hours would be 3750 Default 0 if not held. 11 Gross earnings and/or schedular payments PDEC 14 Required The taxable gross earnings for the employee for the paydate being reported. Non-taxable allowances not included. Do not include Employee Share Scheme payments in this field. See field number 27. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 28 Position Item description Attribute Field size Required / Optional Default values/notes 12 Prior period gross adjustments DEC 14 Required Adjustments to the Gross earnings and/or schedular payments field for prior periods. Do not include this amount in the Gross earnings and/or schedular payments field. Negative values are allowed, however negative amounts cannot be more than the amount in the Gross earnings and/or schedular payments field for the line item. I.e. The line can be reduced to zero, but not below. 13 Earnings and / or schedular payments not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy PDEC 14 Required The employee’s earnings for the paydate being reported, which are not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy. (This does not include earnings over the maximum liable earnings threshold set for the year). This should not be greater than the sum of gross earnings and Employee Share Scheme. Earnings not liable should be equal to gross if schedular payment has been made. 14 Lump sum (extra pay) indicator PDEC 1 Required This indicates whether the employee has received a lump sum payment that has been taxed at the lowest rate during the paydate being reported. 1 for yes otherwise must be 0. Refer to the Payroll Calculations & Business Rules Specification for extra pay PAYE calculation details and extra pay student loans calculations. 15 PAYE / tax PDEC 14 Required PAYE or tax on schedular payments deducted from employee’s earnings for paydate being reported. Does not include student loan or child support deductions. Cannot be greater than the sum of gross earnings and Employee Share Scheme. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 29 Position Item description Attribute Field size Required / Optional Default values/notes 16 Prior period PAYE adjustment DEC 14 Required Adjustments to the PAYE / tax field for prior periods. Do not include this amount in the PAYE / tax field. Negative values are allowed, however negative amounts cannot be more than the amount in the PAYE / tax field for the line item. I.e. The line can be reduced to zero, but not below. 17 Child support deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of child support deducted from the employee’s earnings for the paydate being reported. 0, except when the employee is a liable parent. Cannot be greater than gross earnings. 18 Child support code RANGE 1 Optional Must be blank or one of: Priority • C=ceased employment 1 • A=advanced payment 2 • P=protected earnings 3 • S=short term absence 4 • D=deducted previously 5 • O=other 6 If more than one variation code applies, the priority of the variation codes should be as above i.e. (1-6), the lowest number is the highest priority. If no variation applies or child support is not required to be deducted for the employee, then leave blank. If you deduct the exact child support amount requested for the employee on the Child Support Deduction (YL0010) notice, no code is required. Note: If you no longer employ the person who you were deducting child support for, use the “C” ceased employment code. As these codes are used to track and allocate payments it is preferred that they are provided. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 30 Position Item description Attribute Field size Required / Optional Default values/notes 19 Student loan deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan repayments deducted from the employee’s earnings for the paydate being reported. 0, except when the employee has a student loan tax code. Cannot be greater than gross earnings. 20 SLCIR deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan Commissioner deductions deducted from the employee’s earnings for the paydate being reported. 21 SLBOR deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan voluntary extra deductions deducted from the employee’s earnings for the paydate being reported. 22 KiwiSaver deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of KiwiSaver deducted from the employee’s gross earnings for the paydate being reported. NOTE: Must be one of 0, 3%, 4%, 6%, 8% or 10% of the employee’s taxable gross earnings for the paydate being reported. 23 Net KiwiSaver employer contributions PDEC 14 Required The amount of net KiwiSaver employer contributions paid on behalf of the employee for the paydate being reported. NOTE: this amount will be exclusive of any ESCT payable on the contribution. 24 ESCT deducted PDEC 14 Required ESCT (employer's superannuation contribution tax) deductions for the employee. 25 Tax credits for payroll donations PDEC 14 Required The amount of tax credits for payroll donations granted to the employee for the donation(s) made. 26 Family tax credits PDEC 14 Required The amount of family tax credits paid to the employee for the pay period. This must be ‘0’ except when the employer is Work and Income. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 31 27 Employee Share Scheme PDEC 14 Required The amount of ESS paid to the employee. This amount should also be included in the ‘Earnings and/or scheduler payments not liable for ACC earners levy’ field. 3.4.2 Business rules for specific EI data fields 3.4.2.1 Employee IRD Number The Employee tax code should be provided as ND (no notification) and the PAYE should also be made at the ND rate until an IRD number is supplied for the employee (except in the case of non-resident entertainers or sportspeople who do not need to provide an IRD number – refer to the Payroll Calculations & Business Rules Specification for more information). 3.4.2.2 Tax on Schedular Payments The gross amount of schedular payment and tax deducted must be identified separately from normal gross pay and PAYE deducted. If you have an employee who received both salary or wages and schedular payments you will need to be able to identify the amount of schedular payment and the normal salary and PAYE when you create the EI. For example, if an employee gets a normal salary under the M tax code as well as schedular payments, you will need to have two lines for the employee on the EI. One line would contain the salary and PAYE with the tax code showing as M and the second line would have the gross schedular payment, Earnings not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy (which should be equal to gross schedular payment), and tax with a tax code of WT. For more information on Schedular Payments, refer to the Payroll Calculations & Business Rules Specification. 3.4.2.3 Employee Share Scheme (ESS) Refer to the Payroll Calculations & Business Rules Specification for details. Any ESS amounts should be recorded in the Employee Share Scheme field. 3.4.2.4 Tax codes on payday returns If an employee’s tax code changes during the “month”, each EI should be completed with the tax code that was used to calculate the employees payday deductions. The employee may have different tax codes during the filing month (e.g. change from M to M SL). 3.4.2.5 Final Employer returns The EI will allow employers to advise if they are no longer employing, and that this is their final EI return. The “final return for employer” indicator on the header details (HEI2) of the EI can either be Y or N. If “Y” - this means that this is the final return for that employer that IR expects to receive. The employer is longer employing. 3.4.2.6 Nil EI returns If a “nil” EI return needs to be filed, there is an indicator on the header details (HEI2) of the EI. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 32 In the “nil return indicator” field, employers can indicate either Y (yes – nil return) or N (not a nil return). If Y, no other detail lines are required on the EI 3.4.2.7 Hours Paid Data Inland Revenue will be requesting Employee’s Hours paid data as part of Employer’s Payday Filing submission. The collection of this information will support IR in better understanding employee’s time spent in paid employment which in turn will assist in determining access to certain entitlements. Hours paid data will not be the only source of information used to make any such determination, it may be used in conjunction with other information as an indicator that further enquiries are required. The provision of Hours paid information by employers is not compulsory, it is requested under the same terms as employee Date of birth, in that if the employer holds the information in their payroll system it is required to be sent to Inland Revenue. There is no compulsion for employers to begin to capture this data if they do not already hold it. However, it will be of benefit to Inland Revenue and potentially their own employees if they are able to capture and transmit the data. For further clarity, in the event that some or all components of an employee’s salary and wages are held in, or associated to, units other than hours (or have no time unit associated with them at all), there is no compulsion to translate the data held in to hours or to calculate or otherwise create an hour value in order to transmit data to Inland Revenue. In such a scenario Inland Revenue does not expect to receive Hours paid data pertaining to that employee, for that pay period. 3.4.3 Student Loans For details regarding Student Loan rates and processes, please refer to the Payroll Calculations & Business Rules Specification. The business rules below refer to SLCIR and SLBOR processes for EI reporting. 3.4.3.1 Required data for SLCIR and SLBOR deductions SLCIR and SLBOR student loan deductions should be entered into the SLCIR deductions and SLBOR deductions fields respectively. 3.4.3.2 SLCIR and SLBOR deductions with no standard deductions If a borrower has no standard student loan deduction for the pay period because gross income is below the pay period threshold (when using a main tax code with “SL”) or a special deduction rate of 0% applies for the pay period then: • A SLBOR deduction is still able to be made. The thresholds and zero special deduction rates will not affect the calculation of SLBOR deductions. • A SLCIR deduction is not required to be made. 3.4.4 Example Employment Information file The following is an example of the EI file in the CSV format (as text for readability, please refer to the Sample files folder on the IR GitHub for more file examples). (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 33 NB: the example is intended to show the layout of the file – calculated figures may not be accurate. Version HEI2 HEI2,123123123,20190522,N,N,,Bill Smith,041234567,payroll@email.com,4,143257,5000,2000,47024,40,0,16671,0,5750,85500,83660,2560,147100,2 500,0,22500,vendor\_package\_v1.0,0001 DEI,111111111,Brown John,M,,,20190407,20190414,WK,3050,56875,0,0,0,34687,0,0,,0,0,0,4550,3565,756,0,0,0 DEI,074444444,Cork Chelsea,M,,,20190407,20190414,WK,3750,65725,0,0,0,45695,0,0,,0,0,0,0,0,0,100,0,0 DEI,075555555,French Carol,M SL,,,20190407,20190414,WK,2500,45678,2567,0,0,32785,1456,0,,2687,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 DEI,123123123,Jones Mark,M,,,20190407,20190414,WK,3750,165879,0,22500,0,78562,0,0,,0,0,0,4587,2569,1545,0,0,22500 (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 34 3.5 EI Amendments File Specifications This section specifies the file format and layout for the EIA file – EI amendments file - that will be sent through the myIR system. The file layout should conform to the layout specified in Appendix 5.1. All employers and PAYE intermediaries can use this amendment process. There is no restriction to the number of EIA that can be sent for the same paydate. A PAYE intermediary or employer will not be allowed to submit an EIA if there is no Employment Information (EI) previously filed for that paydate. An EIA enables intermediaries and employers to: • Add new detail lines to an EI previously filed o to add new lines, the intermediary or employer will provide nil ‘DTI’ lines and ‘DAI’ lines with new values. • Delete detail lines from an EI previously filed o to delete lines, the intermediary or employer will provide ‘DTI’ lines with existing values and nil ‘DAI’ lines. • Update detail lines to EI previously filed o to update lines, the ‘DTI’ lines will show the existing values and ‘DAI’ lines will contain modified values. Format examples are shown below: Add DTI,,,,,,,,,0,0,0,0,0,,0,0,0,0,0,0 DAI,111111111,Cook Cameron,M,,,0170607,20170608,4W,10000,200,1,300,500,A,600,700,800,999,900,0 Delete DTI,123123123,Steve Smith,M,,,20170608,20170608,4W,200000,200,1,300,500,A,600,700,800,999,900,0 DAI,,,,,,,,,0,0,0,0,0,,0,0,0,0,0,0 Update DTI,111111111,Ella Vince,CAE,20170407,20170408,20170407,20170408,MT,1000000,20000,1,30000,50000,A,60000,70000,80000,0,9 0000,0 DAI,111111111,Ella Vince,SB,20170607,20170608,20170607,20170608,4W,10000,200,1,300,500,A,600,700,800,999,900,0 3.5.1 EIA2 – EI Amendments Header record The new EI Amendments file is specified in the table below. This version must have the header record indicator of EIA2. Important Note: If an HEI2 was filed, it must be amended with an EIA2. However, if an HEI was filed, it can only be amended with an EIA. The EIA2 is the header record for amended EI information and is similar to the HEI2 header file format. The header record precedes the detail records. The EIA2 Header record IR form version number will be 0001. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 1 Header record indicator ALPHA 4 Required This must have a value of EIA2 to indicate header record. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 35 2 Employer IRD number/Account ID IRD 9 Required A valid IRD number. This is a 9digit number. It cannot be 000000000 3 Paydate DATE 8 Required Paydate that is being amended - date of the original payment to the employee. Must be a valid date. Format CCYYMMDD e.g. 20130831 4 PAYE Intermediary IRD number IRD 9 Optional This is a valid 9-digit IRD number for the PAYE Intermediary linked to the employer. It cannot be 000000000. This can be left blank if no PI is linked to the employer. 5 Name of payroll contact person ANAM 20 Required The name of the payroll contact person for IRD purposes. The preference is ‘first name surname’ with a space between names included in the 20 character total. Must not include embedded commas. 6 Payroll contact work phone number ANUM 12 Required The daytime work contact phone number for the payroll contact person. 12 alphanumeric characters and must not include commas 7 IR form version number NUM 4 Required Must be 0001 3.5.2 Detail record overview – DTI and DAI The detail records are shown as ‘DTI’ and ‘DAI’. Both the detail records contain employee details. DTI shows the original line item and will be used when existing details supplied previously are amended. DAI shows amendments to the previous EI lines or brand new data that did not appear in previous EI. 3.5.2.1 EI Original Line Item Record The detail record contains employee information in the following format and layout. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 1 Detail record indicator ALPHA 3 Required This must have a value of DTI to indicate detail record (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 36 2 Employee IRD number IRD 9 Required IRD number of employee, as per Employer pay records. This is a 9digit number, modulus 11 checked. If not supplied then enter 000000000 and ensure Employee tax code equals ND (no notification) until an IRD number is supplied by the employee. PAYE should also be made at the ND rate. 3 Employee name ANAM 255 Required Preference is ‘firstname lastname’ with a space between names included in the 255 character total. Must not include embedded commas. 4 Employee tax code RANGE 5 Required Refer to section 5.3 to see the valid tax codes. 5 Employment start date DATE 8 Optional Employment start date if this is during the pay period reported, otherwise leave blank. Must be in format CCYYMMDD. 6 Employment finish date DATE 8 Optional Employment finish date if this is during the pay period being reported, otherwise leave blank. Must be in format CCYYMMDD. 7 Employee Pay Period Start Date DATE 8 Required The start date for the paydate being reported. Must be a valid date in the format of CCYYMMDD. 8 Employee Pay Period End Date DATE 8 Required The end date for the paydate being reported. Must be a valid date in format CCYYMMDD. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 9 Employee Pay cycle ANUM 2 Required Indicate if employee is paid: • Weekly (WK), • Four-weekly (4W), • Fortnightly (FT), • Monthly (MT), • Daily (DA) or • Ad hoc/Irregularly (AH), • Half monthly (HM) (twice a month) (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 37 10 Hours paid PDEC 8 Required The number of hours the employee was paid for the paydate being reported. This should be entered to two decimal places. E.g. 37.5 hours would be 3750 Default 0 if not held. 11 Gross earnings and / or schedular payments PDEC 14 Required The taxable gross earnings for the employee for the period. Non taxable allowances not included. 12 Prior period gross adjustments DEC 14 Required The prior period adjustment value. 13 Earning and / or schedular payments not liable for ACC Earner’s Levy PDEC 14 Required The employee’s earnings for the period which are not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy. This should not be greater than the sum of gross earnings and Employee Share Scheme. Should be equal to gross if scheduler payment made. 14 Lump sum (extra pay) indicator PDEC 1 Required This indicates whether the employee has received a lump sum payment that has been taxed at the lowest rate during the period being reported. 1 for yes otherwise must be 0 15 PAYE / tax PDEC 14 Required PAYE or tax on schedular payments deducted from employee’s earnings for period. Does not include student loan or child support deductions. Cannot be greater than the sum of gross earnings and Employee Share Scheme. 16 Prior period PAYE adjustments DEC 14 Required The prior period adjustment value. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 17 Child support deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of child support deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. Should be 0 except when the employee is a liable parent. Cannot be greater than gross earnings. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 38 18 Child support code RANGE 1 Optional Must be blank or one of : Priority • C=ceased employment 1 • A=advanced payment 2 • P=protected earnings 3 • S=short term absence 4 • D=deducted previously 5 • O=other 6 If more than one variation code applies, the priority of the variation codes should be as above i.e. (1-6), the lowest number is the highest priority. If no variation applies or child support is not required to be deducted for the employee, then leave blank. If you deduct the exact child support amount requested for the employee on the Child Support Deduction (YL0010) notice, no code is required. Note: If you no longer employ the person who you were deducting child support for, use the “C” ceased employment code. As these codes are used to track and allocate payments it is preferred that they are provided. 19 Student Loan deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan repayments deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. Should be 0 except if employee has a student loan tax code. Cannot be greater than gross earnings. 20 SLCIR deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan Commissioner deductions deducted from the employee’s earnings for the paydate being reported. 21 SLBOR deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan voluntary extra deductions deducted from the employee’s earnings for the paydate being reported. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 39 22 KiwiSaver Deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of KiwiSaver deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. Must be 0, 3, 4, 6, 8 or 10 percent of employee's taxable earnings for the paydate. 23 Net KiwiSaver Employer Contributions PDEC 14 Required The net amount of employer contributions being paid on behalf of the employee for the period. Exclusive of ESCT payable on contribution. 24 ESCT deducted PDEC 14 Required ESCT (employer's superannuation contribution tax) deductions for the employee. 25 Tax credits for payroll donations PDEC 14 Required The amount of tax credits for payroll donations granted to the employee for the donation(s) made. 26 Family tax credits PDEC 14 Required The amount of family tax credits paid to the employee for the period. This must be ‘0’ except when the employer is Work and Income. 27 Employee Share Scheme PDEC 14 Required The amount of ESS paid to the employee. This amount should also be included in the ‘Earnings and/or scheduler payments not liable for ACC earners levy’ field. 3.5.2.2 DAI – EI amendments or New Data Record The detail record contains amended information about employees and is similar to the DTI file format. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 1 Detail record indicator ALPHA 3 Required This must have a value of DAI to indicate detail record 2 Employee IRD number IRD 9 Required IRD number of employee, as per Employer pay records. This is a 9digit number, modulus 11 checked. If not supplied then enter 000000000 and ensure Employee tax code equals ND (no notification) until an IRD number is supplied by the employee. PAYE should also be made at the ND rate. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 40 Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 3 Employee name ANAM 255 Required Preference is ‘firstname lastname’ with a space between names included in the 255 character total. Must not include embedded commas. 4 Employee tax code RANGE 5 Required Refer to section 5.3 to see the valid tax codes. 5 Employment start date DATE 8 Optional Employment start date if this is during the pay period being reported, otherwise leave blank. Must be in format CCYYMMDD. 6 Employment finish date DATE 8 Optional Employment finish date if this is during the pay period being reported, otherwise leave blank. Must be in format CCYYMMDD. 7 Employee Pay Period Start Date DATE 8 Required The start date for the paydate being reported. Must be a valid date in the format of CCYYMMDD. 8 Employee Pay Period End Date DATE 8 Required The end date for the paydate being reported. Must be a valid date in format CCYYMMDD. 9 Employee Pay cycle ANUM 2 Required Indicate if employee is paid: • Weekly (WK), • Four-weekly (4W), • Fortnightly (FT), • Monthly (MT), • Daily (DA) or • Ad hoc/Irregularly (AH), • Half monthly (HM) (twice a month) 10 Hours paid PDEC 8 Required The number of hours the employee was paid for the paydate being reported. This should be entered to two decimal places. E.g. 37.5 hours would be 3750 Default 0 if not held. 11 Gross earnings and / or schedular payments PDEC 14 Required The taxable gross earnings for the employee for the period. Non taxable allowances not included. Do not include Employee Share Scheme payments in this field. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 41 Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 12 Prior period gross adjustments DEC 14 Required The prior period adjustment value. Negative values are allowed, however negative amounts cannot be more than the amount in the Gross earnings and/or schedular payments field for the line item. I.e. The line can be reduced to zero, but not below. 13 Earning and / or schedular payments not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy PDEC 14 Required The employee’s earnings for the period which are not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy. This should not be greater than the sum of gross earnings and Employee Share Scheme. Should be equal to gross if schedular payment made. 14 Lump sum (extra pay) indicator PDEC 1 Required This indicates whether the employee has received a lump sum payment that has been taxed at the lowest rate during the period. 1 for yes otherwise must be 0 15 PAYE / tax PDEC 14 Required PAYE or tax on schedular payments deducted from employee’s earnings for period. Does not include student loan or child support deductions. Cannot be greater than the sum of gross earnings and Employee Share Scheme. 16 Prior period PAYE adjustment DEC 14 Required The prior period adjustment value. Negative values are allowed, however negative amounts cannot be more than the amount in the PAYE / tax field for the line item. I.e. The line can be reduced to zero, but not below. 17 Child support deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of child support deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. Should be 0 except when the employee is a liable parent. Cannot be greater than gross earnings. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 42 Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 18 Child support code RANGE 1 Optional Must be blank or one of: Priority • C=ceased employment 1 • A=advanced payment 2 • P=protected earnings 3 • S=short term absence 4 • D=deducted previously 5 • O=other 6 If more than one variation code applies, the priority of the variation codes should be as above i.e. (16), the lowest number is the highest priority. If no variation applies or child support is not required to be deducted for the employee, then leave blank. If you deduct the exact child support amount requested for the employee on the Child Support Deduction (YL0010) notice, no code is required. Note: If you no longer employ the person who you were deducting child support for, use the “C” ceased employment code. As these codes are used to track and allocate payments it is preferred that they are provided. 19 Student Loan deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan repayments deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. Should be 0 except if employee has a student loan tax code. Cannot be greater than gross earnings. 20 SLCIR deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan Commissioner deductions deducted from the employee’s earnings for the paydate being reported. 21 SLBOR deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan voluntary extra deductions deducted from the employee’s earnings for the paydate being reported. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 43 22 KiwiSaver Deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of KiwiSaver deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. Must be 0, 3, 4, 6, 8 or 10 percent of employee's taxable earnings for the paydate. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 23 Net KiwiSaver Employer Contributions PDEC 14 Required The net amount of employer contributions being paid on behalf of the employee for the period. Exclusive of ESCT payable on contribution. 24 ESCT deducted PDEC 14 Required ESCT (employer's superannuation contribution tax) deductions for the employee 25 Tax credits for payroll donations PDEC 14 Required The amount of tax credits for payroll donations granted to the employee for the donation(s) made. 26 Family tax credits PDEC 14 Required The amount of family tax credits paid to the employee for the period. This must be ‘0’ except when the employer is Work and Income. 27 Employee Share Scheme PDEC 14 Required The amount of ESS paid to the employee. This amount should also be included in the ‘Earnings and/or scheduler payments not liable for ACC earners levy’ field. 3.5.3 EIA – EI Amendments Header record Important Note: If an HEI was filed, it must be amended with an EIA. However, if an HEI2 was filed, it can only be amended with an EIA2. The EIA is the header record for amended EI information and is similar to the HEI header file format. The header record precedes the detail records. The EIA Header record IR form version number will be 0001. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 1 Header record indicator ALPHA 3 Required This must have a value of EIA to indicate header record. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 44 2 Employer IRD number/Account ID IRD 9 Required A valid IRD number. This is a 9digit number. It cannot be 000000000 3 Paydate DATE 8 Required Paydate that is being amended - date of the original payment to the employee. Must be a valid date. Format CCYYMMDD e.g. 20130831 4 PAYE Intermediary IRD number IRD 9 Optional This is a valid 9-digit IRD number for the PAYE Intermediary linked to the employer. It cannot be 000000000. This can be left blank if no PI is linked to the employer. 5 Name of payroll contact person ANAM 20 Required The name of the payroll contact person for IRD purposes. The preference is ‘first name surname’ with a space between names included in the 20 character total. Must not include embedded commas. 6 Payroll contact work phone number ANUM 12 Required The daytime work contact phone number for the payroll contact person. 12 alphanumeric characters and must not include commas 7 IR form version number NUM 4 Required 0001 3.5.4 Detail record overview – DTI and DAI The detail records are shown as ‘DTI’ and ‘DAI’. Both the detail records contain employee details. DTI shows the original line item and will be used when existing details supplied previously are amended. DAI shows amendments to the previous EI lines or brand new data that did not appear in previous EI. 3.5.4.1 EI Original Line Item Record The detail record contains employee information in the following format and layout. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 1 Detail record indicator ALPHA 3 Required This must have a value of DTI to indicate detail record (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 45 2 Employee IRD number IRD 9 Required IRD number of employee, as per Employer pay records. This is a 9digit number, modulus 11 checked. If not supplied then enter 000000000 and ensure Employee tax code equals ND (no notification) until an IRD number is supplied by the employee. PAYE should also be made at the ND rate. 3 Employee name ANAM 255 Required Preference is ‘surname first name’ with a space between names included in the 255 character total. Must not include embedded commas. 4 Employee tax code RANGE 5 Required Refer to section 5.3 to see the valid tax codes. 5 Employment start date DATE 8 Optional Employment start date if this is during the pay period reported, otherwise leave blank. Must be in format CCYYMMDD. 6 Employment finish date DATE 8 Optional Employment finish date if this is during the pay period being reported, otherwise leave blank. Must be in format CCYYMMDD. 7 Employee Pay Period Start Date DATE 8 Required The start date for the paydate being reported. Must be a valid date in the format of CCYYMMDD. 8 Employee Pay Period End Date DATE 8 Required The end date for the paydate being reported. Must be a valid date in format CCYYMMDD. 9 Employee Pay cycle ANUM 2 Required Indicate if employee is paid: • Weekly (WK), • Four-weekly (4W), • Fortnightly (FT), • Monthly (MT), • Daily (DA) or • Ad hoc/Irregularly (AH), • Half monthly (HM) (twice a month) 10 Gross earnings and / or schedular payments PDEC 14 Required The taxable gross earnings for the employee for the period. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 46 11 Earning and / or schedular payments not liable for ACC Earner’s Levy PDEC 14 Required The employee’s earnings for the period which are not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy. 12 Lump sum (extra pay) indicator NUM 1 Required This indicates whether the employee has received a lump sum payment that has been taxed at the lowest rate during the period being reported. 1 for yes otherwise must be 0 13 PAYE / tax PDEC 14 Required PAYE or tax on schedular payments deducted from employee’s earnings for period. 14 Child support deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of child support deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. 15 Child support code RANGE 1 Optional Must be blank or one of: Priority • C=ceased employment 1 • A=advanced payment 2 • P=protected earnings 3 • S=short term absence 4 • D=deducted previously 5 • O=other 6 If more than one variation code applies, the priority of the variation codes should be as above i.e. (1-6), the lowest number is the highest priority. If no variation applies or child support is not required to be deducted for the employee, then leave blank. If you deduct the exact child support amount requested for the employee on the Child Support Deduction (YL0010) notice, no code is required. Note: If you no longer employ the person who you were deducting child support for, use the “C” ceased employment code. As these codes are used to track and allocate payments it is preferred that they are provided. 16 Student Loan deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan repayments deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 47 Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 17 KiwiSaver Deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of KiwiSaver deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. 18 Net KiwiSaver Employer Contributions PDEC 14 Required The net amount of employer contributions being paid on behalf of the employee for the period. This field is the total of voluntary contributions and the compulsory contribution. 19 ESCT deducted PDEC 14 Required ESCT (employer's superannuation contribution tax) deductions for the employee. 20 Tax credits for payroll donations PDEC 14 Required The amount of tax credits for payroll donations granted to the employee for the donation(s) made. 21 Family tax credits PDEC 14 Required The amount of family tax credits paid to the employee for the period. This must be ‘0’ except when the employer is Work and Income. 3.5.4.2 DAI – EI amendments or New Data Record The detail record contains amended information about employees and is similar to the DTI file format. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 1 Detail record indicator ALPHA 3 Required This must have a value of DAI to indicate detail record 2 Employee IRD number IRD 9 Required IRD number of employee, as per Employer pay records. This is a 9digit number, modulus 11 checked. If not supplied then enter 000000000 and ensure Employee tax code equals ND (no notification) until an IRD number is supplied by the employee. PAYE should also be made at the ND rate. 3 Employee name ANAM 255 Required Preference is ‘surname first name’ with a space between names included in the 255 character total. Must not include embedded commas. 4 Employee tax code RANGE 5 Required Refer to section 5.3 to see the valid tax codes. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 48 Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes 5 Employment start date DATE 8 Optional Employment start date if this is during the pay period being reported, otherwise leave blank. Must be in format CCYYMMDD. 6 Employment finish date DATE 8 Optional Employment finish date if this is during the pay period being reported, otherwise leave blank. Must be in format CCYYMMDD. 7 Employee Pay Period Start Date DATE 8 Required The start date for the paydate being reported. Must be a valid date in the format of CCYYMMDD. 8 Employee Pay Period End Date DATE 8 Required The end date for the paydate being reported. Must be a valid date in format CCYYMMDD. 9 Employee Pay cycle ANUM 2 Required Indicate if employee is paid: • Weekly (WK), • Four-weekly (4W), • Fortnightly (FT), • Monthly (MT), • Daily (DA) or • Ad hoc/Irregularly (AH), • Half monthly (HM) (twice a month) 10 Gross earnings and / or schedular payments PDEC 14 Required The taxable gross earnings for the employee for the period. 11 Earning and / or schedular payments not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy PDEC 14 Required The employee’s earnings for the period which are not liable for ACC Earners’ Levy. 12 Lump sum (extra pay) indicator NUM 1 Required This indicates whether the employee has received a lump sum payment that has been taxed at the lowest rate during the period. 1 for yes otherwise must be 0 13 PAYE / tax PDEC 14 Required PAYE or tax on schedular payments deducted from employee’s earnings for period. 14 Child support deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of child support deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 49 15 Child support code RANGE 1 Optional Must be blank or one of : Priority • C=ceased employment 1 • A=advanced payment 2 • P=protected earnings 3 • S=short term absence 4 • D=deducted previously 5 • O=other 6 If more than one variation code applies, the priority of the variation codes should be as above i.e. (16), the lowest number is the highest priority. If no variation applies or child support is not required to be deducted for the employee, then leave blank. If you deduct the exact child support amount requested for the employee on the Child Support Deduction (YL0010) notice, no code is required. Note: If you no longer employ the person who you were deducting child support for, use the “C” ceased employment code. As these codes are used to track and allocate payments it is preferred that they are provided. 16 Student Loan deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of student loan repayments deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. 17 KiwiSaver Deductions PDEC 14 Required The amount of KiwiSaver deducted from the employee’s earnings for the period. Add a tolerance rule allowing the KSE employee deductions field to accept an amount greater than 10% if the excess is less than $1. 18 Net KiwiSaver Employer Contributions PDEC 14 Required The net amount of employer contributions being paid on behalf of the employee for the period. This field will be the total of voluntary contributions and the compulsory contribution. 19 ESCT deducted PDEC 14 Required ESCT (employer's superannuation contribution tax) deductions for the employee Position Item Description Attribute Field size Required/ Optional Default values/notes (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 50 20 Tax credits for payroll donations PDEC 14 Required The amount of tax credits for payroll donations granted to the employee for the donation(s) made. 21 Family tax credits PDEC 14 Required The amount of family tax credits paid to the employee for the period. This must be ‘0’ except when the employer is Work and Income. 3.5.5 Example EI amendment file The following are examples of the EI Amendment file in csv format (as text for readability, please refer to the Sample files folder on the IR GitHub for more file examples). NB: the example is intended to show the layout of the file – calculated figures may not be accurate Version EIA2 EIA2,123123123,20190508,,Penelope Peach,091234567,0001 DTI,111111111,Ella Vince,CAE,,,20190501,20190528,4W,2500,56478,0,0,0,11365,0,0,,0,0,0,3565,1526,756,0,0,0 DAI,111111111,Ella Vince,CAE,,,20190501,20190528,4W,2800,58746,0,0,0,12569,0,0,,0,0,0,3784,1647,787,0,0,0 DTI,,,,,,,,,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 DAI,074444444,Cook Cameron,M,,,20190501,20190528,4W,3000,67855,0,0,0,13565,0,0,,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 DTI,123123123,Steve Smith,M,,,20190501,20190528,4W,3500,65846,0,0,0,14563,0,0,,0,0,0,03265,1465,745,0,0,0 DAI,,,,,,,,,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 Version EIA EIA,123123123,20180508,075555555,Penelope Peach,09 1234567,0001 DTI,111111111,Ella Vince,CAE,20170407,20170408,20170407,20170408,MT,1000000,20000,1,30000,50000,A,70000,80000,0,90000,0 ,0 DAI,111111111,Ella Vince,SB,20170607,20170608,20170607,20170608,4W,10000,200,1,300,500,A,600,700,800,999,900,0 DTI,,,,,,,,,0,0,0,0,0,,0,0,0,0,0,0 DAI,074444444,Cook Cameron,M,,,20170607,20170608,4W,200000,200,1,300,500,A,600,700,800,999,900,0 DTI,123123123,Steve Smith,M,,,20170607,20170608,4W,200000,200,1,300,500,A,600,700,800,999,900,0 DAI,,,,,,,,,0,0,0,0,0,,0,0,0,0,0,0 4 Kiwisaver Online Forms 4.1 KiwiSaver Employment Details Form (KS1) From 1 April 2021 the KiwiSaver Employment Details form will no longer be accepted. The Employee Details file (header record indicator HED2) should instead be used for providing KiwiSaver details. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 51 5 Appendix 5.1 myIR format and layout This section specifies the file format and layout that will be sent through the myIR system. 5.1.1 File format The file format for all myIR file transfer services must be in ASCII comma delimited format with the exception of the Employee Details excel file upload service which must be in the excel file format. 5.1.2 Location The output file must be placed in a directory that is easily accessible from the desktop. Depending on the file size, it can either be placed in a local or a LAN drive. 5.1.3 File naming suggestions There is no standard file naming required. However, for easier identification we suggest the following: • A unique, period-based name. • Inclusion of the type of return to differentiate it from other returns, which may be required to be filed electronically in the future. • A CSV extension for Employment Information • An CSV extension for Employee Details or alternatively an xls or xlsx extension for Employee Details that accepts new and departing employee details. 5.1.4 Compression File compression using the zip compression algorithm is acceptable, provided that the following rules are adhered to: Filing as an intermediary through then Intermediary Centre: • Must be a PAYE Intermediary, Payroll bureau, tax agent, Bookkeeper or Other representative who has the Intermediary Centre link. • The content of any zip file must consist only of uncompressed files, i.e. a compressed file cannot be included within any other zip file. A ‘nested’ zip file cannot be processed and will cause the whole file to be rejected. • Only zip files of the same type. All files within that zip must represent the same file service type. E.g. Zip file cannot contain both Employee details csv file and Employment information csv file. • A zip file must be a single file only. In other words, a multi-part zip file (usually created to span removable media) will be rejected, as the decompression application will fail when trying to process a part file as a whole file. Filing through the employer’s Payroll account > File transfer service (I want to) • A zip file can contain different file types as long as the files are for that same Payroll account. E.g. A zip file can contain both an Employee details csv file and an Employment information csv file where the employer is the same as the Payroll account the file is submitted from. • All zipped files must be complete files. I.e. a zip file must not contain any files where the contents are split across two separate files. • A zip file must be a single file only. In other words, a multi-part zip file (usually created to span removable media) will be rejected, as the decompression application will fail when trying to process a part file as a whole file. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 52 5.1.5 Trailer record There is no trailer record required. 5.1.6 Data attributes The following is a list of valid attributes accepted by the myIR system: Data type Description ANUM Alphabetic and numeric characters only. Alphabetic: Any letter or space (“a” to “z”, “A” to “Z” and space). Numeric: Any numeric character (0 to 9 and “-“). Leading and trailing spaces must be trimmed; field values must not be enclosed in quotes; nil must be represented by a zero, i.e. 0; blank values must have a format of comma comma, i.e. ,, ALPHA Alphabetic characters only. Alphabetic: Any letter or space (“a” to “z”, “A” to “Z” and space). Leading and trailing spaces must be trimmed; field values must not be enclosed in quotes; blank values must have a format of comma comma i.e.,, NUM A positive integer of a given length. No ‘+’ sign. ANAM Alphabetic and numeric characters from a standard 101/102 keyboard except commas, square brackets, backslashes and quotation marks (“). Leading and trailing spaces must be trimmed; embedded spaces left as is; all spaces are invalid. PDEC Money in cents. The number should be a non-negative decimal integer. For example, if the amount is $547.98, the output format should be ‘54798’. No padding is required. Nil values should be represented by zero, i.e. 0. DEC Money in cents. As per PDEC, but the number can be positive or negative. For example, if the amount is -$547.98, the output format should be ‘-54798’. No padding is required. Nil values should be represented by zero, i.e. 0. DATE Any valid date in the format CCYYMMDD. IRD A valid 9 digit IRD number. It must be modulus 11 checked (see Payroll Calculations & Business Rules Specification– IRD number validation). Note that IRD numbers can contain eight or nine digits. From June 2008, IR introduced an extended number range for IRD numbers to include a new 9 digit range. RANGE This field may only contain the values within the given range. Blank values must have a format of comma comma, i.e. ,, EMAIL This field will contain the email address. Acceptable characters are A-Z, a-z, 0-9 and @ - \_. Syntax must contain ‘@domain’ string, and not contain double periods (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 53 5.2 Pay Cycle, Paydate, Pay Period The following example demonstrates what is meant by Pay Cycle, Paydate and Pay Period. An employer has a Pay Cycle of weekly, with each Paydate being the Friday of each week. The employer has two employees: • Employee A is paid weekly for a Pay Period that spans each Thursday to the Wednesday of the following week. • Employee B is paid fortnightly for a Pay Period that spans a Thursday to the second subsequent Wednesday. The start and end of each Pay Period for each employee is noted in the calendar below. Also shown is the Paydate of each Friday. A pril/May 2019 Sun Mon Tues Weds Thurs Fri Sat 1 2 3 4 5 6 Employee A: Pay Period End Date Employee A: Pay Period Start Date (1) Employer Paydate Employee B: Pay Period End Date Employee B: Pay Period Start Date (1) 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Employee A: Pay Period End Date (1) Employee A: Pay Period Start Date (2) Employer Paydate 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Employee A: Pay Period End Date (2) Employee A: Pay Period Start Date (3) Employer Paydate Employee B: Pay Period End Date (1) Employee B: Pay Period Start Date (2) 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Employee A: Pay Period End Date (3) Employee A: Pay Period Start Date (4) Employer Paydate 28 29 30 1 2 3 4 Employee A: Pay Period End Date (4) Employee A: Pay Period Start Date Employer Paydate Employee B: Pay Period End Date (2) Employee B: Pay Period Start Date Paydates shaded blue include both employees in the pay run for that Paydate. For example, Employment Information for the Paydate: (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 54 • 19th April will include earnings and deduction information for: o Employee A; for the Pay Period 11th April to 17th April; o Employee B; for the Pay Period 4th April to 17th April. • 3rd May will include earnings and deduction information for: o Employee A; for the Pay Period 25th April to 1st May; o Employee B; for the Pay Period 18th April to 1st May. Paydates shaded red only include Employee A in the pay run for that Paydate. For example, Employment Information for the Paydate: 12th April will include earnings and deduction information for Employee A for the Pay Period 4th April to 10th April. 26th April will include earnings and deduction information for Employee A for the Pay Period 18th April to 24th April. (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 55 5.3 Table of Tax Codes as at 1 April 2024 Tax code Description M Main income ME Main income – Independent Earner Tax Credit (IETC) M SL Main income with Student Loan ME SL Main Income with Student Loan & IETC NSW Non-resident seasonal workers income. Flat tax. There are no thresholds SB Secondary income \* $14,000 S Secondary income \* $14,001 to $48,000 SH Secondary income \* $48,001 to $70,000 ST Secondary income \* $70,001 to $180,000 SA Secondary income \* > $180,000 SB SL Secondary income \* $14,000 with Student Loan S SL Secondary income \* $14,001 to $48,000 with a Student Loan SH SL Secondary income \* $48,001 to $70,000 with Student Loan ST SL Secondary income \* $70,001 to $180,000 with Student Loan SA SL Secondary income \* > $180,000 with Student Loan CAE Casual agricultural employees EDW Election day workers ND No notification rate STC Tailored tax code from IR 23 WT Schedular Payments 5.4 Table of Countries Country List ISO 3166 alpha-3 country code NEW ZEALAND NZL AUSTRALIA AUS AFGHANISTAN AFG ÅLAND ISLANDS ALA ALBANIA ALB ALGERIA DZA AMERICAN SAMOA ASM ANDORRA AND (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 56 ANGOLA AGO ANGUILLA AIA ANTARCTICA ATA ANTIGUA-BARBUDA ATG ARGENTINA ARG ARMENIA ARM ARUBA ABW AUSTRIA AUT AZERBAIJAN AZE BAHAMAS BHS BAHRAIN BHR BANGLADESH BGD BARBADOS BRB BELARUS BLR BELGIUM BEL BELIZE BLZ BENIN BEN BERMUDA BMU BHUTAN BTN BOLIVIA BOL BONAIRE, SINT EUSTATIUS & SABA BES BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA BIH BOTSWANA BWA BOUVET ISLAND BVT BRAZIL BRA BRITISH INDIAN OCEAN TERRITORY IOT BRUNEI DARUSSALAM BRN BULGARIA BGR BURKINA FASO BFA BURUNDI BDI CAMBODIA KHM CAMEROON CMR CANADA CAN CAPE VERDE CPV CAYMAN ISLANDS CYM CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC CAF CHAD TCD CHILE CHL CHINA CHN CHRISTMAS ISLAND CXR COCOS (KEELING) ISLANDS CCK (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 57 COLOMBIA COL COMOROS COM CONGO COG CONGO,THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC COD COOK ISLANDS COK COSTA RICA CRI CÔTE D'IVOIRE CIV CROATIA HRV CUBA CUB CURAÇAO CUW CYPRUS CYP CZECH REPUBLIC CZE DENMARK DNK DJIBOUTI DJI DOMINICA DMA DOMINICAN REPUBLIC DOM ECUADOR ECU EGYPT EGY EL SALVADOR SLV ENGLAND GBR EQUATORIAL GUINEA GNQ ERITREA ERI ESTONIA EST ETHIOPIA ETH FALKLAND ISLANDS (MALVINAS) FLK FAROE ISLANDS FRO FEDERATED STATES OF MICRONESIA FSM FIJI FJI FINLAND FIN FRANCE FRA FRENCH GUIANA GUF FRENCH POLYNESIA PYF FRENCH SOUTHERN TERRITORIES ATF GABON GAB GAMBIA GMB GEORGIA GEO GERMANY DEU GHANA GHA GIBRALTAR GIB GREECE GRC GREENLAND GRL (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 58 GRENADA GRD GUADELOUPE GLP GUAM GUM GUATEMALA GTM GUERNSEY GGY GUINEA GIN GUINEA-BISSAU GNB GUYANA GUY HAITI HTI HEARD ISLAND-MCDONALD ISLANDS HMD HOLY SEE (VATICAN CITY STATE) VAT HONDURAS HND HONG KONG HKG HUNGARY HUN ICELAND ISL INDIA IND INDONESIA IDN IRAN IRN IRAQ IRQ IRELAND IRL ISLE OF MAN IMN ISRAEL ISR ITALY ITA JAMAICA JAM JAPAN JPN JERSEY JEY JORDAN JOR KAZAKHSTAN KAZ KENYA KEN KIRIBATI KIR KOSOVO XKX KUWAIT KWT KYRGYZSTAN KGZ LAOS LAO LATVIA LVA LEBANON LBN LESOTHO LSO LIBERIA LBR LIBYA LBY LIECHTENSTEIN LIE LITHUANIA LTU (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 59 LUXEMBOURG LUX MACAU MAC MACEDONIA MKD MADAGASCAR MDG MALAWI MWI MALAYSIA MYS MALDIVES MDV MALI MLI MALTA MLT MARSHALL ISLANDS MHL MARTINIQUE MTQ MAURITANIA MRT MAURITIUS MUS MAYOTTE ISLAND MYT MEXICO MEX MONACO MCO MONGOLIA MNG MONTENEGRO MNE MONTSERRAT MSR MOROCCO MAR MOZAMBIQUE MOZ MYANMAR MMR NAMIBIA NAM NAURU NRU NEPAL NPL NETHERLANDS NLD NEW CALEDONIA NCL NICARAGUA NIC NIGER NER NIGERIA NGA NIUE NIU NORFOLK ISLAND NFK NORTH KOREA PRK NORTHERN IRELAND GBR NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS MNP NORWAY NOR OCCUPIED PALESTINIAN TERRITORY PSE OMAN OMN OVERSEAS PAKISTAN PAK PALAU PLW (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 60 PANAMA PAN PAPUA NEW GUINEA PNG PARAGUAY PRY PERU PER PHILIPPINES PHL PITCAIRN PCN POLAND POL PORTUGAL PRT PUERTO RICO PRI QATAR QAT REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA MDA RÉUNION ISLAND REU ROMANIA ROU RUSSIA RUS RWANDA RWA SAMOA WSM SAN MARINO SMR SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE STP SAUDI ARABIA SAU SCOTLAND GBR SENEGAL SEN SERBIA SRB SEYCHELLES SYC SIERRA LEONE SLE SINGAPORE SGP SINT MAARTEN SXM SLOVAKIA SVK SLOVENIA SVN SOLOMON ISLANDS SLB SOMALIA SOM SOUTH AFRICA ZAF SOUTH GEORGIA-SANDWICH ISLANDS SGS SOUTH KOREA KOR SOUTH SUDAN SSD SPAIN ESP SRI LANKA LKA ST. BARTHELEMY BLM ST. HELENA SHN ST. KITTS NEVIS KNA ST. LUCIA LCA ST. MARTIN MAF (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 61 ST. PIERRE AND MIQUELON SPM ST. VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES VCT State of Palestine PSE SUDAN SDN SURINAME SUR SVALBARD AND JAN MAYEN SJM SWAZILAND SWZ SWEDEN SWE SWITZERLAND CHE SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC SYR TAIWAN TWN TAJIKISTAN TJK TANZANIA TZA THAILAND THA TIMOR-LESTE TLS TOGO TGO TOKELAU TKL TONGA TON TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO TTO TUNISIA TUN TURKEY TUR TURKMENISTAN TKM TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS TCA TUVALU TUV UGANDA UGA UKRAINE UKR UNITED ARAB EMIRATES ARE UNITED KINGDOM GBR URUGUAY URY US MINOR OUTLYING ISLANDS UMI USA USA UZBEKISTAN UZB VANUATU VUT VENEZUELA VEN VIET NAM VNM VIRGIN ISLANDS, BRITISH VGB VIRGIN ISLANDS, U.S. VIR WALES GBR WALLIS-FUTUNA WLF WESTERN SAHARA ESH YEMEN YEM (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 62 ZAMBIA ZMB ZIMBABWE ZWE (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 63 5.5 Table of Unit Types Country List ISO alpha-3 country code Unit Type NEW ZEALAND NZL APARTMENT NEW ZEALAND NZL FLAT NEW ZEALAND NZL KIOSK NEW ZEALAND NZL NUMBER NEW ZEALAND NZL ROOM NEW ZEALAND NZL SHOP NEW ZEALAND NZL SUITE NEW ZEALAND NZL UNIT NEW ZEALAND NZL VILLA CANADA CAN # CANADA CAN APARTMENT CANADA CAN BUILDING CANADA CAN BASEMENT CANADA CAN DEPARTMENT CANADA CAN FLOOR CANADA CAN FRONT CANADA CAN HANGAR CANADA CAN LOBBY CANADA CAN LOT CANADA CAN LOWER CANADA CAN NUMBER CANADA CAN OFFICE CANADA CAN PENTHOUSE CANADA CAN PIER CANADA CAN REAR CANADA CAN ROOM CANADA CAN SIDE CANADA CAN SLIP CANADA CAN SPACE CANADA CAN SUITE CANADA CAN STOP CANADA CAN TRAILER CANADA CAN UNIT CANADA CAN UPPER USA USA # USA USA APARTMENT USA USA BUILDING USA USA BASEMENT USA USA DEPARTMENT (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 64 USA USA FLOOR USA USA FRONT USA USA HANGAR USA USA LOBBY USA USA LOT USA USA LOWER USA USA NUMBER USA USA OFFICE USA USA PENTHOUSE USA USA PIER USA USA REAR USA USA ROOM USA USA SIDE USA USA SLIP USA USA SPACE USA USA SUITE USA USA STOP USA USA TRAILER USA USA UNIT USA USA UPPER 5.6 Table of Employee Titles Title List Brigadier Captain Colonel Dame Doctor Honourable Honourable Doctor Judge Lady Lord Major Master Miss Mr Mrs Ms Mx (IN-CONFIDENCE-EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 65 Professor Reverend Reverend Father Reverend Mother Right Honourable Right Reverend Sir Sister Wing Commander 5.7 KiwiSaver Status Codes Please now refer to the Employee Details file specification table at Section 3.2.2 for details of the KiwiSaver status codes. (IN-CONFIDENCE- EXTERNAL RELEASE) Payday Filing File Upload Specification 2025 01 April 2024 to 31 March 2025 66 5.8 Change Log Version number Sections changed Change description Date V0.01 Updated the year 11/01/2024 V1.00 Updated to Final 02/04/2024