1 | Page \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] BT PROGRAMME CHANGE REQUEST BTPCR ID # BTPCR-XXX DATE PCR RAISED IN JIRA XX/XX/XXXX PCR TITLE PCR OWNER REPORTER ASSIGNEE DESIGN DECISION Please provide reference here to the design decision from which this change originates (if applicable) PCR LINKS Please provide links here to supporting details ( as available) PCR DESCRIPTION Provide details of the change – What, Why, When and How? What is the risk of not doing it? Assess and detail the impact/s of the change in the sections below. CONSULTED - List the people that have been consulted regarding this change Name Role Comment / Note Architecture & Design Team Please note if it’s: Heritage, START, Digital, Reporting, etc Build/Development Team Testing Team Training Team Change & Comm’s Team Finance Team Other Section A: INITIAL ASSESSMENT \[for initial submission\] D PCR IMPACT 3 - Low PCR PRIORITY: 3 - Low IMPACT IF NOT APPROVED: – DETAILED INFORMATION IMPACT ON SCOPE? Impact: None If yes, details must be captured in the BT Scope in JIRA Please add JIRA SCP # h ere Please link the PCR in the JIRA Scope item IMPACT TO DELIVERABLE/s? Impact: None If yes, please provide details in the table provided in section B. IMPACT ON RESOURCES? Impact: None If yes, please provide details in the table provided in section B of the additional resources required. IMPACT ON SCHEDULE? Impact: None If yes, please provide details in the table provided in section B. IMPACT ON BUDGET? Impact: None If yes, please complete the table provided in section B and copy TOTAL COST back here once completed. 2 | Page \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Section B: DETAILED INFORMATION \[complete AFTER initial assessment\] SCHEDULE IMPACT Activity or Task Start Date End Date Reason for the change dd/mm/yyyy dd/mm/yyyy Please note if it’s a new task or a change to existing. RESOURCES REQUIRED Function Role/Type Number of Working Days required Total Days General e.g. Project manager or workstream lead or coordinator e.g. Coordinator Design e.g. Architect e.g. Business Analyst Build e.g. Business Analyst e.g. Developer and/or Build Lead, etc. Test e.g. Test Analyst and/or Test Co-Ordinator and/or Test Lead, etc. This would be derived from # of test scenario required Add as needed TOTAL: DELIVERABLE/s IMPACTED - Impact on the current baselined Deliverables Change Current Change Requested Deliverable ID (leave blank if new) DXXXX n/a Deliverable Title Start Date Insert Baselined date Insert proposed new start date Finish Date Insert Baselined date Insert proposed new end date Responsible Person Accountable Person Consulted Persons Informed Persons BUDGET/COST IMPACT - Please consult with Performance & Finance and provide a confirmation email Expenditure Type Approved Baseline Estimate at Completion Additional Budget Requested OPERATING COSTS Resourcing (copy from resource table) $0 $0 $0 Expenses $0 $0 $0 Software $0 $0 $0 Hardware $0 $0 $0 Other Costs $0 $0 $0 OPEX Costs - Total $0 $0 $0 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE COSTS Resourcing (copy from resource table) $0 $0 $0 Expenses $0 $0 $0 Software $0 $0 $0 Hardware $0 $0 $0 Other Costs $0 $0 $0 CAPEX Costs - Total $0 $0 $0 \*Add further breakdown as required Approved Baseline Estimate at Completion Additional Budget Requested TOTAL OPEX $0 $0 $0 TOTAL CAPEX $0 $0 $0 3 | Page \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] WORKSTREAM REQUESTER PRE-APPROVAL CHECKLIST \*\*COMPLETED BEFORE PMO SUBMISSION\*\* Action Complete Y/N Performance Facilities & Finance has reviewed, and email confirmation included in JIRA commentary. PCR lists individuals consulted and supporting emails included in JIRA commentary. Additional supporting material embedded in PCR (i.e., KDDs, Emails, and Minutes). SUPPORTING MATERIAL Insert links to supporting information i.e., BFD, Design Decision reference #, minutes of meetings, emails, issues, risks, etc. Section C: RECOMMENDATION TO PROCEED WITH PCR (email recommendation will suffice) Name Position Signature Date Insert Name Responsible Person Insert Name Accountable Person (PCR Owner) Brad Diamond BT PMO Manager Section D: APPROVAL \[managed by the PMO\] (email approval will suffice) (1) I approve for this financial impact to be incurred within existing funding, and the pressure to be managed within the under and overs across the BT Programme. YES / NO - OR- (2) I approve for this financial impact to be escalated to PGC / IB to seek approval to draw required funding from the BT Programme contingency. YES / NO \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Date Deputy Commissioner Transformation Please note that in the case of soft copies of this PCR document, email recommendations and approval will be required. Recommendations and approval emails will be attached to the PCR document by the PCR Administrator. In the case of a hard copy recommendations and approval, a pdf version of the document will be attached to the JIRA PCR ticket by the PCR Administrator and the physical document archived by the BT-PMO.