PRODUCT RULING – BR Prd 04/10 This is a product ruling made under section 91F of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Name of the Person who applied for the Ruling This Ruling has been applied for by BNZ Investment Management Limited as Administration Manager of The BNZ International Equity Index Fund. Taxation Laws All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 1994 unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of section HH 3(5) and the section OB 1 definitions of “qualifying trust” and “superannuation fund”. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies The Arrangement is the operation of the BNZ International Equity Index Fund (“the Fund”) pursuant to the Trust Deed of the Fund, dated 1 July 2001, as amended by a Deed of Amendment dated 21 December 2001 (“the Trust Deed”). The Trust Deed will be further amended as soon as practicable following the issuing of this ruling by a Deed of Amendment and the final Deed of Amendment will not be materially different from the draft Deed of Amendment provided to the Rulings Unit on 11 June 2004 (“the Amending Deed”). Further details of the Arrangement are set out in the paragraphs below. 1. The Fund invests in equity securities that correspond to the composition of the Morgan Stanley Capital International World Index (“MSCI”), modified such that the securities invested in will be of those countries specified in Part A of Schedule 3 to the Act (“grey-list countries”) that each comprise 1% or more of the MSCI (“the BNZ Index”). The Fund has been designed to enable investors to obtain, through one security, the same financial results that can be obtained through the direct investment in the securities of those companies that make up the BNZ Index. 2. The Trustee of the Fund (“the Trustee”) is Trustees Executors Superannuation Limited. In July 2003, TOWER Trust Superannuation Limited (as a result of a change in ownership) reverted to its former name of Trustees Executors Superannuation Limited. 3. The Administration Manager of the Fund is BNZ Investment Management Limited (the “Administration Manager”). The Investment Manager of the Fund is State Street Global Advisors, Australia, Limited (“the Investment Manager”). 4. The Sponsor of the Fund is the Bank of New Zealand (“the Sponsor”). 5. The Fund is a wholesale superannuation fund into which other wholesale and retail superannuation funds invest. The Fund was established for the purpose of being a wholesale investment vehicle for retail superannuation funds, other wholesale superannuation funds and for the purpose of providing retirement benefits to the limited number of natural persons who invest directly in it. Unless the prior approval of the Trustee, with the consent of the Sponsor, is obtained, the minimum initial investment into the Fund is NZ$200,000. 6. The Fund is registered under the Superannuation Schemes Act 1989. 7. The Trust Deed states that: The investment policy of the Fund will be: (a) to invest the Fund (other than the Cash Pool) in accordance with Schedule 2 to this Deed only in such investments as the Trustee considers necessary to track the modified grey list components of the World Index; and (b) to invest the Cash Pool in restricted investments, being deposits with banks, and futures contracts. 8. The Fund buys and sells shares as required to ensure that it continues to correspond to the BNZ Index. Such buying and selling will not be motivated by any intention to derive a profit or gain from such sales. In this regard, the Trust Deed states: The Fund and the Trustee do not have an intention to profit from holding, acquiring or selling Index Company securities. 9. The Applicant has confirmed that all material aspects of the previous rulings (Prv 97/125, Prv 01/11, Prv 01/65, Prv 01/114, Prd 97/38, Prd 01/30 and Prd 02/01), relating to the Fund, have been complied with, except that: (a) The earliest rulings did not refer to the Investment Manager’s ability to sell securities where an individual security was outside its tracking weight; and (b) In some cases investments from natural persons have been below $200,000. 10. The only amendments to the Trust Deed are those contained in the Amending Deed. There has not been any material change to the management or operation of the Fund since its establishment. Date of Adjustments 11. The Fund is re-balanced in the following circumstances: • If a security is outside its BNZ Index weight by the lesser of- • 0.5% of the total Fund, whether positive or negative; or • three times the BNZ Index weight of the individual security; and 2 • When the periodic (currently quarterly) adjustments are made to the MSCI; and • If there are any MSCI market driven changes (as identified in clause 3.3 of the current MSCI Methodology Book: MSCI Standard Index Series Methodology) or corporate actions such as a merger, takeover, new listing or reduction or increase in capital affecting any index company in the BNZ Index. 12. Such re-balancing will occur at the earliest practicable time after the above events have occurred and in any event within five business days. Events that trigger acquisitions or realisations 13. There are certain reasons or events when investments held by the Fund will have to be bought or sold. The Trustee will only dispose of securities (other than cash pool investments) if: • the Fund is wound up; • there is a change in the BNZ Index and composition of the securities of the Fund no longer tracks the BNZ Index (whether as a result of a change to the countries included or a change to the securities included); • there is a compulsory acquisition of one of the Fund’s securities or a security is acquired on a compulsory acquisition, merger or takeover which does not track the BNZ Index; • there is a net withdrawal of funds from the Fund by members; • there is a claim on the Trustee in respect of the Fund which cannot be otherwise satisfied; or • the Fund is re-balanced in accordance with the first bullet point in paragraph 11, above. Rights issues 14. In the event of any rights issue by an index company, the Investment Manager will retain the entitlement and take up the securities if the securities the subject of the entitlement will be immediately included in the BNZ Index. 15. Notwithstanding paragraph 14, if the securities the subject of the entitlement are over-represented, the Investment Manager will sell the entitlement and reinvest the proceeds in the index companies to track the BNZ Index. 16. If the Investment Manager does not know whether the securities the subject of the entitlement will be included in the Index the Investment Manager will sell the entitlement at the earliest practicable time (and in any event within five business days) and reinvest the proceeds in the index companies to track the BNZ Index. 3 Mergers, Takeovers and Share Buy-backs 17. The BNZ Index may be adjusted from time to time because of mergers, takeovers, share buy-backs, distributions of capital, cash issues, and substitutions of companies in the BNZ Index. 18. In the event of a merger or takeover of a BNZ Index company the Investment Manager will adjust the Fund portfolio at the earliest practicable time (but in any event within five business days) to the time the BNZ Index is adjusted. The Fund will not accept an offer unless as a consequence of not accepting the offer the Fund would track the BNZ Index less accurately than if it had accepted the offer. 19. The Investment Manager will not participate in an optional share buy-back by a BNZ Index company. Hedging 20. There is no specific provision in the Trust Deed that allows the Fund to hedge foreign exchange risks. 21. The Fund will not take any action to hedge or manage foreign exchange risks or exposures that arise from the investments of the Fund being held in non-New Zealand currencies. Borrowing 22. Clause 10.1 (c) of the Trust provides: ...The Trustee may: borrow money for the purpose of the Fund upon terms and conditions agreed by the Sponsor and the Trustee and charge all or part of the assets of the Fund with repayment and payment of interest on the moneys so borrowed; 23. Pursuant to the ruling, the Fund can only borrow in the following circumstances: • To temporarily fund the redemption of units when the cash pool has insufficient funds; this borrowing must be repaid at the earliest practicable time, and in any event any such borrowing will be repaid within three business days; • Where a security is sold and another purchased and a settlement mismatch occurs resulting in the Fund’s bank account becoming inadvertently overdrawn, and in this event for no longer than strictly necessary; • To temporarily fund the purchase of securities in order to rebalance following a merger, where pursuant to the merger payment due to the Fund for securities 4 that have been disposed of has been delayed (such delay being beyond the control of the Fund), and in this event for no longer than strictly necessary; or • For advances (not to exceed total borrowings of $5,000) by the Administration Manager to the Fund to meet expenses of the Fund, where the Administration Manager’s expense account is insufficient to enable the Administration Manager to meet such expenses. Cash investments held by the Fund 24. Although it is not an objective of the Fund to hold cash, the Trustee and the Investment Manager may hold cash to facilitate the easier administration of the Fund. The cash held by the Trustee and the Investment Manager is on “call”. Wherever possible, futures contracts will be entered into by the Investment Manager to cover cash held by the Investment Manager. This is known as “equitised cash”. 25. The Investment Manager or the Trustee will hold cash in the following circumstances: • Following the sale of securities in the course of tracking the BNZ Index or in the course of a compulsory acquisition, merger, takeover, share buy-back or distribution of capital pending the reinvestment of that cash; • Following a contribution to the Fund, pending the investment of that contribution; • Following the sale of securities to meet a request for withdrawal by a member; • When a dividend is paid to the Fund in respect of an investment in a security; • To accumulate the minimum amount of cash required to allow for minimum trade sizes and to obtain a reasonable representation of the number of securities on the BNZ Index (“the minimum investment level”). The Investment Manager has advised that this amount is presently approximately $US 3 million. The minimum investment level may increase (or reduce) in the future to the extent that a different amount is required to purchase the equivalent representation of securities on the BNZ Index. 26. The Investment Manager may hold up to an amount equivalent to the minimum investment level in cash (including both free and equitised cash). This threshold may be exceeded in the following circumstances: • for up to ten business days preceding a MSCI Structural Change or for up to three business days following a significant new investment; 5 • for up to three business days after a MSCI Structural Change; • for up to ten business days prior to a pending withdrawal in respect of which it has received a withdrawal request. 27. In addition to any funds held by the Investment Manager, the Trustee may hold up to NZ$2 million in cash. This threshold may be exceeded in the following circumstances: • for up to ten business days if there are withdrawals pending in respect of which it has received a withdrawal request; or • for up to three business days if the excess results from a significant new investment. 28. At all times, there is a limit on the total cash (including cash held by the Trustee and free and equitised cash held by the Investment Manager) of 5% of the total Fund (except if there is a significant withdrawal or investment). 29. The Investment Manager will use best endeavours to equitise all cash, subject to futures contract size constraints. 30. The following futures contracts are used: Country Contract Australia SPI200 Canada S&P/TSE60 Japan Topix Germany DAX United Kingdom FTSE100 United States S&P500 31. In the event that alternative futures contracts in one or more markets enable improved tracking of the BNZ Index, or that one or more of the above contracts ceases to exist, the Investment Manager will use such alternative contract or contracts. Dividends 32. The Investment Manager will receive the dividend (and other income) distributions from the securities in which funds are invested and will hold these as part of the cash pool, subject to the terms of paragraph 25 above. 33. The Investment Manager will not elect to participate in any dividend reinvestment plan. Foreign Currencies 34. The Investment Manager may enter into spot foreign exchange contracts where these are necessary in order to purchase or sell the foreign currencies necessary to 6 invest in BNZ Index securities. These contracts are not speculative and are settled within two business days. Suspension of subscriptions and withdrawals 35. Clause 18.7 of the Trust Deed enables the Fund to suspend the payment of benefits relating to withdrawal requests. The Fund has not previously suspended withdrawals. The Fund also has the power under clause 3.2 of the Trust Deed to refuse any application for membership without giving reasons. The Fund has never exercised this power. 36. The Fund will only suspend withdrawals or subscriptions in the following exceptional circumstances: • if the volume of withdrawals is too large to be processed; or • if the volume of withdrawals exceeds the immediately available funds; or • trading on the relevant equity markets has been suspended. 37. Any suspension will only be for three business days unless the exceptional circumstance giving rise to the need to suspend is beyond the control of the Trustee and Investment Manager, in which case the suspension will only be for such period as is strictly necessary for the Trustee and/or the Investment Manager to recover from that event. Conditions stipulated by the Commissioner This Ruling is made subject to the following conditions: a) The Fund will not be resettled in order to enhance the performance of the Fund or to minimise losses of the Fund in any way. b) Subject to condition (a), if the Fund is resettled this Ruling will continue to apply until resettlement. If the Fund is resettled this Ruling shall not apply from the date of resettlement. c) The Fund is an investment vehicle primarily for investment into by superannuation funds which are themselves either: (i) widely-held investment vehicles for direct investment by natural persons or, (ii) vehicles for investment (directly or indirectly) by other superannuation funds that are widely-held vehicles for direct investment by natural persons. d) The Fund is registered under the Superannuation Schemes Act 1989. e) All investors in the Fund who are not natural persons are registered under the Superannuation Schemes Act 1989. 7 f) The existing binding private ruling for the Fund (BR Prv 04/28) remains in force and continues to apply in all respects to the Arrangement. How the Taxation Laws apply to the Arrangement Subject in all respects to any assumption or condition stated above, the Taxation Laws apply to the Arrangement as follows: • The Fund is a “superannuation fund” as that term is defined in section OB 1. • The Fund is a “qualifying trust” as that term is defined in section OB 1. • Investors are not assessable to income tax on withdrawals from the Fund, by virtue of section HH 3(5). The period or income year for which this Ruling applies This Ruling will apply for the period 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2007. This Ruling is signed by me on the 30 th day of June 2004. Martin Smith General Manager (Adjudication & Rulings) 8