PRODUCT RULING – BR PR D 15/ 06 Name of the person who applied for the Ruling This Ruling has been applied for by Fonterra Co-operative Group Limited (Fonterra). Taxation Laws All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of ss BG 1, CD 4, CD 5, CD 6, CX 56, CX 56B, DA 1, DB 23, subpart HM, and the definition of “foreign investment variable-rate PIE” in s YA 1. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies The Arrangement is the establishment and operation of the Fonterra Shareholders’ Fund (FSF), a New Zealand resident unit trust through which non milk-supplying investors (Public Investors) and farmers supplying milk to Fonterra (Supplying Shareholders) are able to invest in units. Units in the FSF give Public Investors and Supplying Shareholders economic rights in Fonterra shares (Shares), but do not provide them with any legal interest in the Shares. Units in the FSF are issued when a Supplying Shareholder, registered volume provider (RVP) (whose Shares are held in the name of the Custodian on trust for the RVP), or Fonterra transfers the legal ownership of Shares to Fonterra Farmer Custodian Limited (Custodian). The Custodian holds the economic rights in those Shares on trust for The New Zealand Guardian Trust Company Limited as trustee of the FSF (Unit Trustee). The FSF was established in November 2012. Trading in FSF Units commenced on the NZX Main Board at 12 pm on 30 November 2012. A total of 95,454,545 Units were on issue at that date, for a total consideration of NZ$525 million. Further details of the Arrangement are set out in the paragraphs below. Office of the Chief Tax Counsel Te Tari o te Rōia Tāke Matua Asteron Centre 55 Featherston Street PO Box 2198 Wellington 6140 New Zealand Telephone: 04 890-1500 Facsimile Numbers: Chief Tax Counsel: 04 978-1630 Taxpayer Rulings: 04 978-1628 Escalations & Advising: 04 978-1630 Disputes Review: 04 978-1630 Public Rulings: 04 978-1633 Parties to the Arrangement 1. The parties to the Arrangement are: • Fonterra; • The FSF (through the Manager or Unit Trustee); • Kevin Turnbull, Malcolm Bailey and Brian Todd in their capacity as trustees of the Fonterra Farmer Custodian Trust (the Farmer Trustees); • The Custodian; • Unit Trustee; • FSF Management Company Limited as manager of the FSF (Manager); • Supplying Shareholders; • RVPs; and • Public Investors. 2. Supplying Shareholders, RVPs, the Farmer Trustees, Fonterra and Public Investors may invest in the FSF. Together, they are referred to as the Unit Holders. Documents relevant to the Arrangement 3. The following documents are relevant to the Arrangement: • Fonterra Shareholders’ Fund Unit Trust Deed dated 23 October 2012 (which established the FSF) (Unit Trust Deed); • Fonterra Shareholders’ Fund Authorised Fund Contract dated 25 October 2012, under which the FSF was established as an "Authorised Fund" under Fonterra's Constitution; • Deed of Trust establishing the Fonterra Farmer Custodian Trust dated 25 October 2012, which holds all of the shares in the Custodian and the Fonterra Unit; • Custody Trust Deed for the Fonterra Economic Rights Trust dated 25 October 2012, under which the Custodian holds the legal title to Shares, and holds the economic rights in Shares on trust for the Unit Trustee; and • Constitution of Fonterra Co-operative Group Limited dated 30 November 2012 (Constitution), which came into force in December 2012 when Trading Among Farmers was implemented. Background to the Arrangement 4. Fonterra is simultaneously registered as a co-operative dairy company under Part 3 of the Co-operative Companies Act 1996 and as a company under the Companies Act 1993 (Companies Act). Many aspects of Fonterra's structure and operation are governed by the Dairy Industry Restructuring Act 2001 (DIRA). 5. Supplying Shareholders must generally hold such number of Shares as is determined by the share standard (currently set in Fonterra's Constitution as being one share for each kilogram of milksolids obtainable from milk supplied by 2 the farmer in that season, save that Shares cannot be issued to a farmer whose supply of milksolids is less than 1,000kg in a season). These Shares are informally known as "wet" shares, as they are backed by the supply of milk. In practice, Supplying Shareholders must indicate in advance how much milk they wish to supply in a coming season, and they must acquire or dispose of the appropriate number of Shares in order to back that supply (within certain margins). Supplying Shareholders may also comply with the share standard through the holding of "vouchers" (discussed further in paragraph 29 below). 6. In addition to their "wet" Shares, Supplying Shareholders may acquire further Shares (currently up to 100% of the number of shares that they are required to hold under the share standard). These Shares are informally known as "dry" Shares, as they are not backed by the supply of milk. Despite the informal distinction between wet Shares and dry Shares, all Shares of Fonterra belong to a single class of Shares. 7. Prior to the implementation of Trading Among Farmers, s 98 of the DIRA required Fonterra to pay a surrender value for Shares when a notice of withdrawal was given by a Supplying Shareholder under s 97 of the DIRA. The ability for farmers to surrender their Shares in this way had led to volatility in Fonterra's capital. For example, the surrender value for Shares withdrawn in 2008 was approximately $600 million as a result of droughts occurring in 2008, with production increasing to pre-drought levels in 2009. Fonterra referred to this volatility as redemption risk. 8. To address this redemption risk, Fonterra made a number of changes to its capital structure in three stages. The changes, referred to as Trading Among Farmers, included: • enabling farmers to acquire up to 100% of the number of Shares that they are required to hold under the share standard as dry Shares. • the establishment of a Fonterra Shareholders' Fund to enable public investment (ie the FSF). • the creation of a "private market" for the trading of Shares between Supplying Sh areholders, RVPs (whose Shares are held in the name of the Custodian in trust for the RVP) and Fonterra (the Fonterra Shareholders' Market (FSM)). Fonterra is involved in the FSM so that it can manage the size of the FSM by conducting buybacks of Shares. 9. The Trading Among Farmers changes required amendments to be made to the DIRA, to remove the requirement for Fonterra to accept the surrender of Shares on request. This amendment was brought into force in November 2012 by Order- in -Council and removed the redemption risk. The Arrangement 10. The FSF is a passive investment vehicle through which a Public Investor can invest indirectly in Fonterra. The FSF was established as a unit trust under the Unit Trusts Act 1960 on 23 October 2012. 3 11. The FSF has elected to be a "foreign investment variable-rate PIE" (as defined in s YA 1) and to use the exit calculation option (under s HM 42), and the Commissioner confirmed this by letter dated 13 November 2012. 12. The purpose of the FSF is to provide support to the FSM by acting as a conduit for Public Investors to access the underlying economic rights in a Share, thereby creating a more liquid market for Supplying Shareholders (and RVPs) to trade in Shares. This mechanism allows Supplying Shareholders to sell economic rights in Sh ares to the FSF, as well as selling Shares on the FSM. It also allows an RVP to move between the FSF and FSM to match supply and demand and possibly hedge its position. While Supplying Shareholders may invest in the FSF, most of the Unit Holders are not Supplying Shareholders. The RVPs 13. Fonterra has appointed one RVP, Craigs Investment Partners (although it retains the discretion to appoint further RVPs), to acquire and dispose of Shares (through the Custodian) on the FSM to facilitate trades and liquidity in that market. The principal duties of the RVPs are to ensure the smooth execution of transactions and improve liquidity through continuous quoting of both buy and sell orders with a contracted maximum spread between the buy and sell prices quoted. A key role of the RVPs is to ensure that the spread between buy and sell prices is restricted to a narrow range. 14. Under the Constitution, RVPs must hold, in aggregate, rights or interests in no more than 5% of the total Shares on issue at any time, excluding treasury stock (such Shares being held in the name of the Custodian in trust for the RVP). Fonterra and the RVPs have not and will not enter into a risk sharing agreement, however where the RVP is suspended from selling economic rights in relation to Fonterra shares to the FSF, Fonterra will compensate the RVP for certain trading losses suffered by the RVP. 15. Like Supplying Shareholders, RVPs are also able to participate in the FSF. This promotes price convergence between the FSM and the FSF. The Unit Trustee, the Manager and the Custodian 16. Fonterra appointed the initial Unit Trustee as trustee of the FSF. The Unit Trustee holds a licence under the Securities Trustees and Statutory Supervisors Act 2011. 17. Fonterra also appointed the initial Manager of the FSF. The initial Manager is a company wholly owned by Trustees Executors Limited. Under the Unit Trusts Act 1960, the role of the Manager is to manage the investments of the FSF and issue Units to the public. The Manager manages the FSF as an investment vehicle and does not undertake an active role (such as actively soliciting farmers to sell economic rights in their Shares). Fonterra provided a licence (the Licence) to the Manager to use Fonterra's name and brand for the purposes of the FSF. 18. The Unit Trustee and Manager are party to an arrangement (the Funding Arrangement) with Fonterra under which Fonterra provides the FSF with funds at the start of each financial year to cover the reasonable expenses incurred by the 4 FSF, or the Manager, on behalf of the FSF (Operating Expenses) in accordance with a Budget agreed between the parties. 19. The Custodian is a limited liability company set up to hold legal title to Shares. The Custodian holds legal title to any Shares in which economic rights have been sold to the FSF, and holds the economic rights in Shares on trust for the Unit Trustee (under the Fonterra Economic Rights Trust). The Custodian also holds legal title to any Shares acquired by the RVP, on trust for the RVP (under a separate trust from the Fonterra Economic Rights Trust). 20. The Custodian is wholly-owned the Farmer Trustees, as trustees of the Fonterra Farmer Custodian Trust. The Fonterra Farmer Custodian Trust is a trust set up for the sole purpose of holding the shares in the Custodian and the Fonterra Unit, which confers on the holder rights to prevent certain changes to the Unit Trust Deed (see further discussion at paragraph 38 below). The Farmer Trustees are three farmer representatives (a farmer directly elected by Supplying Shareholders, a director of Fonterra elected by Supplying Shareholders, and a member of the Fonterra Shareholders' Council). The discretionary beneficiaries of the trust are Supplying Shareholders and Fonterra is the final beneficiary of the trust. 21. The Custodian (and the FSF) do not have any voting rights in Fonterra under Fonterra's Constitution, which restricts voting rights to Supplying Shareholders (ie production based voting rights), except at a meeting of an interest group where there would otherwise be no shareholder entitled to vote at that meeting under clause 24.2(c) of the Constitution. Under clause 7.8 of the Constitution, the Authorised Fund Contract is required to prohibit the FSF and the Custodian from exercising, controlling or exerting any influence over any voting rights attached to the Shares. The Unit Trust Deed and Custody Trust Deed also contain provisions preventing the FSF and the Custodian from exercising any influence over voting rights attached to the Shares. 22. Under clause 7.1 of the Custody Trust Deed, the income of the Fonterra Economic Rights Trust includes amounts of deemed income that arise under tax law and the Custodian is permitted to distribute this income to the FSF. Operation of the FSF 23. The operation of the FSF is described in the paragraphs below. 24. Supplying Shareholders, RVPs and Fonterra can transfer economic rights in Shares to the FSF. In this context, "economic rights in Shares" means the rights to receive dividends and other benefits derived from a Share, including any change in value of the Share, as well as the other rights and benefits comprised in the Share. It does not include any right to hold the legal title to a Share or a security convertible to a Share, or to exercise production-based voting rights. 25. The process for selling economic rights in Shares to the FSF involves two steps: • Supplying Shareholders, RVPs, and Fonterra transfer legal title to a Share to the Custodian (legal title to the Share does not pass to the FSF); and 5 • The Custodian holds the economic rights in the Shares on trust for the Unit Trustee. 26. The economic rights in Shares are the FSF's only material asset. Under clause 7.5 of the Constitution, the aggregate number of Shares in which the FSF may acquire economic rights is limited to 20 percent of the total number of Shares on issue (excluding treasury stock). If this limit is exceeded the Board of Fonterra is obliged to take steps to bring the number of Shares in respect of which the economic rights are held for the FSF back within the limit within an appropriate timeframe (clause 7.6 of the Constitution). 27. Units in the FSF are issued by the Manager upon the Custodian receiving a Share, which gives rise to the receipt of economic rights in a Share by the FSF. In addition, if Fonterra issues further Shares in respect of a Share held by the Custodian (in respect of which economic rights are being held in favour of the Unit Trustee), the FSF will issue a corresponding number of Units to its Unit Holders pursuant to clauses 15.1(d) and (e) of the Unit Trust Deed. This ensures that the number of Shares placed with the Custodian in which economic rights are being held in favour of the Unit Trustee will always equal the number of Units on issue. Clauses 15.1(a) and (b) of the Unit Trust Deed provide for the payment of cash dividends or other cash benefits to Unit Holders, mirroring payments on the Shares, as follows: a) upon receipt of a cash dividend or other cash Benefits (other than a Supplementary Dividend) paid by Fonterra, this will be distributed to Unit Holders who were recorded in the Register at the same time and on the same record date as applied by Fonterra to determine the entitlement to the cash dividend or other cash Benefits. The amount to be paid or transferred to each such Unit Holder in respect of each Unit held by that Unit Holder as at that time, will be equal to the amount Fonterra paid or transferred per Share adjusted to take into account any Tax Liability of the Trust relating to the Unit Holder or any adjustments in accordance with section HM 48 of the Tax Act, and less any non-resident withholding tax deducted in respect of the Unit Holder in accordance with subpart RF of the Tax Act pursuant to section HM 44B of the Tax Act and less any sum authorised in accordance with an Extraordinary Resolution pursuant to paragraph 11.1(b)(viii) of Schedule 1; b) upon receipt of any Supplementary Dividend paid by Fonterra, this will be distributed to the Unit Holders that entitled Fonterra to apply section LP 2 of the Tax Act and receive a tax credit for the Supplementary Dividend; 28. Each Supplying Shareholder or RVP who transfers Shares to the Custodian (in which economic rights have been sold to the FSF) receives either one Unit in the FSF for each such economic right in a Share transferred or a cash sum (clause 5.1 of the Unit Trust Deed) in recognition of the transfer of the economic right in the Share to the FSF. Units received by Supplying Shareholders in consideration for the transfers of Shares to the Custodian (in which economic rights have been sold to the FSF) are not able to be retained by the relevant Supplying Shareholder, and must be sold on the NZX Main Board or ASX to settle a sale contract previously entered into on the relevant market. 29. Supplying Shareholders who sold economic rights in "wet" Shares to the FSF as part of the establishment of Trading Among Farmers (and as part of a subsequent one-off offer by Fonterra to purchase Units in October 2012) also received "vouchers" that count towards the share standard and support production-based voting rights and the right to full share backed milk price (clause 5.3 of the Unit Trust Deed). Fonterra's Constitution gives the Fonterra Board the discretion to 6 permit Supplying Shareholders to sell the economic rights in "wet" Shares to the FSF on a day-to-day basis and (subject to individual limits) to receive "vouchers" in partial consideration for the sale of those economic rights. While the Board keeps this policy under review, Supplying Shareholders are not currently entitled to sell economic rights in "wet" Shares to the FSF or to receive "vouchers" in connection with such sale. 30. Under the Unit Trust Deed, each Unit issued by the FSF evidences the entitlement of the holder to the economic benefits (including distributions and other benefits) in the whole of the trust fund. As the number of Units issued by the FSF equals the number of Shares held by the Custodian (in which economic rights are being held in favour of the Unit Trustee), in effect each Unit provides rights to receive the distributions and other benefits in respect of one Share. Individuals and their associates are permitted to hold no more than 15% of the lesser of the total number of Units on issue or the total voting rights in the FSF under clause 6.1 of the Unit Trust Deed. 31. The Units in the FSF (including the Fonterra Unit discussed in more detail below, at paragraphs 38 and 39) carry in respect of the FSF a right to vote or participate in any decision-making concerning at least one of the following: • a dividend or other distribution to be paid or made by the FSF; or • any variation to the Unit Trust Deed. 32. Clause 4.1(c) of the Unit Trust Deed sets out that the Units do not confer any interest in certain amounts under the Unit Trust Deed, as follows: c) Unless the Manager directs otherwise, Units shall not confer any interest in interest income of the Trust. Units shall not confer any interest in monies paid to the Trustee or the Manager to meet their fees or to reimburse either of those parties for (or any advance payment in respect of) any expenses, liabilities, losses and costs incurred by them respectively in or about acting as Trustee or Manager (as the case may be) under this Deed. In all cases, all interest income and such monies will be applied by the Manager to meet the fees and expenses, liabilities, losses and costs incurred by the Manager or the Trustee in or about acting as Manager or Trustee (as the case may be). 33. The FSF Units trade on a registered market (the NZX Main Board and ASX) in which Supplying Shareholders, RVPs, Fonterra and other Public Investors may participate. Standard listing rules (but with various exemptions to those rules recognising that it is a unit trust and to accommodate other characteristics of Trading Among Farmers) apply to the FSF. Fonterra and the FSF co-operate with each other in relation to matters such as disclosure of information, to enable the FSF to comply with the listing rules applicable to the FSF. 34. Supplying Shareholders, RVPs and Fonterra are able to exchange Units for Shares subject to various limits, but no other investor is able to do this (clause 9 of the Unit Trust Deed). For example, if a Supplying Shareholder, Fonterra or an RVP wished to acquire a Share, it could do so by either buying a Share on the FSM, or by buying a Unit and presenting that Unit to the Unit Trustee for redemption and demanding that the Trustee procure the Custodian to transfer to it (or in the case of the RVP, to the Custodian to hold on trust for the RVP) one Share. 35. Under clauses 6.5 and 7.8 of the Constitution and clause 15.2 of the Unit Trust Deed, neither the RVPs nor the FSF (or the Custodian in relation to either) is 7 entitled to exercise any voting rights attached to Shares which are from time to time held for them by the Custodian (except on an interest group resolution where otherwise no shareholder can vote, clause 24.2(c) of the Constitution). 36. Except as noted in paragraph 34 above, no Unit Holder is entitled or permitted to require the transfer to that Unit Holder of any of the property of the FSF, or any Share. The Unit Trustee covenants that it will not call for a transfer of the Shares (clause 4.8 of the Custody Trust Deed). In addition, no Unit Holder may redeem their Units for cash other than as described in clause 15.1(h) of the Unit Trust Deed. However, Unit Holders may sell their Units to other investors on the NZX Main Board or ASX. 37. In addition to dividends, which are expected to be paid twice a year, other potential distributions in respect of the Shares include: • taxable and non-taxable bonus issues; • in -specie distributions of property; • share buy-backs; • dividend reinvestment schemes; • renounceable and non-renounceable rights issues; and • notional distributions. 38. The Farmer Trustees hold one Unit in the FSF (the Fonterra Unit) which has special, essentially veto, rights (clauses 4.5 to 4.8 of the Unit Trust Deed). This requires the Farmer Trustees' approval, for example, to an amendment, removal or alteration of a provision of the Unit Trust Deed where that amendment, removal or alteration would change: • the governance structure of the Board of the Manager; • the scope and role of the trust fund; • the obligation of the trust to facilitate the exchange of a Share for a Unit or a Unit for a Share; or • the limit of 15% on the number of Units that can be held by any person or their associated persons (other than Fonterra or a wholly owned subsidiary of Fonterra); or • the terms of the Fonterra Unit. 39. The rights of the Fonterra Unit to proceeds and distributions from the FSF are the same as for all other Units (clause 4.5(h) of the Unit Trust Deed). 40. Section 16 of the Dairy Industry Restructuring Amendment Act 2012 inserted a new s 161A and 161B into the DIRA to allow Fonterra to hold Units in the FSF. Fonterra maintains a unitholding in the FSF which may increase or decrease, but it will always hold at least one Unit. In respect of Units held by Fonterra, the DIRA prevents Fonterra from exercising any voting rights carried by those Units (s 161A(i)). 41. The FSF may derive income other than from the Shares held by the Custodian on its behalf such as interest on cash held in a bank account and amounts received 8 under the Funding Arrangement (Other Income). To the extent the Fund derives Other Income, clause 4.1(c) of the Unit Trust Deed provides that no Unit Holder has an interest in such Other Income, unless the Manager directs otherwise. Any Other Income which is available to the FSF is and will be paid to the Unit Trustee as part of the fees due to the Unit Trustee. Transitioning to the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013 42. The FSF will constitute a "managed investment scheme" for the purposes of the Financial Market Conduct Act 2013 (FMCA). The FSF has until 1 December 2016 to meet the requirements of the FMCA. Accordingly, prior to 1 December 2016, various amendments will be made to the Unit Trust Deed in order to comply with the FMCA, and consequential changes will be made to a number of documents including the Authorised Fund Contract. The FSF will no longer be a "unit trust" under the Unit Trusts Act 1960, as that Act has been repealed (although transitional provisions apply until 1 December 2016). Conditions stipulated by the Commissioner This Ruling is made subject to the following conditions: a) The requirements of ss HM 55D(5), (6) and (7), HM 55E, HM 55F and HM 55FB are met in relation to notified foreign investors in the FSF. b) The FSF is not treated under any double tax agreement as not being resident in New Zealand. c) The FSF is not in the business of life insurance. d) 90% or more of the FSF's investments (by value of its assets) are investments of a type referred to in s HM 11, other than an interest in land in New Zealand or a right or option in relation to land in New Zealand, in accordance with s HM 19C(1). e) 90% or more of the income derived by the FSF is of a type referred to in s HM 12, other than an amount derived from an interest in land in New Zealand or the disposal of an interest in land in New Zealand, in accordance with s HM 19C(2). For the avoidance of doubt, this condition will not be breached if any failure to meet the requirement of s HM 12 is not “significant and within control of the FSF” and is remedied by the last day of the next quarter, in accordance with s HM 25. f) The FSF has not lost its PIE status through the application of s HM 25, s HM 27 and/or s HM 29. g) The FSF has not changed its election to use the exit calculation option in s HM 42. How the Taxation Laws apply to the Arrangement Subject in all respects to any condition stated above, the Taxation Laws apply to the Arrangement as follows: a) The FSF qualifies as a "foreign investment variable-rate PIE" (as defined in s YA 1). 9 b) The FSF's interest in the Shares is an investment of a type referred to in s HM 11. c) Income derived by the FSF from its interest in the Shares is income of a type referred to in s HM 12. d) Income attributed by the FSF to its investors is "excluded income" (as defined in s BD 1(3)) of the investor under s CX 56(3) provided that: • the prescribed investor rate for the investor is more than zero and not more than the investor’s notified investor rate when the PIE calculates its income tax liability under s HM 47, or makes a voluntary payment under s HM 45; or • the investor is one of those listed in s CX 56(1B); and • the amount is not an amount of attributed PIE income that is derived by a trustee who has chosen a prescribed investor rate referred to in sch 6, table 1, row 5 or 7, as applicable; and • the investor is not a new New Zealand resident to whom s HM 57B would have applied but who has chosen not to apply that section to determine their prescribed investor rate for a "resident year" (as defined in s HM 57B(3)). e) Where a Permitted Person acquires a Share on redemption of a Unit, and is entitled to a deduction under ss DA 1 and/or DB 23, the cost or amount of expenditure incurred in acquiring the Share for the purposes of those sections will be the market value of the redeemed Unit on the day it was redeemed. f) The redemption of a Unit in the FSF by a Unit Holder, in exchange for a Share, will not give rise to a dividend under ss CD 4 to CD 6. g) Any distributions from the FSF are excluded income of each Unit Holder under s CX 56B (and therefore not taxable), other than where the FSF elects to pay non- resident withholding tax in accordance with s HM 44B in respect of the distribution. h) The Arrangement is not subject to s BG 1. The period or income year for which this Ruling applies This Ruling will apply for the period beginning on 1 December 2015 and ending on 31 December 2020. This Ruling is signed by me on the 21 st day of December 2015. Fiona Heiford Manager (Taxpayer Rulings) 10