\[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Version: Draft v0.01 Date:29 October 2020 Stage 4 START Delivery Release 1 People Readiness Approach Prepared by Organisation Change Management and Training \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] People Readiness Approach Purpose of this document •This document outlines the Stage 4 Start Delivery Release 1 (S4.1.R1) approach on how to me asure our people readiness. People readiness informs both business readiness and programme readiness, which, along with customer readiness, is assessed at pre-determined checkpoints. •The approach summarises how we will engage with our people to understand if they feel ready for S 4.1.R1 and how we can help support and better prepare them for change. Using lessons learned from previous releases, we found that we received the most valuable input from our people through our in-person discussions and team surveys, where themes emerge quickly. In addition to the report that goes to PGC, the results of these types of surveying will assist the wider business with implementation planning through briefings with relevant leads and management advisors. •START Release 3 impacted most people in IR in some capacity and many were very highly impacted. •Release 4 had a more direct impact on specialised teams, including 1,500 people in KiwiSaver and S tudent Loans who are highly or moderately impacted. Other areas of moderate to low change in Release 4 included tax on income, tax at source, Working for Families Tax Credits and Research & Development Tax Incentive. In Stage 4 Release 1 due to the specialised products in scope, we will use a combination of Close Up Teams for our most highly impacted groups, Team Surveys for our moderately to highly impacted groups and we have included a Pulse Check survey which will span multiple change groups. The Stage 4 Release 2 People Readiness approach will be documented later next year. - 2 - \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Checkpoints for People Readiness 4a: Mon 22 Feb (tbc) Go-Live Committee Can we COMMENCE (Deployment Central) Checkpoint 5: Are we ON TRACK 18 March Checkpoint 1: AWARE 22 October Checkpoint 6: Can we EXIT Hyper Care 22 April 1 4a 5 FEB‘21 6 4b: Sun 28 Feb(tbc) Go-Live Committee Can we PROCEED (Deployment Central) Jan’ 21 Feb’ 21 Dec 20 Mar‘ 21 Apr‘ 21 Nov’ 20 Sept’ 20 Checkpoint 0: ALIGNED Stage 0 (Baseline Scope) 13 August S0 Heightened CHANGE CONTROL Stage 2 -7 December CHANGE FREEZE Stage 3 -1 February 4b Classroom Training & SBS Commences 11 January S3 Aug’ 20 CHANGE RESTRICTION Stage -23 October S1 S2 Oct’ 20 CHANGE FREEZE Stage 4 (Black-Out) - 15 February 0 S4 - 3 - Indicates a People Readiness Checkpoint Checkpoint 2: Are we ON TRACK 10 December Surveys include: •Close Up Teams •Team Surveys Checkpoints 3a: Are we READY 18 February Surveys include: •Pulse Check •Team Survey 2 3 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] People Readiness Approach WhatWhyHowSampleResearch type Close Up TeamsTo gain insight into readinessexperiences over time. Team Leads of Close Up Groups will participate in a separate discussion. Checkpoints will be 2 and 3. 30 minute discussion (face to face, or Skype/VC) based around open ended questions S4.1.R1 product specialised teams for UCM, Duties, NZFT only Qualitative Pulse Check Survey To gauge the overall preparedness of the organisation for S4.1.R1. To understand meaningful actions that could be taken to improve readiness. Checkpoint will be 3. 2- 3 minute surveyS4.1.R1 product specialised teams for UCM, Duties, NZFT only Include selected teams randomly selected from CCS-I Individuals (CC CCom focus); and CCS-B SE teams; where staff will only be surveyed once Qualitative Sample sizes of these groups will be confirmed once the numbers of impacted staff have been finalised. For Unclaimed Monies, Duties and NZ Foreign Trusts, we'll use the following approaches: - 4 - \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] People Readiness Approach WhatWhyHowSampleResearch type Close Up TeamsTo gain insight into readinessexperiences over time. Team Leads of Close Up Groups will participate in a separate discussion. Checkpoints will be 2 and 3. 30 minute discussionS4.1.R1 Families staff who work on PPL – PPL specialist team and other staff that carry out non- voice PPL work Qualitative Team SurveyTo understand how prepared highly impacted teams are for S4.1.R1. To understand meaningful actions that could be taken to improve readiness. Checkpoint will be 3. 6- 7 minute survey completed by the Team Lead following a team discussion Our people (including Team Leads), will be randomly selected from teams with Staff handling PPL voice queries: CCS-I Families – non-voice work; Individuals - CC and CCom focus; where staff will only be surveyed once Quantitative Sample sizes of these groups will be confirmed once the numbers of impacted staff have been finalised. For teams that handle Paid Parental Leave work, we'll use the following approaches: - 5 - \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Close Up Teams Business objectiveTo gain insightsfrom the perspective of a highly impacted segment or role by trackingthe experiences of specific teams over time. Description/methodIn-person discussions (face to face or Teams) about readiness using two or three prompt questions, plus an additional one or two questions customised to each Checkpoint focussing on an issue or hot topic. These discussions will be run by OCMT. Audience•Teams will be the specialised teams that handle the main S4.1.R1 products – PPL, UCM, NZFT and Duties. •A separate discussion with the Team Leads of the Close Up Teams will enable a conversation around their role in leading change. Time estimate30 minute discussion, ideallyduring a regular team meeting slot. Continuing on from previous START releases, we will regularly engage with a small number of teams to track their readiness journey and understand their experiences up close. •Selected groups will be surveyed on checkpoints 2 and 3. •Close Up Teams will be selected from change group A and will consist of teams sp ecialised in S4.1.R1 products. •We will work with the Change Gateway to schedule time with the selected teams. - 6 - \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Team Surveys Business objective•To understand how prepared highly impacted teams are for S4.1.R1. •To understand meaningful actions that could be taken to improve readiness. Research objectiveTo understand the views of our people impacted by S4.1.R1, in particular around the resources and assistance being offered to enable them to successfully enact the new skills and processes required.This includes: •whether they find the resources and assistance (written and verbal) easy to understand (e.g. content, format, mode of communication), and what could improve this •whether they are satisfied with the opportunities they are getting to learn the new skills and processes, and what could improve this •whether they are satisfied overall with their level of preparedness, and what could improve this •whether they are satisfied overall with the support they are getting, and what could improve this. Description/methodTeam Surveys willbe around 15 questions online and comprise scale questions with a couple of open-ended questions to allow descriptive responses. These surveys will be distributed by People & Culture using the Maritz surveying tool. Based on the successful methods of surveying from previous releases, Team Surveys will be completed by Team Leads on behalf of their team following a team discussion. Team surveys - 7 - \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Team Surveys Team surveys (cont) •Selected groups will be surveyed on checkpoint 3. •Team Surveys w ill be selected from change groups A and B, and will consist of teams specialised in Paid Parental Leave only; and include teams from across CCS-I Individuals, CCS-I Families, CCS-I Contact Centre and Community Compliance. •We will work with Change Gateway in Process Integrity to schedule time with the selected t eams. AudienceTeams will be randomly selected from targeted areas across IR, ensuring a proportional spread of teams from segments representingthose most highly impacted by S4.1.R1. Time estimate20 minute discussion during a regular team meeting. 6 -8 minutes for the Team Leadto complete the survey (one survey response per team). - 8 - \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Pulse Checks Business objective•To gauge the overall preparedness across change groups for S4.1.R1 and R.Other/Annual Changes at a point in time. •To understand meaningful actions that could be taken to improve readiness. Research objectiveTo understand the views of our people impacted by S4.1.R1, in particular around the resources and assistance being offered to enable them to successfully enact the new skills and processes required.This includes: •whether they find the resources and assistance (written and verbal) easy to understand (e.g. content, format, mode of communication), and what could improve this •whether they are satisfied with the opportunities they are getting to learn the new skills and processes, and what could improve this •whether they are satisfied overall with their level of preparedness, and what could improve this •whether they are satisfied overall with the support they are getting, and what could improve this. Description/methodThe Pulse Check is a short, sharp readiness survey of around4 to 5 questions, most answered using a scale-response, and 1-2 as a free-text response. TeamLeads will have an additional 1 or 2 questions. The Pulse Check, retained from Release 3, is the only quantitative people readiness tool, giving a voice to a large number of our most impacted people. - 9 - \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] AudienceThe survey will include people across change groups A, B and C. Amongst those chosen, 25% will be sent to Team Leads. Time estimate2 - 3 minutes to complete. Checkpoints3 Pulse Checks •Selected groups will be surveyed on checkpoint 3. •Team Surveys w ill be selected from change groups A and B, and will consist of teams specialised in Unclaimed Monies, Duties and NZ Foreign Trusts, as well as wider staff for Annual Changes; and include teams from across CCS-I Individuals, CCS-I Families, CCS-I Contact Centre and Community Compliance; and CCS-B Significant Enterprises. •We will work with Change Gateway in Process Integrity to schedule time with the selected t eams. - 10- \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Progression of surveying across releases Stage 1Release 2Release 3Release 4Stage 4 – Release 1 Survey sent to team leads to be completed after a 10-15 minute discussion with their team. About 50 teams were selected. Survey sent to team leads to be completed after a 10-15 minute discussion with their teams. About 80 teams were selected. Team Surveys were sent to team leads to be completed after a discussion at a team meeting on how ready their team was. 80 teams were selected, in which 40 teams alternated checkpoints. Team Surveys will be sent to up to 70 teams, to be completed after a discussion during a team meeting. Team Surveys will be sent to 6-8 teams, to be completed after a discussion during a team meeting. Te Rapa Sessions – These were 24 people participating in a face- to-face interview on readiness. Close Up teams were selected across the most highly impacted change groups for Release 3 to have face- to-face conversations about readiness. These started with 6 teams and increased to 13 as we got closer to go-live. 8 Close Up teams will be selected to have face-to-face conversations in regard to how ready our most highly impacted groups are. 4 Close Up teams will be selected to have face-to-face conversations in regard to how ready our most highly impacted groups are. Hearts and Minds – a range of frontline staff of varying roles were selected at random to discuss via a phone call how they were feeling about Release 2. Pulse Check surveys were introduced, where 750 different people were surveyed across IR. These gave us a snapshot on how our people were feeling. The Pulse Check survey will be sent out to people across IR to give us a snapshot of how people are feeling. The Pulse Check survey will be sent out to people across IR to give us a snapshot of how people are feeling. - 11- \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Provisional Change Groups and Plan S4.1.R1 and S4.1.Other Provisional Change Groups and Change Management Plan General Communication Targeted Communication Online Training Face -to-face Training On -the -job Learning Online User Support Key Users People Readiness Assessment Early Life Support Post Go -Live Embedding A •CCS-I Individuals – Unclaimed Monies Team and Duties Teams •CCS-I Families – Paid Parental Leave Team and those with Working for Families skillset •CCS-B International Revenue Strategy Team •ESS– Crown Finance 57 √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ B •CCS-I Individuals –Customer Service Officers with skill-mix 1 who manage Working for Families and Paid Parental Leave enquiries over the voice channel •CCS-I Community Compliance – Community Compliance Officers and Customer Service Officers who account manage tax agents and manage front-of-house. 550 √ √ √ √ tbc √ √√ √ √ C •CCS-I Individuals –Customer Service Officers who manage the voice channel (including individual, employer, tax agent and myIR queries). •CCS-B Significant Enterprises– Customer Service Officers, Customer Compliance Specialists and Business Lifecycle Managers who support Significant Enterprises. •CCS-B Small & Medium Enterprises– Customer Service Officers and Team Leads that support voice channels. •CCS-I Micro Business – Customer Service Officers and Team Leads that support voice channels. •CCS-B External Relationships –Relationship Managers and Complaints Management Team. •CCS-B Legal Services - Solicitors, Technical Specialists and Team Leads who provide technical and legal advice services. •CCS-B Technical Specialists Network – Technical Specialists. •Corporate Integrity and Assurance –Stakeholder Relations who undertake official correspondence and information requests. •Information and Intelligence Services – Intelligence and Insight Specialists who manage organized crime, money laundering and revenue forecasting, Information Specialists who are in the Information Sharing Hub and Information and Knowledge Management, Marketing & Communications, Web Content Team 2,100 (tbc) √ optional √ √√ √ D •The rest of Customer and Compliance Services and Information and Intelligence Services •Enterprise Support Services (Information Technology and Change, People & Culture, Performance, Facilities and Finance) •Enterprise Design and Integrity (Corporate Integrity and Assurance) •Policy and Strategy •Tax Counsel Office 2,489 (tbc) √ Organisation Change - 12- \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] People Readiness People Readiness forms an important part of readiness, feeding into both Business and Programme reporting It allows us to: •Understand how prepared you are for go-live •Confirm progress/completion of key change management a ctivities such as training •Determine any actions needed to ensure readiness, if gaps are h ighlighted •Take a snapshot of how effectively things are being i mplemented from your perspective Organisation Change - 13- \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] People Readiness Approach WhatWhyHowSampleResearch type Close Up TeamsTo gain insight into readinessexperiences over time. Team Leads of Close Up Groups will participate in a separate discussion. Checkpoints will be 2 and 3. 30 minute discussion (face to face, or Skype/VC) based around open ended questions S4.1.R1 product specialised teams will be selected only Qualitative Team SurveyTo understand how prepared highly impacted teams are for S4.1.R1. To understand meaningful actions that could be taken to improve readiness. Checkpoints will be 3. 6- 7 minute survey completed by the Team Lead following a team discussion S4.1.R1 product specialised teams will be selected only Qualitative Pulse Check Survey To gauge the overall preparedness of the organisation for S4.1.R1. To understand meaningful actions that could be taken to improve readiness. Checkpoints will be 3. 2- 3 minute surveyOur people (including Team Leads), will be randomly selected from CCS-I Families, Individuals (CC focus) and Ccom; and CCS-B SE; where staff will only be surveyed once Quantitative •Sample sizes of these groups will be confirmed once the numbers of impacted staff have been finalised. - 14- \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] WhatWhyHowWhoResearch type Check in conversation with the whole team To gain insight into readiness over time. For Checkpoints in December 2020 and February 2021, and possibly a quick check-in after go-live as well. 30 minute discussion (face to face or over Teams) The Paid Parental Leave Team Staff handling PPL voice queries Qualitative Team Lead survey To understand how prepared you are as a team. To understand meaningful actions that could be taken to improve readiness. For Checkpoints in December 2020 and February 2021, and possibly after go-live as well. 6- 7 minute survey completed by your Team Lead following a team discussion The Paid Parental Leave Team Staff handling PPL voice queries Qualitative Pulse Check survey To gauge the overall preparedness of people across the organisation. To understand meaningful actions that could be taken to improve readiness. For Checkpoints in December 2020 and February 2021, and possibly after go-live as well. 2- 3 minute survey completed by individual team members People randomly selected from the PPL work teams. Quantitative We’ve measured People Readiness in various ways across the releases. What do you think will work best for you? Organisation Change People Readiness - 15-