Privacy Impact Assessment – High Wealth Individuals Research Project V1 3 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Contents Document contributors ...................................................................... 2 1 Introduction .............................................................................. 4 1.1 Project summary ................................................................................ 4 1.2 Governance ........................................................................................ 5 1.3 Scope of the PIA ................................................................................. 5 1.4 Glossary of terms ............................................................................... 6 2 Personal information .................................................................. 7 2.1 Information to be used in the Project .................................................... 7 2.2 Information flows ................................................................................ 8 3 Privacy assessment .................................................................... 9 3.1 Privacy principles and response ............................................................ 9 4 Risk assessment ...................................................................... 23 4.1 Table of risks and mitigations ............................................................. 23 4.2 Summary of risks.............................................................................. 26 5 Recommendations .................................................................... 27 Privacy Impact Assessment – High Wealth Individuals Research Project V1 4 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 1 Introduction 1.1 Project summary Inland Revenue has regulatory stewardship responsibilities in respect of the tax and payment system. This includes understanding whether the tax system is effective and efficient in delivering on the policy intent - including meeting the Government’s distributional objectives; is operating as intended; and remains fit for purpose. Inland Revenue currently lacks important information to be able to evaluate the equity and efficiency of the tax system in an evidence-based way. A key gap in the information base is information on full economic income ( which seeks to measure the increase in an individual’s ability to consume goods and services over a period). This information gap is especially apparent for high wealth individuals (HWIs), who as a small cohort are not well sampled in current surveys that capture information on wealth, such as the Household Economic Survey (HES). Given this, Inland Revenue received funding in 2021 to undertake research aimed at better understanding the level of progressivity observed in New Zealand, by seeking to understand the amount of tax HWIs pay relative to economic measures of income. To do this, Inland Revenue has identified a HWI population group and is seeking to estimate various concepts of economic income and effective tax rates for t his group for the period 2016-2021. For comparability purposes, the information and methods used within the Project will closely relate to those used by Stats NZ, where appropriate. In terms of data sources, Inland Revenue is first utilising reasonably available internal data (administrative data) and external data sources (e.g. public databases) on the HWIs. However, there are gaps in this data and therefore Inland Revenue will need to collect information from the individuals. Initially, the HWI lead will be asked to provide details of their partner and dependent children (as defined). This is required because the Project will calculate measures of income for the family unit. Inland Revenue will then collect information on the entities and business undertakings the HWI lead and their partner, respectively, have an interest in. Then, the HWI lead and their partner will respectively be asked to provide a range of financial information that will be used to calculate measures of economic income. The HWI lead will also be asked to provide equivalent information for any dependent children (subject to a threshold). All three of these requests will be made under section 17GB of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA). Information collected under section 17GB cannot be used by the Commissioner of Inland Revenue in proceedings against that person (section 17GB(2)). Consistent with this, Inland Revenue has put in place a number of operational procedures to ensure that the information collected for this Project is only used for the purpose of the Project. These are detailed in this PIA. The information will be used to produce a public report on the effective tax rates (ETR) paid out of economic income for these households, to be published in mid-2023. This report will enrich the evidence base available on the progressivity of the tax system and will contribute to improved policy advice in the future. The report will not provide personally identifiable information on any individual. Privacy Impact Assessment – High Wealth Individuals Research Project V1 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 1.2 Governance A Governance Group was formed in March 2021 to oversee the Project. Membership is made up of tier 2 and tier 3 officials from across the department. The group includes a nominated member from the Treasury’s Tax Strategy team, and a Stats NZ official attends as an observer, to ensure cross government co-ordination. Membership on the Governance Group does not grant access to collected information. As at the date this PIA is issued, membership of the Governance Group is: • David Carrigan, Deputy Commissioner, P olicy and Regulatory Stewardship (PaR S) – Chair • Tony Morris, Significant Enterprises • Tina Maclean, Intelligence Leader • Chris Cullinan, Intelligence Leader • Geoffrey Frost, B usiness Transformation • Ron Grindle, Business Transformation • Nominated member from the Treasury Tax Strategy team • Phil Whittington, Chief Economist, PaRS • Karen Whitiskie, Legal Services. This Project is led by a project team within the PaRS business unit. Services are provided to this team from other parts of Inland Revenue. 1.3 Scope of the PIA This PIA covers the life cycle of information collected for the Project. This includes the collection, storage, use, flow, access, disclosure and disposal of the information. 1 An assumption is that Qualtrics will be the main collection instrument. The security features of Qualtrics are discussed in this PIA (see IPP 5). The matters set out in the PIA are current as at the date of issue. 1 The GDPR is not relevant as we are not requesting information from individuals who are resident in the EU. Privacy Impact Assessment – High Wealth Individuals Research Project V1 7 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] ‘Personal information’ is any information that is capable of identifying a living human being. It doesn’t have to be sensitive or negative information just so long as someone could be identified by it. However, the level of sensitivity, and impact on individuals, will influence the privacy risks in managing the information. 2 Personal information 2.1 Information to be used in the Project Personal information will be used and collected in this Project. This will include names, contact details, IRD numbers, connections to entities, financial details and family relationships. The Project will use personal information: • already held by Inland Revenue, • sourced from public registers, such as the Companies Register; and • new information collected directly from individuals. Personal information will be collected at three main points of time: 1. Collection 1 – Family details November 2021: HWIs will be asked for information on their family details, such as the name, date of birth, contact details and IRD numbers (if known) of their partner and the number of dependent children (as defined). They will be asked to provide the names, date of birth and IRD number (if known) of dependent children that hold significant assets or earn significant income. 2. Collection 2 – Entity links Approximately February 2022: HWIs and, separately, their partners will respectively be asked to supply information in relation to entities and business undertakings in which they have a non-portfolio interest. HWIs will also be asked to provide information on entities that their dependent children (identified in Collection 1) have a significant interest in. An interest will include where, for example, the individual is a settlor, trustee, named beneficiary and/or appointer of a trust, and where the individual is a shareholder of a company. 3. Collection 3– Financial information Approximately June 2022: HWIs and, separately, their partners will respectively be asked to provide a range of financial information on themselves and on entities they have an interest in. In some instances, information may be requested directly from entities. This information will include entity balance sheet and income statement information, information on investments, and holdings of significant personal assets (e.g. real property). De minimis thresholds will apply where appropriate. While the lead and partner will receive separate requests, they may choose to provide consolidated information. The personal information described above is required to calculate the income measures and effective tax rates required for the purpose of the Project. These measures are calculated on a family unit basis. Only personal information that is required to fulfil the purpose of the Project will be used. Privacy Impact Assessment – High Wealth Individuals Research Project V1 8 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 2.2 Information flows Qualtrics will be the main collection platform. In Collection 1 HWIs were asked to complete an online form via Qualtrics, however, they could also respond by email and by mail. Collections 2 and 3 will use Qualtrics to deliver spreadsheets for individuals to download and complete, to be uploaded via Qualtrics, or provide an on-line form. If an individual does not upload the information via the secure Qualtrics platform they will need to use secure email. Collected information will ultimately be stored in the Policy Only Workspace (POW) within the Data Intelligence Platform (DIP). The DIP has undergone a Certification and Accreditation (C&A) process conducted by Inland Revenue’s Chief Information Security Officer. POW can only be accessed by the Rawa Data Team (RDT). Following receipt from collection, information will be transferred to the POW and deleted from Qualtrics and emails, and hard copies destroyed. Information may be temporarily stored in a restricted SharePoint site as part of the process of transferring the information into the POW. Some limited i nformation (for example, names, IRD numbers and contact details) will remain in a restricted SharePoint site for the purposes of contacting individuals, sourcing internal data and to record compliance with the section 17GB notices. Information sourced from tax returns and public registers will be transferred into the DIP RIMU lab and accessed by the RDT from there. T hese labs (POW and RIMU), where they are restricted to the RDT, are called the secure data lab. Analysis will take place in the secure data lab. Only non-identifiable information will be shared outside of the secure data lab (an exception is information used to assess compliance with and enforce a section 17GB notice). Only aggregate or synthetic data that does not identify individuals will be released publicly (see IPP10). Collected information will be destroyed on completion of the report (synthetic data may be retained). A data plan setting out the flow of data will be created and approved at Deputy Commissioner level. Privacy Impact Assessment – High Wealth Individuals Research Project V1 14 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Individuals on the RDT APL have access to all collected information. The RDT APL is made up of a small number of identified data and policy analysts, an d people from CIE required to extract data from Q ualtrics. Individuals on the RDT APL will be provided a letter of expectations setting out the expectations of this APL. This includes not sharing the information outside of those on the RDT APL and following the sharing protocols (below). Additionally, these people will need to declare a conflict of interest if in future work at Inland Revenue that work involves knowledge of any HWIs they have gained knowledge of through the Project. New APLs may be needed if individuals have needs to access limited data sets, for example, named analysts for analytical support or Legal Services representatives in relation to non- compliance with section 17GB notices. Multiple APLs are created to ensure individuals’ access to information is restricted to business need. Inland Revenue administration staff have access to Inland Revenue tools, platforms and documents associated with these. They will not access information without a specific reason to do so, such as a major technology issue. These people could include, but are not limited to, SharePoint Administrators, Workplace Technology Services and DIP administrators . Audit logs are in place so that any activity can be tracked. All Inland Revenue staff are subject to confidentiality obligations. Before an Inland Revenue employee performs their first official duty they must complete a declaration of confidentiality (see s18B(1)). Any unlawful disclosure of taxpayer information by an Inland Revenue employee is a potential criminal offence with a maximum sentence of six months imprisonment and a $15,000 fine (see sections 18(1) and 14(C)). Unlawful disclosures include disclosures that are made internally within Inland Revenue without a legitimate business purpose or lawful authority. This obligation by law continues after an Inland Revenue employee has left the organisation (see s16C(4)(b)(ii)). Beyond the possibility of criminal prosecution, a breach of confidentiality will be a matter of serious misconduct under Inland Revenue’s Code of Conduct. Access to information that is otherwise restricted to those on APLs would be in accordance with permitted disclosures and disclosures required by law, as described below (IPP 11). Storage To ensure only authorised persons have access to collected information, the collected information will be held in the Policy Only Workspace in the DIP ( except as noted below and during the process to transfer to POW). Access to POW is limited to a subset of people on the RDT APL (approximately 5 people). These people will undertake the analysis of collected information in POW. Access to the secure data lab can be audited if required. There are three circumstances where collected information will be stored in a restricted access SharePoint page: • The first is a master list of the name, contact details and authorised agent for the HWI lead. This information is not collected under section 17GB but is restricted to those with a business need relating to the Project. • The second is names, IRD numbers and contacts details of HWI partners and dependent children, obtained pursuant to section 17GB. This information is restricted to the Family details APL and is needed to contact people and obtain administrative data. • Third, entity and financial information may be temporarily stored in a restricted SharePoint site until importation into the POW in the DIP is finalised and useability is confirmed. If there is any delay in converting hardcopy documents to electronic form, these documents will be stored in a safe (for which access is restricted to a single person). Hardcopy documents will be securely destroyed following being converted to electronic form. A data plan setting out the flow of data will be created and approved at Deputy Commissioner Privacy Impact Assessment – High Wealth Individuals Research Project V1 16 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] parties, but not requested under s 17GB And, temporarily Private SharePoint group information within Inland Revenue Family details Details of the partners/dependent children - collected under s 17GB Partner and children names and contact details DIP - Secure data lab And, private SharePoint group Temporarily Qualtrics Family details APL Entity details A list of entities - collected under s 17GB. Companies and Trusts DIP - Secure data lab And, temporarily Qualtrics and Private SharePoint group RDT APL Financial account data collected under s 17GB Personal financial details and entity financial account data that has been sourced by way of a s 17GB notice Collected financial account information DIP - Secure data lab And, temporarily Qualtrics and private SharePoint RDT APL Merged data This is the merged or pooled data from the administrative, external and collected data Individual financial profiles DIP – Secure data lab RDT APL Aggregated tables Aggregated, non- identifiable data that is used to arrive at conclusions in the report Estimated total economic income and ETRs Private SharePoint Those with a purpose to see the information within Inland Revenue Final report information A subcategory of the aggregated tables ETR calculations Publicly released Publicly released Privacy Impact Assessment – High Wealth Individuals Research Project V1 24 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] private information. contact these people. partner is subject to a notice themselves. Couples provide information individually unless they choose otherwise. RSK-04 Personal information is provided to the wrong individual. Unwarranted disclosure of the individual’s affairs. Various identifiable information is cross- checked before sending correspondence. Contact details extracted from START and verification checks made on individual’s addresses. All correspondence is double checked to ensure correct addressee before sending. Medium Contact details updated when notified of incorrect information. Limited personal information is disclosed (e.g. names). Couriers may leave mail in a letter box but personal service will be used if an address appears incorrect. Letters double packed (envelope and courier package). Generic email addresses not used. Low RSK-05 Individuals consider the information requested is unreasonably intrusive or a breach of their privacy. Information is not provided leading to poor data. General information about the Project, its purpose and why the information is required has been published and sent to individuals. Restrictions on access and use of the data are implemented. Information requested using section 17GB. High Same as RSK-01. Ensure only necessary information is collected for the Project outcomes. High RSK-06 Information collected by the Project is accessed by unauthorised staff or used/disclosed for other IR misuses the information. Strict protocols on access to information. Information is only accessible to those with a Low Collected information stored in a secure data lab in the DIP. Audit of access to secure data lab. Staff to be reminded Low Privacy Impact Assessment – High Wealth Individuals Research Project V1 25 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] purposes. need to view the data. Appropriate APLs put in place. of sharing protocols. Data plan (setting out the flow of data) is created and approved at Deputy Commissioner level. Destroy the raw data at the end of the Project. RSK-07 Information collected is not deleted at the completion of the Project Information is subsequently used for improper purpose. Disposal Authority provides disposal requirements under the Appraisal Report. Low Create synthetic non- identifiable data that can be stored. IKM audit of electronic storage sites on completion of Project. Low RSK-08 Inadequate steps taken by Inland Revenue to ensure participants in the Project are not identified Unwarranted disclosure of individuals’ affairs. Reputational damage to Inland Revenue. APLs and letters of expectation around access to Project information. Strict protocols on access to information. Medium Only aggregated or synthetic data will be released. Industry data aggregated to ensure anonymity. Low Privacy Impact Assessment – High Wealth Individuals Research Project V1 26 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 4.2 Summary of risks There is a potential risk that Inland Revenue may seek to obtain more information from individuals than is needed or that individuals may consider the request unreasonably intrusive or burdensome. This risk will be addressed by taking steps to ensure that each category of information requested is required for the purposes of the Project and it is not practicable for the project team to obtain it from other sources. The risks to unauthorised use of the information (that is, for purposes other than the Project) are mitigated by storing collected data in a secure data lab or restricted sites, which only authorised persons can access. These authorised persons are listed and are given clear expectations of how to handle the data. Additionally, data collected under section 17GB will be destroyed at the end of the Project and this will be audited by the IKM team. There is a risk that agent contact details are wrong on Inland Revenue’s system or that the wrong agent is contacted. Only limited information (names) will be shared with agents until a specific authorisation is obtained for the Project. There is a risk that individuals’ contact details may not be up to date on Inland Revenue’s systems. We will use contact details on Inland Revenue’s START system and run a verification process for this information. All communications are subject to a two- person addressee checking process before being sent to minimise sending errors. Letters are couriered in a secure package, and personal service used if an address is doubtful. Partners are treated as separate individuals for information gathering purposes. The only information Inland Revenue will disclose on one partner to another is name and that they are in the population. Couples may choose to provide a joint response, but this is not required.