Page 3 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Part A Updates to the Programme Business Case This section summarises material changes since the last addendum to the Programme Business Case was prepared in October 2019. The most significant update is to the economic case. The commercial and management cases have also been updated. No changes have been made to either the strategic or financial cases. Executive Summary Page 4 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] The advent of COVID-19 has had a significant impact on people and economies everywhere. Inland Revenue’s response to the challenges presented by the pandemic and the need to act swiftly to support New Zealanders have provided a very visible demonstration of the benefits of transformation. Inland Revenue has played a key role in supporting the Government’s response to COVID-19, while continuing to deliver services, provide support to customers, and implement further changes as part of transformation. The agility delivered by transformation was a significant enabler of the Government’s response to COVID-19. Decision-makers have significantly more agility than previously to make changes to policy and legislative settings. A focus on keeping solutions as simple as possible for both customers and Inland Revenue means that previous system constraints are no longer an issue. This is a huge change as the answer to “can the system do this and do it at a reasonable price” is now almost always yes rather than no for initiatives that are a good fit with Inland Revenue’s core capabilities. However, other constraints, such as the need to ensure that both customers and Inland Revenue itself are ready for changes, are now more evident. The flexible and iterative nature of START 1 means that new products or services that adopt out-of-the-box processes and use established patterns can be implemented much more quickly than previously. This 1 START stands for simplified tax and revenue technology and is the name chosen by Inland Revenue for the GenTax software provided by FAST Enterprises LLC approach combined with a focus on minimising exceptions and working with other agencies was very evident during the initial response to COVID-19. These ways of working will be even more important as the country recovers. Inland Revenue has supported the Ministry of Social Development to administer the Wage Subsidy. Initially this was through sharing information and providing a verification service for applications where this was needed. More recently, Inland Revenue has made a portal available to Ministry staff to enable them to self-serve the majority of queries. Providing Ministry staff with access to the relevant information held in START took just 15 working days from when the portal was approved by Inland Revenue’s governance forums until it was up and running. Business tax changes have been implemented to free up cashflow, including a provisional tax threshold lift, the reinstatement of building depreciation and writing off interest on the late payment of tax. In addition, the small business cashflow (loan) scheme and loss carry-back scheme have been introduced. Both schemes have proven to be successful, with 104,000 applications for the loan scheme and $1.6 billion in loans approved and $105 million in funds re leased to 2,500 customers through loss carry-back as at 9 October 2020. The small business cashflow (loan) scheme provides a very good demonstration of Inland Revenue’s agility. It was 39 working days from the initial decision to begin some preparatory work until the launch of the scheme. It took just 10 days from when the Government confirmed its intentions until the scheme was launched. These timeframes were unthinkable as recently as a couple of years ago. However, these results were not achieved without cost. Work had to be re-prioritised and resources re-directed to enable people to focus on the higher priority COVID-19 response work. The continued delivery of services to customers was made possible by transformation. Inland Revenue quickly shifted the majority of its people to working remotely once the impacts of COVID-19 became clear. This was enabled by the investment made in workplace technology as part of transformation. As a result, Inland Revenue was able to continue to support customers and ensure they pay and receive the right amounts. The second year of automatically issued income tax assessments was largely completed during this period, with 3.1 million assessments issued and $ 688 million in refunds paid as at 30 June 2020. For the first time, Inland Revenue implemented changes remotely and Release 4 successfully went live. On 16 April 2020, KiwiSaver and student loans and the back-end processing of PAYE moved to new systems and processes. Page 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] A remote go-live was made possible by the investment in tools and technology in recent years which enabled people to work remotely, and by the well-practiced processes developed for previous releases. The cutover team were very well prepared and very clear about what was required of them, having practiced the execution of every required task multiple times. Going live in the early days of the COVID-19 Alert Level 4 lock down was not an easy call to make, and it was the right one. Not going live would have delayed making new services available to customers which make it easier for them to get the help they need and would have made it more difficult for Inland Revenue to support the Government’s response. Customers now have access to a wider range of services and more information and options. For example, all customers experiencing financial difficulties can apply for relief through a simple, new myIR service. The benefits for customers of the changes made in Release 4 are evident. A key consideration throughout transformation has been reducing effort for customers. Employers, particularly those using gateway services, are finding filing easier, with 89% saying they find it quite or very easy. All employers’ information is now held in one place. The vast majority of individual customers say they like the automatic income tax assessment process as it is straightforward and minimises the actions required from them. Changes were made when the process ran for the second time in 2020 to further improve customer experiences. As a result, Inland Revenue received fewer calls and complaints. Over 80% of student loan customers are finding it easy to understand and do what they needed to do in myIR. KiwiSaver customers are finding myIR easy to use. Processing times are now much faster providing customers with certainty sooner. Around three quarters of members’ KiwiSaver contributions are now processed in a few days, compared to the 20 to 23 days this used to take. Closing a student loan is now an overnight process that previously took up to 42 days. The final stage of the transformation programme has been re-planned as a result of the impacts of COVID-19. The end of the transformation programme is now in sight. Moving the remaining products to new systems and processes will now happen in two releases during 2021, rather than in a single big release as previously planned. Paid parental leave, duties and foreign trusts will move on 1 March 2021, with Child Support and an upgrade to Inland Revenue’s online services likely to follow in October 2021. Transformation will be completed in 2021/22 and is on track to complete within the funding envelope approved by government in 2015. The final stage includes work to complete decommissioning of heritage infrastructure and transition the processes, frameworks and methods the transformation programme has built to Inland Revenue’s future operating model. This will help to ensure the benefits of transformation are enduring. Realisation of benefits is well advanced. The non-financial benefits of policy agility, system resilience and making things easier for customers have been very evident in Inland Revenue’s response to COVID- 19. Overall trends in financial benefits are positive with administrative savings increasing year-on-year. The result for compliance effort reduction for small to medium sized businesses is indicative only this year, as the planned 2020 survey was not run due to COVID-19. The 2018 results have been used in the absence of any new information. There are still challenges ahead. Although risk has reduced somewhat, significant risks remain. Operational risk will remain elevated until Inland Revenue completes transformation and fully migrates off heritage systems and processes. Child Support implementations are notoriously complex and difficult. While Inland Revenue is simplifying requirements as much as possible, this remains a very complex product. In addition, despite Inland Revenue’s best efforts at readying customers for change, there are likely to be difficulties as Child Support customers have complex circumstances and can be hard to reach. Completing transformation will need to be balanced against any future COVID-19-related work and trade-offs may be required. Page 6 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] THE ECONOMIC CASE Delivering the preferred way forward This section provides an update on progress in delivering transformation and realising the agreed benefits and outcomes. The preferred way forward and programme roadmap are unchanged. The implementation plan has been updated as a result of the impacts of COVID- 19. Modernisation of the revenue system is nearing completion Page 7 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Transformation continues to be implemented as planned: • The final policy changes to be implemented as part of transformation were being considered by select committee prior to the General Election. The proposed changes aim to simplify the administration of Child Support as part of Stage 4 in late 2021. • New analytical capabilities are shaping how Inland Revenue supports customers to pay and receive the right amounts and comply with their obligations. • Changes to Inland Revenue’s enterprise support services, capabilities and organisation design continue. • Release 4 was successfully implemented on 16 April 2020, completing Stage 3 and moving KiwiSaver, student loans and the back-end processing of PAYE, to START. The external environment has changed significantly since the last addendum to the programme business case was completed in October 2019. The advent of the COVID-19 global pandemic has required all organisations and individuals to adapt. Inland Revenue’s response to COVID-19 amply demonstrates the benefits of the investment made in transformation. • Inland Revenue was able to quickly shift the majority of its people to a remote working model once the impacts of COVID-19 became clear, as a result of the investment made in workplace technology as part of transformation. • Go-live of Release 4 was completed remotely. This was made possible by the investment in tools and technology in recent years which enabled people to work remotely, and by the well-practiced release management and change management processes developed for previous releases. The cutover team was very well prepared and very clear about what was required of them, having practiced the execution of every required task multiple times. • Inland Revenue has played a significant role in delivering the Government’s response to COVID-19. The department has supported the Ministry of Social Development (MSD) to administer the Wage Subsidy. Business tax changes to free up cashflow, including a provisional tax threshold lift, the reinstatement of building depreciation and writing off interest on the late payment of tax have been implemented. A very successful small business cashflow (loan) scheme and a loss carry-back scheme have been introduced. The small business cashflow loan scheme demonstrates the agility now available. The scheme successfully went live at 12.01am on 12 May 2020. It was 39 working days from the initial decision on 13 March 2020 to begin some preparatory work until the launch of the scheme. It took just 10 days from when the Government confirmed its intentions on 25 April 2020 until the scheme was launched. During the first 5 to 10 minutes Inland Revenue had received 43 applications, with 600 received by 1:20am. As at 9 October 2020, Inland Revenue had received 104,000 applications and approved $1.6 billion in loans. The vast majority of applications have been online, with less than 300 not made through myIR. Delivering the future revenue system Delivering the future revenue system has required changes to policy, data, processes, people, and technology. The majority of these changes have already been made, with one final stage to go.  Simplifying policy and legislative settings A review of policy and legislative settings to support, enable, and optimise the benefits from business transformation is in its final stages. A Bill containing the final transformation policy changes to improve the administration of Child Support has had its first reading and was being considered by select committee before the General Election. A Supplementary Order Paper (SOP) to this Bill proposes to repeal child support incremental penalties and simplify the penalty write-off provisions. Another SOP to the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2020-21, Feasibility Expenditure, and Remedial Matters) Bill proposes changes to the Unclaimed Monies Act. Some changes implemented in earlier releases continue to be embedded. From 1 April 2020, payers of investment income have been required to provide more detailed recipient information more frequently to Inland Revenue. Companies and Māori Authorities have been required to Page 21 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] where they need help to get it right. These capabilities are also making it harder for people to deliberately avoid their obligations or to claim things they are not entitled to. For example, potentially fraudulent or incorrect refunds are identified and stopped during processing. This is helping to prevent revenue loss which increases the assessed revenue available to government. How progress is measured/monitored The agreed basis for monitoring progress is proxy measures and case studies given the difficulty of direct attribution. Two case studies have been completed to date. The percentage of returns filed on time and filed electronically increased significantly for 2019/20 to 93% and 96% respectively. Both measures have increased by 7% over the last year as shown in the graph below. Benefit area 6: Inland Revenue is more efficient Target state By 2023/24, Inland Revenue will deliver cumulative administrative savings of $495 million. All things being equal, Inland Revenue will be 25-30% smaller than it was at the start of transformation, with reductions across all business groups. Progress to date – 2019/2020 results On a cumulative basis, Inland Revenue is ahead of target with savings of $118 million compared to the target of $95 million. The 2019/20 target of $80 million was not achieved, with Inland Revenue achieving $57 million in savings. Planned organisational changes were deferred due to Release 4 and COVID-19. Changes were put on hold to enable Inland Revenue’s people to focus fully on supporting customers and the Government’s response to the pandemic. Changes to Inland Revenue’s organisation design will now take place later than the timeframes originally envisaged. In addition, there was always expected to be some inter- year variability in administrative savings as new systems and processes bed in. This has been evident in the results achieved to date. Inland Revenue achieved more savings than expected in both the 2017/18 and 2018/19 years, meaning that cumulative savings are ahead of target. Overall the trend is positive with annual savings increasing year on year. How progress is measured/monitored Digital uptake is a lead indicator for the achievement of administrative savings, as this indicates that work effort is reducing. Digital uptake is well ahead of where Inland Revenue expected it to be. As at 30 June 2020, digital uptake was at 96%, an increase of 7% since 30 June 2019 and well above the target of 72%. The benefits of a digital revenue system are becoming increasingly evident. Inland Revenue is already seeing the nature of its work changing. For example, the volume of manual work for Working for Families has reduced considerably compared to last year. The number of manual calculations required as part of the 2020 automatic income tax assessment process was around half what it was last year. This was also true of rollover ( when customers’ entitlements for the following year are estimated and communicated to them) which happens in February each year. Employer errors are starting to disappear which is having a considerable impact on work effort. The 120,000 line items in error on employer schedules previously is now down to around 14,000. This is the result of a deliberate focus on designing out errors when products and services are moved to new systems and processes. For student loans, improved border management query processes have resulted in a huge reduction in the number of cases requiring manual intervention. Prior to Release 4, around 2,000 to 3,000 cases a month required Page 22 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] one of Inland Revenue’s staff to look at them. In May 2020, just 17 cases required manual intervention. Analytical capabilities are enabling Inland Revenue to work more efficiently and deliver very cost-effective interventions to help ensure customers pay and receive the right amounts. Inland Revenue is better able to target its activity, delivering productivity improvements. Progress tracking for all benefit areas Achievement of the investment objectives is measured against a number of lead and lag indicators as shown in the table on the next page. Inland Revenue achieved seven out of the ten indicators for which there are quantitative measures. The measures not achieved for 2019/20 were: • The percentage of customers who find it easy to comply. While this has increased slightly since last year, it appears it is taking longer than expected for customers to adopt new services and become comfortable with them. There are positive signs however, with student loan customers in particular being very positive about how easy it is to use new services. • Reduction in compliance time for SMEs. The result for 2019/20 is indicative as it is based on the 2018 survey rather than the 2020 survey, which was deferred due to COVID-19. However the indicative, cumulative value of the time saved is well above target. • Annual reduction in Inland Revenue’s administrative costs. This was not achieved due to the deferral of planned organisational changes in light of COVID-19. However, the cumulative reduction in costs is above target. Page 24 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] THE COMMERCIAL CASE Sourcing the services and products required for delivery This section outlines the suppliers Inland Revenue is working with to implement the future revenue system. Commercial arrangements support all-of -Government principles Page 25 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] The major procurement activity required to successfully implement transformation has largely been completed. Inland Revenue is increasingly turning its attention to ensuring that arrangements for the commercial relationships that will endure once the transformation programme closes are in place and sustainable. All procurement is consistent with the five principles of Government procurement. Work underway Since the last addendum to the programme business case was completed in October 2019, Inland Revenue has continued to work with a range of suppliers on the products and services needed to support transformation. The services sought this year include: • Privileged access management and identity governance administration services – a recommendation for a preferred supplier and approach has been through Inland Revenue's governance forums. Once budget has been allocated, participants in the request for proposal process will be notified and Inland Revenue will progress negotiations with the preferred supplier. . • Evidence management – the signing of a Master Services Agreement is imminent. This will enable implementation and a s ubscription agreement will follow. As part of an initial market scan, Inland Revenue worked with a number of agencies, including the Serious Fraud Office, the Department of Internal Affairs, and the Ministry of Justice to understand their approaches and capabilities. Activity to be completed There are two significant pieces of work to be completed over the next year. As part of the enterprise support services programme of work, Inland Revenue plans to replace its payroll solution. Inland Revenue is closely aligned with the all-of- Government payroll programme to ensure the department’s requirements and approach are consistent with the broader government sector. On 30 September 2020, a payroll request for proposal was released. While the majority of Inland Revenue’s people could work remotely easily and effectively during the COVID-19 lock down period, some could not. It was not possible for some contact centre roles for example, as some software cannot currently be accessed remotely. Inland Revenue is looking at solutions to enable this. Work is also underway to establish the commercial arrangements that will be required once transformation is complete. Some suppliers will not have an on-going role in providing products or services to Inland Revenue once transformation is complete. The focus with suppliers in this category is to ensure good knowledge transfer so that Inland Revenue has the capabilities needed to continue to successfully run the department following the closure of the programme. Other suppliers will have an on-going role to play, albeit in a different capacity. For example, the skills and experience required during the design, build and implement phases are different to those needed during the support and optimisation phases. The focus for suppliers in this category is to ensure that commercial arrangements are established that set both Inland Revenue and suppliers up for success once transformation is complete. All-of-government/shared services capabilities Inland Revenue continues to consume common capabilities and ICT capabilities where they exist, meet the department’s business needs and are cost-effective. Inland Revenue continues to work with other agencies to leverage the investment made in Ātea. In February 2020, the Digital Government Leadership Group (DGLG) agreed a work programme to enable the process model developed by Inland Revenue for human resources, finance, asset management and procurement functions to be adopted as a common process model for all-of-Government. The work programme is headed by senior leaders from the functional lead agencies: • The Public Service Commission for human resources. • Treasury for finance and asset management. • The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment for procurement. • The Government Chief Digital Officer for digital government services. \[IN CONFIDENCE\] implementation of Oracle technology produced to date. Agencies using the common process model and Inland Revenue configuration will have an accelerator for implementing Oracle cloud-based technology. New Zealand businesses Inland Revenue has sought a wide range of providers for transformation. Opportunities have been actively promoted to the market place including New Zealand businesses – for example, advertising on GETS and communications with vendors. In line with achieving broader cultural, economic, environmental and social outcomes from government procurement, Inland Revenue is considering how opportunities can be created for New Zealand businesses through the department’s procurement activity. Information and communications technology has been identified as one of the priority sectors for increasing access to government contracts for New Zealand businesses. Inland Revenue has developed a social procurement strategy focused on achieving better buying outcomes and therefore greater public value. The department is aiming to drive better social and environmental outcomes through its supply chain and spend with suppliers. Social procurement evaluation criteria have been incorporated into the supplier selection process. Each year Inland Revenue publishes a list of New Zealand suppliers it has spent over $500,000 with. For the purposes of procurement, the definition of a New Zealand business is A business that originated in New Zealand (not being a New Zealand subsidiary of an off- shore business), is majority owned or controlled by New Zealanders, and has its principal place of business in New Zealand. Using this definition, between 1 July 2014 and 31 March 2020, where Inland Revenue incurred more than $500,000 on contractors and consultants providing services across the business transformation programme, the total percentage spend on New Zealand companies was 36%. Based on whether a company is considered a New Zealand resident for tax purposes, the total percentage spend was 73%. A company is considered a tax resident if it is incorporated in New Zealand, or if control by company directors is exercised in New Zealand, or if it has its centre of management in New Zealand, or if it has its head office in New Zealand. Both delivery partners, FAST and Accenture, have recruited New Zealand staff. FAST has employed 50 New Zealanders over the last 4 years and had 34 New Zealanders on staff as at May 2020. Accenture have employed over 40. The objectives of the work programme are to improve consistency of processes, provide greater resilience, enable more effective processes, and deliver on-going efficiencies. COVID-19 has resulted in delays in getting the work programme fully up and running. In October 2020, the DGLG agreed the next steps to progress the work programme. In December 2020, the DGLG will consider the longer-term approach to the common process model, including access, governance, and funding. In addition, as part of the agreed arrangements for the implementation of Ātea, any material or information developed for Inland Revenue is able to be reused across government. This will enable other agencies using the same technology platform as Inland Revenue (Oracle) to accelerate delivery as they will not have to start from scratch. Oracle provides upgrades to its software (which Inland Revenue has named Ātea) every quarter. Inland Revenue has automated the testing of these upgrades and is exploring options for enabling other agencies to leverage this capability. Inland Revenue will also explore how its e-invoicing capability can be leveraged by other agencies, for example working with software developers to establish standard design patterns. Withheld under s18(c)(i) of the OIA performed an independent quality assurance review of the common process model and the approach and material developed to support the Page 26 Page 27 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] THE MANAGEMENT CASE Ensuring successful delivery This section outlines updated governance and management arrangements for the programme, including assurance, benefits and risk management. Transformation continues to be well managed and governed Page 28 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Since the last addendum to the programme business case was completed in October 2019, Inland Revenue has: • updated programme governance and management arrangements • completed independent quality assurance reviews, and • regularly reviewed and updated risks. Programme methodologies and approaches and Inland Revenue’s change management approach remain unchanged. Programme governance arrangements From February 2020, some changes were made to streamline Inland Revenue’s g overnance system. The Performance and Investment Committee, Organisation Development Committee and Customer-Centric Committee were paused and then formally closed in August 2020. The governance decisions that would have been made at these forums will be made through the remaining governance bodies. An updated governance structure for the programme is shown in the diagram below. Programme management arrangements Following Release 4 go-live and the re-planning of the final stage of the programme, the management structure of the programme was reviewed to ensure it is fit-for-purpose for the remainder of the programme. As a result, the Release 4 Programme Manager and Release 5 Programme Manager roles have been renamed to reflect the workstreams remaining in the final stage of the programme. The high-level structure for transformation as at July 2020 is shown in the diagram below. Progress tracking Delivery progress is evaluated through: • Independent quality assurance and Gateway reviews. • Oversight by the Senior Responsible Owner and governance groups. • Management and oversight from the Deputy Commissioner, Transformation and members of the Programme Leadership Team (PLT). • Monthly red amber green (RAG) status reporting against the 10 keys (scope, risk, issues, inter-dependencies, schedule, resource, stakeholder engagement, delivery partners, financials and benefits). Page 29 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Programme assurance A programme of regular independent assurance reviews provides confidence that transformation continues to be well managed and governed. Since the last addendum was completed in October 2019, four further independent assurance reviews have taken place. • A Gateway 4 (Readiness for Service) interim review in October 2019. • KPMG completed their tenth independent quality assurance and ninth technical quality assurance review (IQA10/TQA9) in January 2020. • A Gateway 4 (Readiness for Service) review in March 2020. • KPMG completed their IQA11/TQA10 review in July 2020. Delivery of the final report was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Reviews continue to be positive, while noting transformation remains high risk. Summaries of each review are published on Inland Revenue’s website. The Office of the Auditor General (OAG) tabled their performance audit of benefits management for transformation in August 2020 (please refer to page 18). Benefits management Progress in realising benefits is regularly tracked and reported. In addition to the programme business case 6 Paid parental leave and Inland Revenue’s payroll application run off SAP. addendum dated October 2019, the following reports have been delivered: • Nine case studies demonstrating realisation of benefits were provided to the Portfolio Governance Committee to note between July 2019 and September 2020. • A comprehensive update of progress across all non- monetary and monetary benefits was reported to the Strategic Governance Board in September 2020. Progress for 2019/20 will be shared with central monitoring agencies and independent assurance reviewers. Risk management Identification and management of risks remains a strength of the programme. As at October 2020, there were 54 risks for transformation managed by the programme leadership team, of which the most significant (15 as at October 2020) are reported each month to the Portfolio Governance Committee. The top risks for transformation are reliance on SAP 6 , FIRST satellite functions, and KiwiSaver business-to- business exchanges after July 2022 preventing full decommissioning of Inland Revenue’s heritage data centres. There are strong mitigation plans in place for these risks. Page 30 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Part B Additions to the scope of transformation This section summarises additions to scope since the last addendum to the programme business case was prepared in October 2019. Some additions to scope have been agreed Page 31 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] The additions to scope during 2020 are the result of decisions taken by Government in response to COVID-19. Inland Revenue’s swift response to COVID-19 amply demonstrates the benefits of the investment made in transformation and the agility decision-makers now have. The initiatives were delivered while Inland Revenue was organising its people to work remotely, preparing for the implementation of Release 4 and supporting customers following go-live, and preparing for the peak tax season, including the 2020 automatic income tax assessments. To achieve this, Inland Revenue focused on: • Making processes as easy and simple as possible for customers to reduce effort for them at a highly stressful time. • Ensuring requirements were as clear and as simple as possible. • Leveraging the digitally-based revenue system to ensure as a wide a reach as possible. • Clearly understanding the source of data and, where it did not exist, ensuring it could be obtained in way that made implementation simple and straight forward. It should be noted that these results were not achieved without cost. The final stage of the transformation programme was re -planned as a result, as some work underway was paused to enable people to focus on the higher priority COVID-19 response work. Inland Revenue was the lead agency for a number of initiatives. Inland Revenue was the lead agency on two COVID-19 response bills and prepared a Supplementary Order Paper (SOP) for another. The COVID-19 Response (Taxation and Social Assistance Urgent Measures) Act 2020: • reintroduced depreciation deductions for non- residential buildings; • increased the threshold for having to pay provisional tax from $2,500 to $5,000; • increased the low value asset threshold; • brought forward the application date of broader refundability for the research and development tax credit by one year to the 2019/20 income year; • allows Inland Revenue to remit interest on a late tax payment if the taxpayer’s ability to make the tax payment on time was significantly adversely affected by COVID-19; • allows Inland Revenue to share information with other government agencies to assist them in their response to COVID-19; • removed the work hours eligibility requirement from the in-work tax credit; • allows people on a temporary visa, that would not otherwise meet the Working for Families residence criteria, to qualify for Working for Families if they receive an emergency benefit from the Ministry of Social Development (MSD); • ensures that GST does not apply to payments of the COVID-19 Wage Subsidy or the COVID-19 leave payment; and • restores the rates for the winter energy payment from 2021 onwards to $450 per year for single people with no dependent children and $700 per year for couples and people with dependent children. The COVID-19 Response (Taxation and Other Regulatory Urgent Measures) Act 2020: • introduced a temporary tax loss carry-back measure; • gave the Commissioner of Inland Revenue a temporary discretionary power to modify due dates, timeframes, or procedural requirements for taxpayers who are impacted by COVID-19; • authorised the Commissioner of Inland Revenue, on behalf of the Crown, to lend money under the small business cashflow (loan) scheme; and • ensures that special assistance granted under the COVID-19 New Zealanders Stranded Overseas Support Programme has the same treatment for tax and social policy purposes as for the equivalent payments of main benefits, NZ Super, and the veteran’s pension. SOP No. 488 proposed amendments to the Income Tax Act 2007 and the Tax Administration Act 1994 relating to the small business cashflow (loan) scheme and the temporary tax loss carry-back regime, to ensure that those measures work as intended. Page 32 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] The measures are intended to support ordinarily viable and currently vulnerable businesses. As at 9 October 2020: • Approximately 104,000 applications for the small business cashflow (loan) scheme had been received and approximately $1.6 billion in loans approved. • Around 2,500 customers had opted into the loss carry-back scheme and received approximately $105 million in funds released. As at 12 October 2020: • Approximately 52,000 customers had use of money interest remitted, to a total value of $5.6 million. • Approximately 20,000 customers had entered into an instalment arrangement and the total estimated value of interest supressed was $15 million. Inland Revenue also supported other agencies with the response to COVID-19. Inland Revenue supported MSD to deliver the Wage Subsidy as part of the COVID-19 response package. While the Wage Subsidy is administered by MSD, it relies on data held by Inland Revenue to verify applications. Initially, supporting Wage Subsidy applications was very labour-intensive. Inland Revenue shared information about self-employed individuals, employers and employees with MSD which enabled many applications to be automatically approved. Many however needed further clarification and initially an 0800 number was established specifically for MSD staff to connect directly with Inland Revenue. Inland Revenue answered more than 350,000 calls from MSD staff between March and early June 2020. The extension of the Wage Subsidy provided the opportunity to improve support for MSD. Inland Revenue developed a portal to allow MSD to self- serve some queries. Customers are benefitting as their applications can be processed more quickly, and both MSD and Inland Revenue are benefitting from improved administration of the subsidy. The portal has been in place since 11 June 2020 and allows approved MSD people to access the information they need to verify applications directly, reducing the number of calls and the manual work, and ensuring applications are processed efficiently. To protect individuals' privacy, MSD users have read-only access to selected data, limited to the minimum data necessary in order to verify whether or not any particular Wage Subsidy application should be approved. Inland Revenue only verifies applications where there is some complexity, for example large employers and any exceptions for self-employed customers. These are still managed via a phone call. The portal also supports COVID-19 Income Relief Payments. The information required to assess eligibility for these payments is different from that required to assess applications for the Wage Subsidy. MSD requires access to employer and income data to undertake post-payment integrity work. MSD staff are assigned as a user for either the Wage Subsidy or the Income Relief Payments – not both. This is to protect the integrity of the revenue system and ensure that information shared with MSD is only used for its intended purpose. The speed with which the portal was implemented is further demonstration of the benefits of transformation. It took just 15 working days from when the proposal to build the portal was approved through Inland Revenue’s governance forums until the portal was up and running. This was enabled by Inland Revenue’s new core technology, new workplace technology, and new ways of working. A networked team, including representatives from MSD, was established to co-design the portal and develop the necessary information-sharing arrangements simultaneously. The flexible and iterative nature of START meant that changes could be made overnight if needed.