Page 3 IN CONFIDENCE Part A Updates to the Programme Business Case This section summarises material changes since the last addendum to the Programme Business Case was prepared in October 2018. The most significant update is to the economic case. The commercial and management cases have also been updated. No changes have been made to either the strategic or financial cases. Executive Summary Page 4 IN CONFIDENCE Fundamental changes to the revenue system over the last three years have delivered significant value to New Zealanders. The successful implementation of Release 3 on 26 April 2019 marks a significant milestone in the transformation of the revenue system. Policy and legislative settings have changed. Customers and partners interact with Inland Revenue in a completely different way. Inland Revenue’s organisation design and capabilities are organised around customers. Supporting all of this are new systems and processes. All taxes and Working for Families are now on the new system, as is all customer information such as contact details. While these significant changes have at times put pressure on participants in the revenue system, their value is now evident. It is much less effort for customers The way customers interact with Inland Revenue and the revenue system has now fundamentally changed. Changes to the collection and use of employment and investment income information have enabled more far- reaching changes to be made, including the introduction of a new year-end process for individuals. The combination of these changes means that for most individuals, tax will be correctly withheld and assistance provided at the time it is needed. As a result, customers no longer have to rely on a year-end process to be certain they have paid and received about the right amounts. Customers receiving social policy entitlements can be more confident they are doing the right thing, as, in the main, these rely on accurate income information. Inland Revenue has supported the approximately 200,000 employers to move to payday filing, and approximately 2.9 million individual customers to adapt to a new year- end process. Online services are now available for all taxes. Customers can provide information, set up payment arrangements, and keep track of everything online. More and more customers are using them, with 89% of returns filed electronically for the year ending 30 June 2019. Individuals can see their personal details and all the income Inland Revenue pre-populates for them in their online account (myIR). Businesses can interact with Inland Revenue through their software and all their information is in one place in myIR. As at 30 September 2019, the majority of employers (98%) are filing digitally, with around 48% of payday returns filed through software. A wider range of intermediaries can act on their clients’ behalf, see the same information as their clients, and do everything online their clients can do. These changes make it easy for customers to do what they need to do, with 80% saying they find it easy to comply for the year ending 30 June 2019. Small-to-medium sized businesses say they are spending nine fewer hours a year meeting their tax obligations and say new digital services are making a real difference. Since the first changes were made in early 2017, the value of the time saved by these business owners is $280 million. It is simpler to pay and receive the right amounts Employers are providing employment income information more regularly. Payers of investment income are able to provide information about recipients more regularly, along with some new information where they have it. They will have to do so from 1 April 2020. This information is now stored in one place by Inland Revenue so it can be quickly collated to identify inconsistencies and errors. This means Inland Revenue can work with customers to help them get things right before the amounts involved get too big. Salary and wage earners now automatically get a refund or bill for tax to pay at the end of the year. For the year ending 31 March 2019, 1.3 million people received refunds worth $572 million and 271,000 people have $95 million to pay. It is easier for customers to comply and harder not to Improved analytical capabilities are enhancing the integrity of the revenue system by providing a real-time view of issues customers are struggling with and areas that might require closer investigation. All returns are now automatically risk-profiled. Inland Revenue now has more tools at its disposal to make smarter decisions about where to focus its resources. As a result, compliance activity can be better targeted through cost-effective interventions ranging from advice and education where needed to enforcement where necessary. Page 5 IN CONFIDENCE Errors and non-compliance, both inadvertent and deliberate, are being better detected and detected earlier through rules, created by Inland Revenue’s compliance experts. These are constantly adjusted as customer behaviour changes. Inland Revenue can now act more quickly to provide support where customers need it and also when obligations are being deliberately avoided. Inland Revenue is working more efficiently to collect and distribute money Broader, capability-based roles with more decision- making abilities mean that, increasingly, customers only have to talk to one person to get a query resolved. New workplace tools and internal systems and processes are enabling Inland Revenue’s people to do more for themselves and work more flexibly and efficiently. Since transformation began, Inland Revenue has made savings of $60 million from improved administration. Further efficiencies will follow as a result of increased automation and as the legislative changes implemented as part of Release 3 are embedded. The revenue system is more agile and resilient It is easier for Inland Revenue to make changes and deliver the outcomes policy-makers are looking for as new systems are configurable. Involving customers and third parties earlier has enhanced the policy development process. New infrastructure is more robust and secure, with customer-facing online services available 99.4% of the time for the year ending 30 June 2019. More solutions are being provided as-a-service or off-the-shelf meaning Inland Revenue can scale up quickly when needed. The addition of the research and development tax incentive and collection of hours paid information to scope are further evidence of increasing agility. Independent, external reviews confirm the good progress being made Regular, independent assurance reviews provide confidence that transformation is well managed and governed and that benefits are being progressively realised. Programme costs and benefits Transformation continues to track well within the funding envelope approved by Cabinet in 2015, Progress against monetary and non-monetary benefits is also tracking well as demonstrated by the results for the year ending 30 June 2019 for the lead and lag indicators. Inland Revenue recognises there is no room for complacency While transformation is now well advanced and has been successful to date, there are still two big releases ahead. Student loans and KiwiSaver will migrate to new systems and processes in April 2020, followed by Child Support in April 2021. In addition, a range of policy changes will be introduced, subject to legislation. These are complex products with many different stakeholders and for Child Support in particular, affect some customers with complex personal circumstances. Withheld under Section 9(2)(f)(iv) of 18(c)(i) of the Official Information Act 1982. Page 6 IN CONFIDENCE THE ECONOMIC CASE Delivering the preferred way forward This section provides an update on progress in delivering transformation and realising the agreed benefits and outcomes. The preferred way forward, programme roadmap, and release plan are unchanged. Modernisation of the revenue system is progressing well Page 7 IN CONFIDENCE Transformation continues to be implemented as planned: • Cabinet has agreed to policy changes to improve the administration of KiwiSaver and Student Loans as part of Release 4 in April 2020. • A new data and intelligence platform has been implemented. • Changes to Inland Revenue’s capabilities and organisation design continue. • Release 3 (the third of five planned releases) was successfully implemented on 26 April 2019, completing the migration of tax products to START. 1 The benefits of the changes being made are becoming increasingly evident. Because employment and investment income information are reported to Inland Revenue more often, people who only earn this type of income now have their end-of-year refund or tax to pay worked out for them. This information is now stored in one place and means Inland Revenue can associate more of a person’s income with them and identify things that aren’t right. New analytical capabilities are enabling Inland Revenue to look at any errors and separate potentially fraudulent behaviour from inadvertent mistakes and respond accordingly. Some transactions are stopped and referred to a person for review. In other cases, areas of complexity and confusion have been highlighted where customers 1 START stands for simplified tax and revenue technology and is the name Inland Revenue has chosen for the GenTax software provided by FAST Enterprises LLC and third parties need help to get things right. The prescribed investor rate is a good example. New systems and processes mean more and more customers are using online services as they are quick and convenient. As at 30 June 2019, 89% of returns were filed electronically and 98% of employers provided employment income information electronically. Together, these changes are making it simpler and easier for customers to meet their obligations and pay and receive the right amounts. The revenue system is working as designed – to be simple, open and certain. Delivering the future revenue system Delivering the future revenue system requires changes to policy, data, processes, people, and technology.  Simplifying policy and legislative settings A review of policy and legislative settings to support, enable, and optimise the benefits from business transformation is nearly complete. A number of significant legislative changes were implemented as part of Release 3 in April 2019. From 1 April 2019, employers have been required to provide employment income information to Inland Revenue on a payday basis. Since 1 April 2018, when payday filing was introduced on an optional basis, Inland Revenue has been supporting the approximately 200,000 employers to ensure they meet their new obligations. As at 30 September 2019, approximately 191,000 employers had filed approximately 3.4 million payday returns since 1 April 2019. A small portion of employers have not yet filed a payday return. Inland Revenue has been proactively contacting them to understand if they require any assistance. More businesses are now required to file electronically. From 1 April 2019, businesses that withheld more than $50,000 of PAYE and employer superannuation contribution tax (ESCT) in the previous tax year have been required to file online. From 1 April 2019, payers of investment income have been able to provide more detailed recipient information more frequently if they choose to. This becomes mandatory from 1 April 2020. Also from 1 April 2020, companies and Māori Authorities will be required to provide information about the recipients of investment income. Changes to the collection and use of employment and investment income information have enabled more far- reaching changes to be made, including the introduction of a new year-end process for individuals. The combination of these changes means that, for most Page 21 IN CONFIDENCE THE COMMERCIAL CASE Sourcing the services and products required for delivery This section outlines the suppliers Inland Revenue is working with to implement the future revenue system. Commercial arrangements support all-of -Government principles Page 22 IN CONFIDENCE The major procurement activity required to successfully implement transformation has largely been completed. All procurement is consistent with the principles of the Government Rules of Sourcing. Key suppliers Since the last addendum to the Programme Business Case was completed in October 2018, Inland Revenue has completed contract negotiations with a number of suppliers of products and services. These include: • Sitecore and AKQA for a web-content management solution. • Oracle for the technology solution that underpins Ātea. • Accenture and PrimeQ for services to implement Ātea. • Deloitte for ongoing support for identity and access management services. • FAST for ongoing support arrangements for START. • Assurity for testing services (pending completion of negotiations). • Unisys for the Mainframe-as-a-Service and data centre housing extensions to enable completion of Release 5 and successful disengagement and decommissioning. Efforts are now focused on agreeing the contract with Unisys to facilitate the decommissioning. All-of -government/shared services capabilities Inland Revenue continues to consume common capabilities and ICT capabilities where they exist, meet the department’s business needs and are cost-effective. Inland Revenue is working with other agencies to determine how the underlying business process model for Ātea can be shared across agencies. New Zealand businesses Inland Revenue seeks a wide range of providers for transformation and will continue to do so. Opportunities are actively promoted to the market place, including New Zealand businesses – for example, advertising on GETS and communications with vendors. Vendors are not chosen based on where they come from. The Government Rules of Sourcing are very clear that this is not allowed. To increase transparency, each year Inland Revenue publishes a list of the New Zealand tax resident suppliers it has spent over $500,000 with. For the year ending 30 June 2019, the total percentage spend on New Zealand companies was 35%. Following decisions made by Cabinet (CAB-19-MIN- 0213.02 refers), Inland Revenue has adjusted its definition of a New Zealand company to align with amendments to the Government Rules of Sourcing. For the purposes of procurement, the definition of a New Zealand business from 1 October 2019 is A business that originated in New Zealand (not being a New Zealand subsidiary of an off-shore business), is majority owned or controlled by New Zealanders, and has its principal place of business in New Zealand. The definition of a New Zealand company Inland Revenue previously used was based on whether the company is considered a New Zealand resident for tax purposes. A company is considered a tax resident if it is incorporated in New Zealand, or if control by company directors is exercised in New Zealand, or if it has its centre of management in New Zealand, or if It has its head office in New Zealand. Both delivery partners, FAST and Accenture, have recruited New Zealand staff. FAST has employed 35 New Zealanders and Accenture have employed over 40. Page 23 IN CONFIDENCE THE MANAGEMENT CASE Ensuring successful delivery This section outlines updated management arrangements for the programme, including assurance, benefits and risk management. Transformation continues to be well managed and governed Page 24 IN CONFIDENCE Since the last addendum to the Programme Business Case was prepared in October 2018, Inland Revenue has: • updated programme management arrangements • completed independent assurance reviews, and • regularly reviewed and updated risks. Governance arrangements remain unchanged. Programme methodologies and approaches and Inland Revenue’s change management approach also remain unchanged. Programme management arrangements Following Release 3 go-live in April 2019 and the completion of initiatives such as the deployment of work place technology, the structure and resource model for transformation was reviewed to ensure it is right-sized for the remainder of the programme, out to 2021. The high-level organisational structure for transformation as at July 2019 is shown below. The changes made since November 2018 are: • Some roles are no longer required. The Director Programme Management Office (PMO) role was put in place to set up the release plan and improve delivery processes. As the focus is now predominantly on the delivery of Releases 4 and 5, with two sub-programmes (intelligence-led and Ātea) being delivered in conjunction with business groups, this broad role is no longer needed. The Organisation Change Management and Training Lead role has not been replaced. Change support has been embedded in Releases 4 and 5 and in the intelligence-led and Ātea programmes. • Some reporting lines have changed. The PMO Lead now reports to the Deputy Commissioner, Transformation. Communications now reports to the Principal Transformation Director. The Director New Service Platform now reports to the Chief Technology Officer. • Some new roles have been established. Two dedicated senior leaders have been appointed to lead Releases 4 and 5. The Release 5 Lead will also lead the close out of the programme. Page 25 IN CONFIDENCE Progress tracking Delivery progress is evaluated through: • Independent quality assurance and Gateway reviews. • Oversight by the Senior Responsible Owner and governance groups. • Management and oversight from the Deputy Commissioner, Transformation and members of the programme leadership team (PLT). • Monthly red amber green (RAG) status reporting against the 10 keys. 5 Programme assurance A programme of regular assurance reviews provides confidence that transformation continues to be well managed and governed. Since the Programme Business Case Addendum was completed in October 2018, two further independent assurance reviews have taken place. • A Gateway 4 (Readiness for Service) review in March 2019. • KPMG completed their IQA9/TQA8 review in May 2019. Reviews continue to be positive, while noting transformation remains high risk. In July 2019, the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) began a performance audit of benefits management for transformation. The OAG are looking at measures and measurement systems for assessing and reporting on the 5 Scope, risk, issues, inter-dependency, schedule, resource, stakeholder engagement, delivery partners, financials and benefits benefits (to customers, the Crown, the department, and others) derived from transformation. Inland Revenue understands the OAG expects to complete their review by the end of 2019 and report to Parliament in March 2020. Benefits management Progress in realising benefits is regularly tracked and reported. Since the Programme Business Case Addendum dated October 2018, the following reports have been delivered: • In January 2019, a progress update on benefit realisation was included in a wider sustainability update provided to the Performance and Investment Committee (PIC). • In March 2019, a paper to the Portfolio Governance Committee (PGC) and PIC provided visibility of the process for confirming Release 4 benefits and facilitating a stocktake of progress to date in realising the benefits and outcomes set out in the 2015 business case. • Eleven case studies demonstrating realisation of benefits were provided to PGC and PIC to note between February 2019 and September 2019. • In May 2019, the results of the 2018 survey of SMEs perceptions of the time and costs of meeting their tax obligations were p rovided to PGC and PIC and reported to the Minister of Revenue and Cabinet. • A comprehensive update of progress across all non- monetary and monetary benefits was reported to the Strategic Governance Board in September 2019, and subsequently shared with central monitoring agencies, independent assurance reviewers and the Office of the Auditor-General. Risk management Identification and management of risks remains a strength of the programme. As at September 2019, there were 55 risks for transformation managed by the programme leadership team, of which the most significant (13 as at September 2019) are reported each month to the Portfolio Governance Committee. The top risks for transformation are support for heritage systems ending in 2021, the time taken to resolve major incidents, retaining people and the timing of benefit realisation. Mitigations are in place for all risks. Page 26 IN CONFIDENCE Part B Additions to the scope of transformation This section summarises additions to scope since the last addendum to the Programme Business Case was prepared in October 2018. Some additions to scope have been agreed Page 27 IN CONFIDENCE The additions to scope are the result of decisions taken by Government. The Government’s research and development tax incentive legislation and the collection of hours paid information initiative have been added to the scope of transformation since October 2018, demonstrating improved agility. Rese arch and Development Tax Incentive The Research and Development (R&D) Tax Incentive is part of the Government's strategy to increase the amount of R&D done in New Zealand. The R&D Tax Incentive operates as a tax credit and features a 15% tax credit on up to $120 million of eligible expenditure. It is available to eligible businesses from the 2019/20 income year. The benefits of the Incentive The Government has announced a goal of raising New Zealand’s total R&D spending to 2% of GDP by 2027. The R&D Tax Incentive is aimed at encouraging more business investment in R&D. It will support businesses of all sizes to undertake R&D. Who the Incentive will apply to Businesses doing R&D in New Zealand can be eligible if they have a core R&D activity and satisfy the eligibility criteria, regardless of their legal structure. 6 The R&D Tax Incentive applies from the beginning of the 2019/20 income year, which means the date from which it applies depends on An activity is a core activity if it is: • undertaken in New Zealand using a systematic approach, and • is intended to create new knowledge or things, and • is intended to resolve scientific or technological uncertainty. Businesses must own the results of their R&D activities or be able to use the results for no extra cost. The Government estimates that 2,000 to 3,000 businesses will be able to benefit from the R&D Tax Incentive. This compares to the approximately 300 businesses receiving Growth Grants from Callaghan Innovation, which are being replaced by the Incentive. Implementation approach Inland Revenue will be the administering agency of the R&D Tax Incentive, supported by Callaghan Innovation. In the first year of the Incentive (the 2019-20 income year), to claim the Incentive businesses will need to: • Enrol online through myIR before they file their re turns • Submit an R&D supplementary return online through myIR, and • Include their R&D tax credit claim amount in their income tax return. the balance date of each claimant. For most standard balance date (31 March) claimants, the R&D Tax Incentive will apply from 1 April 2019. In the second year of the Incentive (the 2020-21 income year), to claim the Incentive businesses will need to: • Enrol online if they didn’t enrol in year 1 • Obtain in-year approval (either by obtaining general approval or opting into the significant performer regime) – applications are made online through myIR • Submit an R&D supplementary return online through myIR • If they are in the significant performer regime, submit an R&D certificate alongside their supplementary return, and • Include their R&D tax credit claim amount in their income tax return. The R&D Tax Incentive is being delivered as part of Release 4. Funding Additional funding of $4.3 million over 4 years was provided as part of Budget 2018 for one-off implementation costs for the R&D tax incentive. Legislation The Taxation (Research and Development Tax Credits) Act 2019 was enacted on 7 May 2019. The R&D tax Incentive scheme commenced from 1 April 2019 for most businesses. 6 Page 28 IN CONFIDENCE Future development From year two (the 2020/21 income year), most businesses will be required to get their R&D activities approved by Inland Revenue (supported by Callaghan Innovation) before they can claim the credit. Businesses that spend more than $2m on eligible R&D in a given income year can choose to opt out of general approval into the significant performer regime (which includes an optional approval process called criteria and methodologies approval). The Government intends to run a pilot approval process in the first year of the regime (the 2019/2020 income year). The aim of the pilot is to ensure the general approval and criteria and methodologies approval are ready to be rolled-out more broadly from year two. Changes to the regime are proposed in the Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans and Remedial Matters) Bill, which is currently before Select Committee. This includes proposals to enable more businesses to access refundable R&D tax credits, by removing the current refundability eligibility criteria completely and replacing the $255,000 cap on refundability with a new cap based on labour- related taxes. Hours paid The Government’s decision to collect hours paid information is included in the scope of Release 4. Who this will apply to This information will be collected from employers who file through software and who already record their payroll on this basis. Not all employers will be required to provide this information. Inland Revenue expects more employers to do so as digital uptake increases over time. The benefits of collecting this information Collecting this information will help to improve the administration of Working for Families and Child Support. These payments are partly determined by the hours people are paid for. Once collected, this information will be shared with Statistics NZ so that it can be used to support broader Government priorities such as pay equity, social wellbeing, and better understanding productivity. Funding This is being delivered as part of Release 4 and has not required additional funding.