INTEREST DEDUCTIBILITY—ROBERTS AND SMITH— BORROWING TO REPLACE AND REPAY AMOUNTS INVESTED IN AN INCOME EARNING ACTIVITY OR BUSINESS Rulings BR Pub 07/04—BR Pub 07/09 originate from issues paper IRRUIP 5: Interest deductibility in certain arrangements, which was issued for public consultation in March 2001. (IRRUIP 5 had superseded an earlier issues paper, IRRUIP 3.) Consultation comments received on IRRUIP 5 have been taken into account in forming the Commissioner’s opinion outlined in these rulings and commentary. There are no significant changes from the Commissioner’s opinion expressed in IRRUIP 5 in respect of the matters covered in these rulings and commentary. The Commissioner’s opinion of the application of Public Trustee v CIR \[1938\] NZLR 436, discussed in IRRUIP 5, is outlined in Interpretation Statement IS0082—Interest Deductibility—Public Trustee v CIR. Other issues discussed in IRRUIP 5 may be covered in future statements. INTEREST DEDUCTIBILITY—FUNDS BORROWED BY A PARTNERSHIP TO RETURN CAPITAL CONTRIBUTIONS PUBLIC RULING – BR Pub 07/04 This is a public ruling made under section 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation Law All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2004 unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of section DB 6. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies The Arrangement is the borrowing of and the payment of interest on funds used by a partnership to return capital to partners who previously invested that capital. The Arrangement only includes: • a partnership carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable and excluded income both at the time the partnership borrows the funds and at the time the interest on those funds is payable; and • arrangements where the interest rate on the borrowed funds is an arm’s length rate. The Arrangement does not include arrangements where one or both of the following applies: • subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement \[subpart BG relates to tax avoidance arrangements\]; • interest is deductible under section DB 7 \[section DB 7 applies to companies\]. This Ruling is subject to Part FG of the Act. \[The purpose of Part FG is to ensure that worldwide interest expense is apportioned appropriately to a New Zealand taxpayer. The rules in Part FG are commonly referred to as the “thin capitalisation rules”.\] How the Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement The Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement as follows. • Any partner’s share of the interest will be deductible by that partner to the extent that the partner’s capital contribution was used directly in the partnership’s business, or used to repay borrowed funds on which the interest was deductible. • Any partner’s share of the interest will not be deductible by that partner to the extent that the borrowed funds are used by the partnership to pay current year income to the partner, or are purported to be used to make a payment out of unrealised asset revaluations or internally generated goodwill. The period for which this Ruling applies This Ruling will apply for the period beginning on 22 May 2007 and ending on 22 May 2010. This Ruling is signed by me on the 22 nd day of May 2007. Susan Price Senior Tax Counsel 2 INTEREST DEDUCTIBILITY—FUNDS BORROWED BY A PARTNERSHIP TO RETURN PROFITS PUBLIC RULING – BR Pub 07/05 This is a public ruling made under section 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation Law All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2004 unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of section DB 6. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies The Arrangement is the borrowing of and the payment of interest on funds used by a partnership to pay profits to partners. The Arrangement only includes: • a partnership carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable or excluded income both at the time the partnership borrows the funds and at the time the interest on those funds is payable; and • arrangements where the interest rate on the borrowed funds is an arm’s length rate. The Arrangement does not include arrangements where one or both of the following applies: • subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement \[subpart BG relates to tax avoidance arrangements\]; • interest is deductible under section DB 7 \[section DB 7 applies to companies\]. This Ruling is subject to Part FG of the Act. \[The purpose of Part FG is to ensure that worldwide interest expense is apportioned appropriately to a New Zealand taxpayer The rules in Part FG are commonly referred to as the “thin capitalisation rules”.\] How the Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement The Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement as follows. • Any partner’s share of the interest will be deductible by that partner to the extent that the profits are past years’ profits that were used directly in the partnership’s business or used to repay borrowed funds on which the interest was deductible. 3 • Any partner’s share of the interest will not be deductible by that partner to the extent that the borrowed funds are used by the partnership to pay current year income to the partner, or are purported to be used to make a payment out of unrealised asset revaluations or internally generated goodwill. The period for which this Ruling applies This Ruling will apply for the period beginning on 22 May 2007 and ending on 22 May 2010. This Ruling is signed by me on the 22 nd day of May 2007. Susan Price Senior Tax Counsel 4 INTEREST DEDUCTIBILITY—FUNDS BORROWED BY A COMPANY TO REPURCHASE SHARES PUBLIC RULING – BR Pub 07/06 This is a public ruling made under section 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation Law All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2004 unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of section DB 6. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies The Arrangement is the borrowing of and the payment of interest on funds used by a company to repurchase shares from its shareholders as authorised by the Companies Act 1993. The Arrangement only includes: • a company carrying on an assessable or excluded income earning activity or a business for the purpose of deriving assessable or excluded income both at the time the company borrows the funds and at the time the interest on those funds is payable; and • arrangements where the interest rate on the borrowed funds is an arm’s length rate. The Arrangement does not include arrangements where one or both of the following applies: • subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement \[subpart BG relates to tax avoidance arrangements\]; • interest is deductible under section DB 7 \[section DB 7 applies to companies\]. This Ruling is subject to Part FG of the Act. \[The purpose of Part FG is to ensure that worldwide interest expense is apportioned appropriately to a New Zealand taxpayer The rules in Part FG are commonly referred to as the “thin capitalisation rules”.\] How the Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement The Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement as follows. • Interest will be deductible in the circumstances described in the Arrangement to the extent that the funds that were represented by the shares and returned to 5 shareholders were funds contributed by the shareholders and used directly in the company’s assessable or excluded income earning activity or business, or used to repay borrowed funds on which the interest was deductible. • Interest will not be deductible to the extent that the borrowed funds are used by the company to pay current year income to a shareholder, or are purported to be used to make a payment out of unrealised asset revaluations or internally generated goodwill. • Interest will be deductible in the circumstances described in the Arrangement if the shares are bonus issue shares, to the extent that the bonus issue shares: • were paid up out of funds used directly in the company’s assessable or excluded income earning activity or business; and • were not paid up out of current year income, unrealised asset revaluations, or internally generated goodwill. The period for which this Ruling applies This Ruling will apply for the period beginning on 22 May 2007 and ending on 22 May 2010. This Ruling is signed by me on the 22 nd day of May 2007. Susan Price Senior Tax Counsel 6 INTEREST DEDUCTIBILITY—FUNDS BORROWED BY A COMPANY TO PAY DIVIDENDS PUBLIC RULING – BR Pub 07/07 This is a public ruling made under section 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation Law All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2004 unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of section DB 6. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies The Arrangement is the borrowing of and the payment of interest on funds used by a company to pay dividends to its shareholders. The Arrangement only includes: • a company carrying on an assessable or excluded income earning activity or a business for the purpose of deriving assessable or excluded income both at the time the company borrows the funds and at the time the interest on those funds is payable; and • arrangements where the interest rate on the borrowed funds is an arm’s length rate. The Arrangement does not include arrangements where one or both of the following applies: • subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement \[subpart BG relates to tax avoidance arrangements\]; • interest is deductible under section DB 7 \[section DB 7 applies to companies\]. This Ruling is subject to Part FG of the Act. \[The purpose of Part FG is to ensure that worldwide interest expense is apportioned appropriately to a New Zealand taxpayer The rules in Part FG are commonly referred to as the “thin capitalisation rules”.\] How the Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement The Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement as follows. • Interest will be deductible to the extent that the dividends are sourced from past years’ profits or contributed capital, which was used directly in the company’s 7 assessable or excluded income earning activity or business, or used to repay borrowed funds on which the interest was deductible. • Interest will not be deductible to the extent that the borrowed funds are used by the company to pay current year income to a shareholder, or are purported to be used to make a payment out of unrealised asset revaluations or internally generated goodwill. The period for which this Ruling applies This Ruling will apply for the period beginning on 22 May 2007 and ending on 22 May 2010. This Ruling is signed by me on the 22 nd day of May 2007. Susan Price Senior Tax Counsel 8 INTEREST DEDUCTIBILITY—FUNDS BORROWED TO REPAY DEBT PUBLIC RULING – BR Pub 07/08 This is a public ruling made under section 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation Law All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2004 unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of section DB 6. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies The Arrangement is the borrowing of and the payment of interest on funds used by a taxpayer or a partnership to repay borrowed funds to the person who invested those funds in the taxpayer or partnership. The Arrangement only includes: • a taxpayer or a partnership carrying on an assessable or excluded income earning activity or a business for the purpose of deriving assessable or excluded income both at the time the taxpayer or partnership borrows the funds and at the time the interest on those funds is payable; and • arrangements where the interest rate on the borrowed funds is an arm’s length rate. The Arrangement does not include arrangements where one or both of the following applies: • subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement \[subpart BG relates to tax avoidance arrangements\]; • interest incurred under the Arrangement is deductible under section DB 7 \[section DB 7 applies to companies\]. This Ruling is subject to Part FG of the Act. \[The purpose of Part FG is to ensure that worldwide interest expense is apportioned appropriately to a New Zealand taxpayer The rules in Part FG are commonly referred to as the “thin capitalisation rules”.\] How the Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement The Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement as follows: • Interest will be deductible in the circumstances described in the Arrangement to the extent that the funds which are repaid: 9 • were used directly in the taxpayer’s or partnership’s assessable or excluded income earning activity or business; or • were used by a company and the interest was deductible under section DB 7; or • were used by a company to purchase shares and the interest was deductible under section DB 8; or • were used for one of the Arrangements in Public Rulings BR Pub 07/04–BR Pub 07/09, and met the requirements for interest deductibility in those rulings; or • were used to retain income earning assets from sale and satisfied the elements of the Public Trustee case set out in the Commissioner’s Interpretation Statement IS0082; or • themselves repaid, either directly or through a series of borrowings used to repay borrowings, other borrowed funds in respect of which the interest was deductible. The period for which this Ruling applies This Ruling will apply for the period beginning on 22 May 2007 and ending on 22 May 2010. This Ruling is signed by me on the 22 nd day of May 2007. Susan Price Senior Tax Counsel 10 INTEREST DEDUCTIBILITY—FUNDS BORROWED TO MAKE A PAYMENT TO A GROUP COMPANY PUBLIC RULING – BR Pub 07/09 This is a public ruling made under section 91D of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Taxation Law All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2004 unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of section DB 6 and section IG 2. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies The Arrangement is the borrowing of and the payment of interest on funds used by a company to make a payment under section IG 2(2) to another company that has a net loss. The Arrangement does not include arrangements where one or both of the following applies: • subpart BG of the Act applies to void the arrangement \[subpart BG relates to tax avoidance arrangements\]; • Interest is deductible under section DB 7 \[section DB 7 applies to companies\]. How the Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement The Taxation Law applies to the Arrangement as follows: • Interest will not be deductible in the circumstances described in the Arrangement. The period for which this Ruling applies This Ruling will apply for the period beginning on 22 May 2007 and ending on 22 May 2010. This Ruling is signed by me on the 22 nd day of May 2007. Susan Price Senior Tax Counsel 11 COMMENTARY ON PUBLIC RULINGS BR PUB 07/04–07/09 This commentary is not a legally binding statement, but is intended to provide assistance in understanding and applying the conclusions reached in Public Rulings BR Pub 07/04–07/09 (“the Rulings”). The Rulings and commentary express the Commissioner’s view of the principles relating to interest deductibility in the Australian Full Federal Court decision in FC of T v Roberts; FC of T v Smith 92 ATC 4 (“Roberts and Smith”). All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2004 unless otherwise stated. SUMMARY 1. The interest deductibility test is satisfied if there is a sufficient connection between interest incurred and assessable income. The sufficient connection is established if the borrowed funds on which interest is incurred are used in deriving assessable income or in a business carried on for the purpose of deriving assessable income. 2. In Roberts and Smith the borrowed funds were not used directly in deriving income, but the Court held that the interest is deductible. 3. Roberts and Smith is authority that there is a sufficient connection between interest and income when the interest is incurred on borrowed funds used to replace an amount previously invested in an income earning activity or business and to return the amount to the person who invested it. The link with income is through the new borrowings taking the place of funds that have a sufficient connection with assessable income or in respect of which interest was deductible through the operation of section DB 7 or DB 8 of the Income Tax Act 2004. Capital contributions, past years’ profits and debt are all capable of being replaced. 4. The case only applies where the amount replaced and repaid is owed to a person separate to the income earning activity or business. It does not apply to sole traders. 12 BACKGROUND Legislation Income Tax Act 2004 PART D — DEDUCTIONS Subpart DA — General rules DA 1 GENERAL PERMISSION DA 1(1) Nexus with income A person is allowed a deduction for an amount of expenditure or loss (including an amount of depreciation loss) to the extent to which the expenditure or loss is— (a) incurred by them in deriving— (i) their assessable income; or (ii) their excluded income; or (iii) a combination of their assessable income and excluded income; or (b) incurred by them in the course of carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving— (i) their assessable income; or (ii) their excluded income; or (iii) a combination of their assessable income and excluded income. DA 1(2) General Permission Subsection (1) is called the general permission. Defined in this Act: amount, assessable income, business, deduction, depreciation loss, excluded income, general permission, loss DA 2 GENERAL LIMITATIONS DA 2(1) Capital limitation A person is denied a deduction for an amount of expenditure or loss to the extent to which it is of a capital nature. This rule is called the capital limitation. DA 2(2) Private limitation A person is denied a deduction for an amount of expenditure or loss to the extent to which it is of a private or domestic nature. This rule is called the private limitation. DA 2(3) Exempt income limitation A person is denied a deduction for an amount of expenditure or loss to the extent to which it is incurred in deriving exempt income. This rule is called the exempt income limitation. ... DA 2(7) Relationship of general limitations to general permission Each of the general limitations in this section overrides the general permission. Defined in this Act: amount, capital limitation, deduction, employment limitation, exempt income, exempt income limitation, general limitation, general permission, income from employment, loss, non-residents' foreign-sourced income, non- residents' foreign-sourced income limitation, private limitation, schedular income subject to final withholding, withholding tax limitation DA 3 EFFECT OF SPECIFIC RULES ON GENERAL RULES DA 3(1) Supplements to general permission A provision in any of subparts DB to DZ may supplement the general permission. In that case, a person to whom the provision applies does not have to satisfy the general permission to be allowed a deduction. 13 DA 3(2) Express reference needed to supplement A provision in any of subparts DB to DZ takes effect to supplement the general permission only if it expressly states that it supplements the general permission. DA 3(3) Relationship of general limitations to supplements to general permission Each of the general limitations overrides a supplement to the general permission in any of subparts DB to DZ, unless the provision creating the supplement expressly states otherwise. DA 3(4) Relationship between other specific provisions and general permission or general limitations A provision in any of subparts DB to DZ may override any 1 or more of the general permission and the general limitations. DA 3(5) Express reference needed to override A provision in any of subparts DB to DZ takes effect to override the general permission or a general limitation only if it expressly states— (a) that it overrides the general permission or the relevant limitation; or (b) that the general permission or the relevant limitation does not apply. ... DB 1 TAXES, OTHER THAN GST, AND PENALTIES DB 1(1) No deduction A person is denied a deduction for the following: (a) income tax: (b) a civil penalty under Part 9 of the Tax Administration Act 1994: (c) a tax, a penalty, or interest on unpaid tax that is— (i) payable under the laws of a country or territory outside New Zealand; and (ii) substantially the same as a civil penalty as defined in section 3(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994, or a criminal penalty under Part 9 of the Act, or interest imposed under Part 7 of the Act. ... DB 6 INTEREST: NOT CAPITAL EXPENDITURE DB 6(1) Deduction A person is allowed a deduction for interest incurred. DB 6(2) Exclusion Subsection (1) does not apply to interest for which a person is denied a deduction under section DB 1. DB 6(3) Link with subpart DA This section overrides the capital limitation. The general permission must still be satisfied and the other general limitations still apply. Defined in this Act: capital limitation, deduction, general limitation, general permission, interest DB 7 INTEREST: MOST COMPANIES NEED NO NEXUS WITH INCOME DB 7(1) Deduction A company is allowed a deduction for interest incurred. DB 7(2) Exclusion: qualifying company Subsection (1) does not apply to a qualifying company. DB 7(3) Exclusion: exempt income If a company (company A) derives exempt income or another company (company B) in the same wholly-owned group of companies derives exempt income, subsection (1) applies to company A only if all the exempt income is 1 or more of the following: (a) dividends; or (b) income exempted under section CW 46 (Disposal of companies' own shares); or 14 (c) income exempted under section CW 48 (Stake money) and ancillary to the company's business of breeding. DB 7(4) Exclusion: non-resident company If a company is a non-resident company, subsection (1) applies only to the extent to which the company incurs interest in the course of carrying on a business through a fixed establishment in New Zealand. DB 7(5) Exclusion: interest related to tax Subsection (1) does not apply to interest for which a person is denied a deduction under section DB 1. DB 7(6) Link with subpart DA This section supplements the general permission and overrides the capital limitation, the exempt income limitation, and the withholding tax limitation. The other general limitations still apply. Defined in this Act: business, capital limitation, company, deduction, dividend, exempt income, exempt income limitation, fixed establishment, general limitation, general permission, income, interest, New Zealand, non-resident company, qualifying company, supplement, wholly-owned group of companies, withholding tax limitation DB 8 INTEREST: MONEY BORROWED TO ACQUIRE SHARES IN GROUP COMPANIES DB 8(1) Deduction: borrowing to acquire group company shares A company is allowed a deduction for interest incurred on money borrowed to acquire shares in another company in the same group of companies. DB 8(2) Exclusion: group not in existence at tax year end Subsection (1) does not apply if the 2 companies are not in the same group of companies at the end of the tax year for which the deduction is claimed. DB 8(3) Deduction: interest after qualifying amalgamation A company is allowed a deduction for interest incurred on money borrowed to acquire shares in another company that has ceased to exist on a qualifying amalgamation. DB 8(4) Exclusion: group not in existence immediately before qualifying amalgamation Subsection (3) does not apply if the 2 companies were not in the same group of companies immediately before the qualifying amalgamation. DB 8(5) Application from tax year of qualifying amalgamation Subsection (3) applies in the tax year in which the qualifying amalgamation occurs and in later tax years. DB 8(6) Link with subpart DA This section supplements the general permission and overrides the capital limitation, the exempt income limitation, and the withholding tax limitation. The other general limitations still apply. Defined in this Act: company, deduction, exempt income limitation, general limitation, general permission, group of companies, interest, qualifying amalgamation, share, supplement, tax year, withholding tax limitation Roberts and Smith principle not relevant to section DB 7 deductions 5. The interest deductibility legislation distinguishes between companies and other taxpayers. Interest incurred by companies is automatically deductible— that is, there is no requirement to satisfy a nexus test—except for certain exceptions. The effect of this is that most companies seeking interest deductions will obtain them under section DB 7, rather than by applying Roberts and Smith. Roberts and Smith may apply to companies who do not come within section DB 7. 15 6. Under section DB 7, interest incurred by a company is automatically deductible, provided the statutory exceptions in subsections DB 7(2) – (5) do not apply. The exceptions are: • qualifying companies; • companies deriving exempt income except if that exempt income is dividends, exempt income arising from a disposal of a company’s own shares or exempt income related to stake money and a breeding business; • non-resident companies to the extent to which interest is not incurred in the course of carrying on a business through a fixed establishment in New Zealand; and • interest on unpaid taxes payable to another country and substantially the same as civil or criminal penalties as defined under certain laws in New Zealand. 7. The effect of section DB 7 is discussed in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 11 (November 2001). How the sections of the Act, other than section DB 7, apply in relation to interest deductibility 8. Section DB 6(1) provides that: A person is allowed a deduction for interest incurred. 9. Section DB 6(3) states that This section overrides the capital limitation. The general permission must still be satisfied and the other general limitations still apply. 10. Therefore, a person seeking to deduct interest is subject to the general permission, which states: DA 1 GENERAL PERMISSION DA 1(1) Nexus with income A person is allowed a deduction for an amount of expenditure or loss (including an amount of depreciation loss) to the extent to which the expenditure or loss is— (a) incurred by them in deriving— (i) their assessable income; or (ii) their excluded income; or (iii) a combination of their assessable income and excluded income; or (b) incurred by them in the course of carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving— (i) their assessable income; or (ii) their excluded income; or (iii) a combination of their assessable income and excluded income. DA 1(2) General permission Subsection (1) is called the general permission. 16 11. So in considering the application of the Act to interest expense, a person must satisfy the test under the general permission that the expenditure (interest in this case) is incurred in deriving assessable income (or excluded income) or incurred in carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable (or excluded income). This test is the same in all relevant respects to the test under the 1994 Act. 12. The concept of “excluded income” requires some comment in relation to how it will be dealt with in this commentary. “Excluded income” is defined and specified to include, for example, GST, fringe benefits, certain life insurance premiums or claims derived by persons carrying on the business of life insurance, and other specific classes of income (see sections OB 1, BD 1(3) and subparts CX and CZ). The addition of the reference to “excluded income” in the general permission does not alter the principles applying to the deductibility of interest. The same principles apply to excluded income. However, because the concept of “excluded income” is a statutory mechanism used to deal with certain types of income, and does not affect the principles of interest deductibility, for ease of reference, “excluded income” is not referred to further in this commentary. 13. The general permission is subject to the general limitations, pursuant to section DA 2(7). The general limitations include the private limitation and the capital limitation: DA 2 GENERAL LIMITATIONS DA 2(1) Capital limitation A person is denied a deduction for an amount of expenditure or loss to the extent to which it is of a capital nature. This rule is called the capital limitation. DA 2(2) Private limitation A person is denied a deduction for an amount of expenditure or loss to the extent to which it is of a private or domestic nature. This rule is called the private limitation. ... DA 2(7) Relationship of general limitations to general permission Each of the general limitations in this section overrides the general permission. 14. The private limitation applies to interest expense, pursuant to section DA 2(2). The capital limitation, on the other hand, does not apply to interest. This result is achieved in the Act by the capital limitation being expressly overridden. Sections DA 3(4) and DA 3(5) state the general rule that a limitation (such as that applying to capital expenditure) does not apply if it is expressly overridden: DA 3(4) Relationship between other specific provisions and general permission or general limitations A provision in any of subparts DB to DZ may override any 1 or more of the general permission and the general limitations. DA 3(5) Express reference needed to override A provision in any of subparts DB to DZ takes effect to override the general permission or a general limitation only if it expressly states— (a) that it overrides the general permission or the relevant limitation; or (b) that the general permission or the relevant limitation does not apply. ... 17 15. The capital limitation is expressly overridden in relation to interest by section DB 6(3) (subsection DB 6(1) is reproduced to give context): DB 6 INTEREST: NOT CAPITAL EXPENDITURE DB 6(1) Deduction A person is allowed a deduction for interest incurred. ... DB 6(3) Link with subpart DA This section overrides the capital limitation. The general permission must still be satisfied and the other general limitations still apply. Defined in this Act: capital limitation, deduction, general limitation, general permission, interest Summary of the legislation relating to interest deductions 16. In summary, the legislation provides the following general rules relating to interest deductibility: • Interest incurred by companies is usually automatically deductible; • For other taxpayers, interest is deductible if it is incurred in deriving assessable income or incurred in carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable income; • Interest is not deductible if it is private or domestic in nature; • Being capital in nature will not, on its own, mean that interest is non- deductible. Analysis of the Commissioner’s Opinion The Roberts and Smith case Introduction 17. Courts have established that the general test for interest deductibility requires a sufficient connection between the interest on borrowed funds and the derivation of income. This sufficient connection depends on the use to which the assets provided with the borrowed funds are put (see Richardson J in Eggers v Commissioner of Inland Revenue (1988) 10 NZTC 5,153, and Pacific Rendezvous Ltd v C of IR (1986) 8 NZTC 5,146; Cooke P at p 573, Richardson J at pp 577-578 and Somers J at p 581). In most cases, the test is satisfied when the borrowed funds are used directly in an income earning activity or business in that they are used to acquire income earning assets. 18. In a limited number of cases, notably Roberts and Smith and Public Trustee v CIR, Courts have held that the borrowed funds were used in relation to the income earning assets, and that the connection was sufficient for deductibility, even though the funds were deployed outside the income earning activity or business. The application of Roberts and Smith is discussed in this commentary, and the application of Public Trustee is discussed in 18 Interpretation Statement IS0082—Interest Deductibility—Public Trustee v CIR. The facts of Roberts and Smith 19. The Australian decision in Roberts and Smith concerned the deductibility of interest incurred by a partnership which borrowed in order to repay partners part of their capital contributions. Judgment was given on two appeals heard together. 20. The facts were that new partners were to join the partnership, but the cost of contributing an amount equal to the capital of the existing partners was too high. To make it easier for the new partners to join the partnership, the partners decided to decrease the amount of the existing partners’ capital by borrowing to repay partners their capital contributions. The Australian Full Federal Court held that the interest on this borrowing was deductible. 21. Hill J, who delivered the leading judgment, considered that the deduction was limited to the extent that the borrowed funds replaced the amount of partnership capital contributed by partners. His Honour explained (p 4,390): The provision of funds to the partners in circumstances where that provision is not a replacement of funds invested in the business, lacks the essential connection with the income producing activities of the partnership business. \[emphasis added\] 22. Hill J explained his reasoning in the following passage (p 4,390): Let it be assumed that the original partnership capital in the Lord Lindley sense \[i.e. contributed capital\] was $10 and that the balance in the account designated as “the capital account” of the partnership was $125,000, which included goodwill. That would mean that the equity of each partner in the partnership, assuming five partners, was $25,000. But it could not be said that each partner had invested funds totalling $25,000 as capital in the partnership. A cheque for $25,000 drawn on the partnership bank account would not operate to repay the partner any funds invested. The partnership capital would remain as $10, and all that would happen is that there would be a borrowing which was used to pay the partner $25,000. That borrowing would reduce the partner’s equity in the partnership, but it could not represent a replacement of capital invested. The partnership assets would remain constant. The goodwill would still be worth $125,000; it would not have been distributed to the partners, nor could it be. On these facts, there could be no question of there being a refund of a pre-existing capital contribution. Rather, looking at the facts objectively, the only purpose of the borrowing would be the provision of funds to the partners to which they were not entitled during the currency of the partnership (save of course by agreement among themselves). The provision of funds to the partners in circumstances where that provision is not a replacement of funds invested in the business, lacks the essential connection with the income producing activities of the partnership, or, in other words, the partnership business. ... If at least $125,000 of the amount in that account represents partnership capital in the Lord Lindley sense, undrawn profit distributions, advances by partners or other funds which have actually been invested in the partnership and which the partners were entitled to withdraw in June 1984, then in my view the taxpayer is entitled to succeed. \[emphasis added\] 19 23. His Honour considered that interest is only deductible in this type of situation if the borrowed funds replace amounts that have actually been invested in the partnership. The reason for this is that the borrowed funds will only take on the character of the funds they are replacing if in fact they have the effect of replacing funds used in the business. Capital contributions can be replaced by borrowings that are used to pay out these contributions to partners. Hill J explains that goodwill is not an amount invested in an income earning activity, and so it cannot be repaid to anyone, and therefore borrowed funds cannot take the place of that goodwill. Similarly, with asset revaluations, the revalued portion of the asset is not an amount that has been invested so it cannot be repaid to anyone. 24. Therefore, Roberts and Smith applies if an amount is able to be replaced by borrowed funds and if the amount replaced is then returned to the person who invested it. The link with income comes through the new borrowings taking the place of funds that have a sufficient connection with assessable income. Capital contributions, undrawn profits and advances are all capable of being replaced. 25. This principle from Roberts and Smith is referred to in this commentary as the “replacement and repayment principle”. Are the borrowed funds used in an income earning activity? 26. In Hill J’s view, in the circumstances of Roberts and Smith the borrowings replaced the capital that had been paid in by the partners. A question might be raised as to how borrowings can be said to replace funds invested in an income earning activity or business, when the borrowings were actually paid direct to the partners and were never paid into the partnership. The “replacement” occurs in the books of the partnership in that equity is reduced and debt increased. There might seem to be some difficulty in understanding how one debt, with its own parties, conditions, and direct use can inherit the deductibility status of a completely different debt. A basic principle of deductibility would seem to be that deductibility of any item should depend on the circumstances in which it is incurred. A further issue is that if the direct use of the borrowed funds is a private use, for example the private use of partners in a partnership, then it might be argued that the prohibition against deductions of a private nature in section DA 2(2) might apply. 27. Hill J supports his reasoning by saying that interest on a debt that replaces a debt is deductible. But that statement is not an explanation, and it is not clear that a debt replacing a debt inherits its deductibility status. A contrary approach was taken in the Canadian decision in Interior Breweries Ltd v Minister of National Revenue \[1955\] C.T.C. 143, 55 D.T.C. 1090 (Exch.). In that case Cameron J of the Exchequer Court held that interest was not deductible where the borrowed funds were used to pay a bank loan. Cameron J considered that the borrowed money was not used to earn income, but was “used entirely to pay off the bank loan...” (p.148). 28. However, Interior Breweries does not appear to have been applied in any later cases. In Canada, the reason is that legislation was introduced to reverse its 20 effect. It seems likely that the decision may not be accepted in New Zealand or Australia if it were argued, because although New Zealand and Australian courts have been cautious about allowing deductions relating to indirect uses of borrowed funds (particularly in the lower courts in regard to cases where there has been private use of funds), they have not taken such a strict approach as the Canadian courts. Roberts and Smith is an Australian example of acceptance by a Court that interest may, in some situations, be deductible when the borrowed funds are not used directly to derive income. The approach to identifying the use of borrowed funds in New Zealand 29. In New Zealand, as in Australia and Canada, the interest deductibility test involves considering the use of the borrowed funds and the connection between the funds and the derivation of income. However, New Zealand Courts have held that the use of funds encompasses not only the direct use of the funds, but also the outcome of that use. In Public Trustee the borrowed funds were applied in payment of the death duties. It was argued that the funds were used to retain assets. The dissenting judge in Public Trustee, Northcroft J, had the following view about how the borrowed funds were used (p 459): ... if money be borrowed to discharge a debt of the owner of the business which debt is otherwise unconnected with the business and if the alternative be a sale of business assets with a consequent diminution of profits, then, in my opinion, this would be capital employed in the payment of the debt and not in the production of income. 30. Northcroft J’s view was not shared by the majority. The majority held that the capital was used in the payment of the debt and to retain assets. Callan J held that borrowed capital used in retaining assets is employed in the production of assessable income, just as capital used in acquiring assets is employed in the production of assessable income. Therefore, the case is authority that in identifying how borrowed funds are used as required by the statutory test, the use of funds will not only encompass the actual application of the funds, but will include the outcome of the application. This interpretation is consistent with the meaning of “use” in the Concise Oxford Dictionary (11 th ed, Oxford University Press, 2004): use take, hold, or deploy as a means of achieving something. 31. This definition involves two aspects: deployment (i.e. application) and outcome. A similar conclusion was reached in Pacific Rendezvous. The use of the funds was held to be in acquiring assets for the motel business and in augmenting the company’s capital. Pacific Rendezvous therefore established that if borrowed funds are used in deriving assessable income, and the sufficient connection is established, it does not matter that the funds are also used to achieve a non-taxable outcome. In the Commissioner’s opinion, this same reasoning applies to the Roberts and Smith situation. If the sufficient connection is established through the use of the borrowed funds, that connection is not lost if there is a second, non-income-related outcome. In Roberts and Smith, the two outcomes were the replacement of funds that had a sufficient connection with the derivation of assessable income, and the use of the funds by partners for non-partnership and possibly private uses. 21 32. The Commissioner’s opinion is, following Hill J’s judgment, and applying the understanding of “use” that New Zealand Courts have taken, that borrowings used to replace and repay amounts invested in an income earning activity or business will have a sufficient connection with income. In those circumstances, the new borrowings take on the character of the money they replace, and the interest will be deductible if the original funds were used directly in the income earning process. Deductibility will not be affected by a concurrent non-income earning use of the borrowed funds. A requirement of the replacement and repayment principle—the funds must return to their owners 33. An element of the Roberts and Smith replacement and repayment principle is that the repaid funds are returned to the person who originally paid them. The principle stated by Hill J in Roberts and Smith is as follows (p 4,390): The provision of funds to the partners in circumstances where that provision is not a replacement of funds invested in the business, lacks the essential connection with the income producing activities of the partnership, or in other words, the partnership business. 34. Roberts and Smith does not apply when the borrowed funds are paid to someone else other than the person who originally paid them into the income earning activity. In that situation, even though the borrowed funds would be recorded as a liability against the assets, there is no particular connection between the new borrowing and those assets. That situation contrasts with the one where the borrowings are used to repay funds in the partnership that had a sufficient nexus for deductibility. When the new borrowing has the effect of repaying those other funds to the person who contributed them, the replacing funds have a special connection with the funds replaced that can be traced from one use of funds to the other, such that the replacing funds can take the place of the replaced funds and so take on the deductibility nexus of the replaced funds. Funds used to replace but not repay funds do not have that same connection with those amounts and do not inherit any deductibility status. 35. This distinction can be understood from a statutory interpretive point of view. If the Roberts and Smith principle extended to borrowings used to replace any amounts in an income earning activity or business, then interest on those funds would in most cases be deductible. That result would be inconsistent with the presence of a statutory test for deductibility that requires a sufficient connection between interest and income. For example, a business might borrow and use the funds for a non-income use, such as to make a nil interest loan to a sister company, to invest in a company which was barred from making distributions, or to pay criminal fines. The argument might be made that as the borrowing would be reflected in the business’ liabilities, it was used in the income earning activity. However, borrowed funds used in that way are not connected with the income earning activity or business. No amount is repaid, and therefore the borrowings cannot inherit any connection with income. 22 36. Professor Parsons discussed this issue in his paper Roberts and Smith: Principles of Interest Deductibility. 1 He argued that the Roberts and Smith principle should not be simply that a borrowing inherits the deductibility status of the original borrowing. If that were the rule, then there “would be opened a means of obtaining deductions for interest in respect of money borrowed that is used for private non-income producing purposes”. In the Commissioner’s opinion, an interpretation of the deductibility provision that would lead to all interest being deductible, in the context of a provision that the Courts have said requires a sufficient connection and apportionment where that connection is not established, cannot be correct. 37. Therefore, in the Commissioner’s view, the Roberts and Smith principle requires that funds repaid are returned to the person who invested or advanced them. New Zealand cases relevant to Roberts and Smith Case P56 38. The approach of the TRA in Case P56 (1992) 14 NZTC 4,386 is similar to the Commissioner’s interpretation of Roberts and Smith. Partners borrowed to draw out more than they had invested in the partnership. The interest was held to be non-deductible. Willy DJ said that if the partners had replaced capital investments, they would have been entitled to interest deductions (p.4,396). Case M127 39. Roberts and Smith appears to be inconsistent with Case M127 (1990) 12 NZTC 2,817. Case M127 concerned a husband and wife operating a coffee lounge business. They had $76,000 of their own equity invested in the business. There was little available cash. They wished to buy a new dwelling house, and had some cash outside of the business, but were $70,000 short. The partnership paid $70,000 to the husband and wife as individuals. This put the partnership account into overdraft. The partnership then borrowed to repay the overdraft, leaving it with a credit balance of $2,304. In summary, the borrowed funds were used by the partnership to pay back a loan to the bank, which had been taken out to repay partners their capital so that they could buy a house. The effect on the partnership’s balance sheet was that the capital contributed by the partners was replaced by the loan. 40. The objectors argued that the borrowed money was used in the production of income. It does not appear from the judgment that they specifically argued that the loans replaced their equity. The case was heard before Roberts and Smith was decided, so the taxpayers did not have that case available as a precedent. 41. It is helpful to consider the case in the context of the general principles of interest deductibility. The direct test for interest deductibility, followed in Pacific Rendezvous v CIR and C of IR v Brierley (1990) 12 NZTC 7,184, 1 Professor Ross Parsons, Taxation in Australia Red Edition. Vol.1 No.5 June 1993 p.261 at p.266 23 requires borrowed funds to be traced to a use that derives income. Roberts and Smith is authority that a strict tracing is not required, if the borrowing replaces funds, and the replacement involves a replacement of money actually invested. The direct use of the borrowed funds in Roberts and Smith was to pay capital out to partners, who may have used the funds for private use. Hill J said at p 4,388: A tracing approach, if carried beyond the payment to the partner, encourages the argument raised by the Commissioner in the present case that the funds were used for the private purpose of the partner who received them. But that fact will not preclude the deductibility of the outgoing. The funds to be withdrawn in such a case were employed in the partnership business; the borrowing replaces those funds and the interest incurred on the borrowing will meet the statutory description of interest incurred in the gaining or production of the partnership of assessable income. 42. In Case M127, if a strict tracing approach is applied, the loan was used to pay off a business overdraft. That overdraft loan can be traced to private use by the partners. If Roberts and Smith is applied to the facts, the second loan can be seen as replacing the overdraft, which in turn replaced the equity. The equity was used directly to fund the partnership’s business, and therefore, there is a sufficient connection with income such that the interest is deductible. This reasoning was not argued, or applied by Bathgate DJ. Bathgate DJ held that the interest was not deductible. The case is, therefore, incompatible with Roberts and Smith. The objectors may have still failed on the facts, had they argued Roberts and Smith, because a large proportion of the $76,000 appears to have been made up of goodwill. 43. In the absence of Roberts and Smith, Bathgate DJ held in Case M127 that the borrowed funds were used for private purposes. His Honour considered that the first loan by way of overdraft was used to buy the house, the second loan paid back the overdraft, and that neither loan was used in producing partnership income. Instead, the loans were used to purchase the house for the objectors. The interest incurred by the partners was private in nature. 44. The decision in Case M127 is therefore inconsistent with the decision in Roberts and Smith. Although the TRA case is from the New Zealand jurisdiction, a decision of the Full Federal Court of Australia has precedential value, and in the circumstances of this issue the Commissioner considers that a higher New Zealand court would follow the decision in Roberts and Smith rather than the TRA decision. The arrangements to which the replacement and repayment principle applies Returns of capital to partners 45. The Roberts and Smith replacement and repayment principle applies to borrowed funds used to repay partners their capital contributions to the partnership. Interest is deductible on borrowings used to repay capital to partners, to the extent that the capital that was repaid was used in earning assessable income. 24 46. This view is based on the conclusion that a partnership can transfer property to a partner. However, a partnership is not a legal entity. A partnership consists of a collection of rights and obligations between the partners, and ownership of partnership assets is vested in the partners, not the partnership. It could be argued, therefore, that a partnership cannot repay partnership property to a partner, because the partner already owned that property. 47. A key concept of partnership law is that partners do not have individual rights to partnership property. In Hadlee & Sydney Bridge Nominees Ltd v C of IR (1993) 15 NZTC (PC), the Privy Council considered the rights of partners. Lord Jauncey, delivering the judgment, said at paragraph 5 that as a matter of general law a partner does not have title to specific partnership property but has a beneficial interest in the entirety of the partnership assets and in each and every particular asset of the partnership (his Lordship quoting Richardson J in the Court of Appeal Hadlee and Sydney Bridge Nominees Ltd v CIR (1991)13 NZTC 8,116, 8,126 and referring to Lindley on Partnership 15 th edition, page 516). 2 This beneficial interest, expressed in terms of its realisability, is in the nature of a future interest taking effect in possession on (and not before) the determination of the partnership. 48. Molloy says in Principles of the Law of Partnership 3 that a receipt received by a partnership remains a receipt of the partnership alone, which is to say by the partners jointly. He says that if an amount is partnership property, it is not an individual entitlement of any particular partner. The individual partner does not derive several income (i.e. each partner’s individual allocation of income) until it has been ascertained whether the overall result for the relevant fiscal period has been that the firm has derived any net assessable income. 49. The point was made in Crowe v Commissioner of Taxation (1958) 100 CLR 532 that there is a distinction between partnership property and partner’s individual property. The case was concerned with an expense, rather than income, but is relevant because it makes the point that partnership property is not the same as individual entitlements of the partners. In Crowe a partnership took out a policy on each of the lives of its four partners. Each policy was for the benefit of all four partners. The premiums were paid by the firm and the policy was in the name of the firm. A provision of the Australian Commonwealth income tax legislation permitted the deduction of “amounts paid by the taxpayer as premiums or sums for insurance on the life of the taxpayer.” Fullagar J said that if any of the partners were to have: ... effected an insurance on her own life, and the partnership had paid a premium on the policy at her request and debited the amount to an advance account in its books, I should have said that she ought to be held to have “paid” the premium, although no money or money’s worth passed from her hand to the hand of the insurer. 2 Lindley & Banks on Partnership, 17 th edition, para. 19-08. 3 Principles of the Law of Partnership sixth edition Webb and Molloy Butterworths Wellington 1996 para. 11.235 25 50. The issue in the case was whether payment by the firm, of the premium on a policy which the firm itself had taken out, had been payment by the taxpayer. Fullagar J answered the question in the negative: \[T\]hat a partnership has, in English law, no legal personality distinct from those of the individual partners ... does not mean that there is not a very real difference between a right or obligation of a partnership (or partners as such) and a right or obligation of an individual member of a partnership. 51. The insurance contracts were taken out in the name of the firm, and the firm (and not each individual partner) paid the premiums. The premiums were paid by the partners jointly. It was therefore not a payment made by any one of the individual partners. Similarly, in the Commissioner’s view, income of a firm is derived by the partners jointly, and not individually by each partner. 52. This conclusion is consistent with section HD, which provides that: HD 1 ASSESSMENT OF PARTNERS, CO-TRUSTEES, AND JOINT VENTURERS HD 1(1) Where amounts are derived or incurred by 2 or more persons jointly, whether as partners, co-trustees, or otherwise,— (a) in the case of co-trustees, they include such amounts that would be income or deductions if the co-trustees were a single taxpayer resident in New Zealand in a joint calculation of taxable income and are jointly and severally liable for the resulting income tax liability: (b) in the case of partners there is no joint assessment, but each partner must, in calculating their taxable income, take into account their share of the income that they jointly derive from the firm: (c) in any case other than that of co-trustees or partners, each person jointly deriving or incurring such amounts must, in calculating their taxable income, take into account their share of the income that they jointly derive. 53. As partners own an undivided interest in partnership property, and do not have individual title to any particular items of partnership property, there can be a valid legal transfer of property from a partnership to a partner, because the nature of the legal ownership changes from joint ownership to ownership by a single person. Therefore, the Roberts and Smith principle can apply to partnerships. The Roberts and Smith case of course involved a partnership, and so is authority for this point. 54. Proposals released in an Inland Revenue discussion document in June 2006, General and limited partnerships - proposed tax changes 4 to change the law relating to the taxation of partnerships will not, in their current form, affect this conclusion. 55. It should be noted that a return of capital, whether by a partnership or a company, is not connected with income simply because it is an ordinary part of running a business. A return of capital is not part of the income earning activity, it is a transaction relating to the structure of the business. However, 4 A Government discussion document. June 2006 26 there is a sufficient connection with income in this arrangement because, following Roberts and Smith, borrowing to return capital has the effect of replacing and repaying the funding of the income earning activity. In these circumstances, the borrowed funds continue the connection the repaid funds had with income. Share repurchases 56. A repurchase of shares by a company involves a payment by a company to its shareholders of amounts previously contributed by shareholders. The effect of the payment by the company is a diminishment of the shareholder’s capital holding in the company. This arrangement is analogous to a return of capital to partners in a partnership. 57. Therefore, in the Commissioner’s view, the replacement and repayment principle may apply to share repurchases. Interest is deductible on borrowings used to repay share capital to shareholders, to the extent that the capital was used in deriving the company’s assessable income. 58. As discussed above, interest incurred by companies will usually be deductible under section DB 7, without the necessity to apply Roberts and Smith. Payments of past years’ profits to partners 59. Past years’ profits in a partnership, which Hill J refers to as undrawn profit distributions, can be viewed as amounts contributed by partners. If a partner does not withdraw profits, they are allocated to partners equally, or in accordance with the divisions in the partnership agreement (Principles of the Law of Partnership). 5 The accounting treatment might be to carry profits to the credit of the partner’s respective current accounts by book entry calculated at the end of the accounting period. Although there may not be any active reinvestment by the partners themselves, this process can reasonably be seen as an investment of capital. 60. Therefore, in the Commissioner’s view, past years’ profits can be seen as reinvestments by partners in the partnership and the replacement and repayment principle may apply. Interest is deductible on borrowings used to repay past years’ profits to partners, to the extent that those profits were used in earning assessable income or in the partnership business. Payments of current year income to partners 61. The Commissioner’s opinion is that the principle from Roberts and Smith does not extend to borrowings purporting to return the current year income that has not yet been identified as profits. The reason is that current year income is not an amount that has been invested in the partnership by the partners, and so cannot be repaid to partners. 5 ibid para.s 2.48 and 4.109 27 62. The principle from Roberts and Smith is that interest may be deductible if borrowed funds repay funds invested in an income-earning activity or business carried on to derive income. The issue with current year income is whether it is an amount that can be repaid. To be repayable, it must have been paid into the partnership by someone. The amount can only have been paid in if someone other than the partnership has had an entitlement to it at some time. Therefore, the issue is to decide whether partners can be said to have become individually entitled to current year income at some time before any purported replacement. 63. To consider this question, the legal nature of current year income will be examined. If current year partnership income is owned by individual partners at any point during the year, it could in theory be invested by partners in the partnership business. Is current year income partnership property or property of individual partners? 64. The conclusion has already been reached that there is a distinction between partnership property and property belonging to individual partners. In considering the application of Roberts and Smith to current year income, the next step is to ascertain whether it is partnership property, or property of individual partners. 65. The Partnership Act 1908 is silent on the treatment of current year income. It provides for the division of profits in section 27: 27. Rules as to interests and duties of partners— The interests of partners in the partnership property, and their rights and duties in relation to the partnership, shall be determined, subject to any agreement (express or implied) between the partners, by the following rules: (a) All the partners are entitled to share equally in the capital and profits of the business, and must contribute equally towards the losses, whether of capital or otherwise, sustained by the firm: ... (d) A partner is not entitled, before the ascertainment of profits, to interest on the capital subscribed by him: 66. Under section 27, partners are entitled to share in any profits, subject to any agreement to the contrary. The concept of “profits” is not defined. There is no particular guidance in the Partnership Act as to when the division and allocation of profits occurs. 67. It has been held in Australia that, for tax purposes, the amount that forms part of each partner’s individual income is only ascertainable once partnership accounts have been prepared, and that this would normally be at year end. In FC of T v Galland 86 ATC 4885 the High Court held that in the absence of an agreement stating a different balance date, accounts of the partnership would be required to be taken each year as at 30 June and a partner’s share of the partnership income would be distributed to the partner as at that date. The Court said that: 28 ...although a partner is not usually entitled to call for a distribution of profits or net income until accounts have been prepared, he has an individual interest in the net income of the partnership, notwithstanding that the precise amount of his interest cannot be determined until the accounts are prepared for the relevant period. 68. The Court’s view is that partners are not \[usually\] entitled to current year income. The partners have an individual interest in the net income of the partnership, but not an immediate entitlement to the current year income. Galland was quoted by Hill J in Roberts and Smith as authority for the proposition that a partner’s share of the partnership income is derived by the partner only once annual accounts of the partnership have been prepared. Hill J said: In the absence of agreement, accounts for the partnership would be required to be taken each year as at 30 June and a partner’s share of the partnership income would be derived by him as at that date: FC of T v Galland. 69. Further, it is in the nature of profits that they have to be identified before anyone can become entitled to them. Fletcher Moulton LJ provided a definition of “profits” in Re Spanish Prospecting Co. Ltd \[1911\] 1 Ch 92 at 98-99 6 (cited in Galland): The word “profits” has, in my opinion, a well-defined legal meaning, and this meaning coincides with the fundamental conception of profits in general practice, although in mercantile phraseology the word may at times bear meanings indicated by the special context which deviate in some respect from this fundamental signification. “Profits” implies a comparison between the state of a business at two specific dates usually separated by an interval of a year. The fundamental meaning is the amount of gain made by the business during the year. This can only be ascertained by a comparison of the assets of the business at two dates ... We start therefore with this fundamental definition of profits, namely, if the total assets of the business at the two dates be compared, the increase which they show at the later date as compared with the earlier date (due allowance of course being made for any capital introduced into or taken out of the business in the meanwhile) represents in strictness the profits of the business during the period in question. 70. As Fletcher Moulton LJ points out, as a matter of logic, profits can only be known once they are calculated. They can only be calculated when the amounts of income and expenses for the relevant fiscal period are known. Although amounts will come in that will in due course form profits, until the fiscal period has ended, the amount of profits cannot be known. It follows, in the Commissioner’s opinion, that an entitlement cannot arise until the amount can be known, and it can only be known at the end of the fiscal period. This period, as Fletcher Moulton LJ says, is generally annual. 71. Therefore, the Commissioner’s opinion is that a partner does not have an individual entitlement to current year income. Current year income is owned by all of the partners jointly. Individual partners have an ownership interest in it in common with the other partners, but not an entitlement to their potential individual share until profits have been calculated and allocated for a fiscal period. 6 This definition was adopted by Williams J in Dalgety v Commissioner of Taxes \[1912\] NZLR 260 at 261-262, and discussed in The Law of Partnership in Australia and New Zealand Higgins & Fletcher LBC Information Services 2001 eighth edition 29 Discussion of current year income in Roberts and Smith 72. In applying the law to the case he was considering, Hill J explained that it was necessary to identify whether the partners received a refund of capital, or whether they received amounts in excess of their capital. Hill J considered capital to be the aggregate amounts contributed by the partners for the purpose of commencing or carrying on the partnership business (p 4,389). The partnership accounts he was considering did not separate out the contributed capital from other items. He thought that it was possible that the amount of capital represented in the partnership accounts included (p 4,390): • contributed capital; • internally generated goodwill; • undrawn distributions; • profits of the year not yet distributed; and • asset revaluations. In Hill J’s view, the items that could be replaced with a deductible result were (p 4,390): • contributed capital; • undrawn profit distributions; • advances made by partners; and • other funds which have actually been invested in the partnership and which the partners were entitled to withdraw. 73. Hill J did not include “profits of the year not yet distributed” (i.e. current year income) as amounts able to be replaced. Hill J’s view was that the types of amounts that could be replaced with a deductible result were funds which had actually been invested in the partnership and which the partners were entitled to withdraw at the time of the borrowing. 74. In contrast, Hill J considered that undrawn distributions that have been allocated to partners, but not paid out (i.e. past years’ profits), can be replaced with borrowings and the interest would be deductible. Application of the Roberts and Smith principle and the law on partnerships to current year income 75. Partners do not have rights to current year income as it arises during the year, because it is partnership property. Profits are generally determined at year- end. Until the profits are determined at year-end, the partners are not entitled to current year income. Any drawings taken from the partnership’s current year income can only be a partner’s anticipated share of the profits. Current 30 year income cannot, therefore, be an amount invested in the partnership by the partners. As it is, in the Commissioner’s opinion, essential for the Roberts and Smith replacement and repayment principle that the funds must be repaid to someone, there must be someone who has had an entitlement to them. Therefore, to be repayable, someone must have invested the funds in the income earning activity or business. Current year income has not been invested so the Roberts and Smith principle does not apply to it. The difference between current year income and past year’s profits 76. Past years’ profits can be distinguished from current year profits because partners have become entitled to them, either at a time specified under the partnership agreement or, in the absence of a partnership agreement, when the partnership accounts are required to be taken (FC of T v Galland) and they have been notionally allocated to partners. Their status is then as advances to the partnership or new investments of capital. Hill J considered that past years’ profits could be viewed as amounts invested, and that they could be repaid with a deductible result. Payments of dividends 77. The Roberts and Smith replacement and repayment principle applies to borrowings used to pay dividends sourced from past year profits, usually described as retained earnings, to shareholders. There is, however, some conceptual difficulty in bringing a company’s retained earnings within this principle. The difficulty is in analysing retained earnings as amounts contributed by shareholders. Company profits are not allocated to shareholders at the end of each year. Retained earnings are added to the existing retained earnings. Directors may decide to distribute some of these as dividends, or they may decide not to. Shareholders are not immediately entitled to retained earnings in the way that partners are entitled to partnership profits. 78. There are, however, similarities between a partnership’s past years’ profits and a company’s retained earnings. They share the characteristic that the amount has been finally settled for the year, and the theoretical amount each shareholder (or partner) is entitled to can be established. They can, in a sense, be seen as the amount a shareholder or partner has invested into the business. The features of partnership profits that do not suggest they have been invested by partners, are also shared by retained earnings. Both retained earnings and partnership profits are at the disposal of the business until the decision is made to pay them out. Just as partners may not necessarily make any active decision to reinvest past profits, shareholders would not usually make any decision to reinvest profits in the business. For these reasons, the Commissioner’s opinion is that payment of dividends from retained earnings can be viewed as sufficiently analogous to payments to partners of partnership past years’ profits, such that both should be treated the same in determining interest deductibility. 79. Therefore, in the Commissioner’s view, retained earnings can be treated as notional reinvestments by shareholders in the company and the replacement 31 and repayment principle should apply. Interest is deductible on borrowings used to pay dividends to shareholders, to the extent that those profits were used in income earning. 80. If company profits are distributed as bonus issues, then similarly the amount represented by the shares can be seen as capital able to be replaced under the replacement and repayment principle. 81. It should be noted that interest incurred by companies will generally be deductible under section DB 7, the provision that gives companies in most situations an automatic deduction for interest, and that Roberts and Smith would be an alternative basis for deductibility for interest incurred on borrowed funds used to pay dividends. Replacement of debt 82. Borrowings used to repay borrowings used in an income earning activity or business are within the Roberts and Smith principle. Hill J in Roberts and Smith said that where a loan is taken out and used to repay a debt that was used directly in an income earning process or business, the character of the refinancing takes on the same character as the original borrowing and gives to the interest incurred the character of a working expense. In Hill J’s mind, there is no difference in terms of interest deductibility between repaying one debt with another and borrowing to return capital, and both situations should be similarly treated. 83. If the first refinancing takes on the character of the debt it replaces, then logically, subsequent refinancings should also inherit that character. Therefore, the Commissioner’s opinion is that interest is deductible on borrowings used to repay other borrowings, to the extent those other borrowings can be traced to a use that gave rise to deductible interest. Continuation of a statutory nexus 84. The general rule from Roberts and Smith is that borrowings may inherit the deductibility status of funds they repay. In some situations, the repaid funds may be deductible by the operation of a specified statutory nexus, rather than the general rule which requires as a question of fact a sufficient connection with income. One relevant nexus is in section DB 7, which provides for automatic deductions for most companies, and the other is in section DB 8, which provides for deductions for companies investing in shares in a group company. 85. Although the nexus in each of these two sections is different in nature from the nexus in Roberts and Smith, where the replaced funds achieved the nexus by being used to derive income, nevertheless, the Commissioner considers that the deductibility status should also be inheritable when deductibility is established through a statutory nexus. If it were not, and refinancing meant interest that had been deductible as a matter of law rather than fact was no longer deductible, Parliament’s intention for sections DB 7 and DB 8 would be defeated. Therefore, the Commissioner’s opinion is that Roberts and Smith 32 applies to replacement and repayment of borrowed funds in respect of which deductibility is established under sections DB 7 and DB 8. What is the treatment if the lender’s right is assigned? 86. The Commissioner’s view is that the principle from Roberts and Smith is that funds may be replaced with borrowed funds and the interest will be deductible, if the repaid funds are returned to their owners. The exception is the replacement and repayment of a debt, where the right to receive the amount advanced has been assigned to someone else. Interest would still be deductible under the principle, because in those circumstances there is still a repayment of funds invested, as the amount can be traced back to the original investor through the assignee. Is direct tracing required? 87. The replacement and repayment principle requires identifying how the original funds were used, and identifying the use of the new debt to repay those original funds. Therefore, under the principle, the use of funds needs to be identified or “traced”. 88. Given the compliance costs that may arise in some circumstances, consideration has been given to whether tracing is essential to the replacement and repayment principle. It is recognised that for some taxpayers, who have daily changes to their borrowings, the requirement may be difficult to fulfill. 89. One approach would be to allow a deduction if the refinancing loan is taken out and the first loan paid back about the same time. However, it seems likely that this “around the same time” requirement would not in practice operate to limit deductibility to arrangements within the principle, and would result in interest on any borrowing qualifying for deductibility. 90. An alternative is that the Commissioner would accept that a loan is a replacement unless it is used solely for a private or exempt use. However, that approach would, in the Commissioner’s view, be too wide to be consistent with the statutory requirements, as any use of borrowings would satisfy the test (apart from sole private and exempt uses). The test would not be limited to replacement of funds that are returned to their owners. Without the element of replacement, there would not be a sufficient nexus with income. Uses of funds that would qualify would be those uses that would not seem to be within the intent of the interest deductibility provision such as nil interest loans to sister companies, investments in companies prohibited from making distributions, and so on. 91. Therefore, the Commissioner takes the view that the replacement and repayment principle requires that borrowings should be traced to replacement of funds that satisfy the statutory nexus for deductibility. Taxpayers with few borrowings should usually be able to trace money. Taxpayers with more complicated borrowing practices will, in most case, be companies, for which interest will be deductible under section DB 7, without the need to satisfy the Roberts and Smith principle. 33 92. It should be remembered that all debt is subject to a tracing test. In a number of cases that considered the direct test of interest deductibility, the courts have held that the use of funds must be traced: for example, Pacific Rendezvous Ltd and Brierley. When interest is not deductible Subvention payments 93. Interest incurred by companies is generally deductible under section DB 7. Therefore, interest incurred by a company on borrowed funds used to make a subvention payment would generally be deductible under that section. 94. If section DB 7 does not apply, then the application or not of Roberts and Smith becomes relevant. The replacement and repayment principle is that interest is deductible on borrowings repaying funds paid into the business or income earning process. A subvention payment is a payment between companies in a group to reduce the overall tax burden of the group. It is not a replacement of an amount previously advanced by the recipient company, or an amount repaid to shareholders for amounts they invested in the paying company. 95. Therefore, in the Commissioner’s view, the use of borrowed funds to pay a subvention payment does not satisfy the replacement and repayment principle from Roberts and Smith, and interest incurred on borrowed funds used to pay a subvention payment is not deductible under that principle. Sole traders 96. The principle in Roberts and Smith is that interest is deductible on borrowed funds used to repay funds to investors in an income earning activity or business. This principle applies where an entity—whether a partnership or a company—borrows money and uses it to return amounts invested in the partnership or company. Individuals with an income earning activity or business but who do not operate through a company or any other structure (referred to as a “sole trader”), do not have a separate entity in which to invest their money. If an individual invests money used for private purposes into a business or activity they carry on as a sole trader, there has been no change in ownership of that money. It is artificial to describe a transaction with oneself as a replacement and repayment of funds. Therefore, in the Commissioner’s opinion, the replacement and repayment principle cannot apply to sole traders arguing that borrowing funds have the effect of returning their capital or past years’ profits. 97. Although a partnership is not a separate legal entity from its partners, as discussed above, there is a distinction between property owned by a partnership and property owned by individual partners. Therefore, in contrast to sole traders, there can be a valid legal transfer of property from a partnership to a partner, and the Roberts and Smith principle can apply to partnerships. 34 98. Professor Parsons raised some arguments that support applying the Roberts and Smith principle to individuals in Roberts and Smith: Principles of Interest Deductibility. 7 He said that separate accounting records may personify a separate entity. Secondly, he argued that the legislation recognises a sole trader in business as separate from the sole trader in a private capacity, because the deductibility provisions distinguish between individuals in business and individuals not in business. However, he considered that these arguments may be tenuous, and that it will be difficult for a sole trader to establish that interest on borrowings used to withdraw capital is not prohibited as private. Also, Professor Parsons considered these arguments in the context of an interpretation of Roberts and Smith that is much broader than the interpretation taken by the Commissioner. 99. Although an individual cannot replace capital, an individual can, however, deduct interest incurred in using borrowed funds to replace a debt owed to a third party, where the amount first borrowed was used directly in the individual’s income earning activity or business. As the borrowed funds replaced are repaid to a separate entity, the third party lender, the funds are able to be repaid, and so the Roberts and Smith principle can apply. Goodwill and asset revaluations 100. Hill J singled out internally generated goodwill as an amount in the partnership capital account that could not be replaced because it is not an amount that has been invested by someone in the business. At p 4,390, Hill J explained that a payment of goodwill is not a “refund of a pre-existing capital contribution.” 101. Glazebrook and James 8 have explained that goodwill cannot be distributed because after a purported distribution, it would still remain. Therefore, internally generated goodwill is not an amount that can be replaced with borrowed funds with a deductible result. 102. However, the situation will be different if goodwill is purchased. In that situation, funds, either equity or debt, are used to purchase the goodwill. These funds can be replaced with borrowed funds and the interest would be deductible. 103. If purchased goodwill is revalued internally, the extent of the internal revaluation is not represented by an amount invested in the business that can be replaced. Therefore, interest on an amount borrowed purporting to replace goodwill to the extent that it is internally generated will not be deductible. 104. Similarly, amounts that are attributable to asset revaluations cannot be repaid and replaced and are not within the Roberts and Smith principle. 7 See n 1 8 “Taxation Implications of Company Law Reform” by Susan Glazebrook and Jan James, New Zealand Journal of Taxation Law and Policy, Volume 1 132 at p 157. 35 Private use 105. The Commissioner’s view is that when borrowings are used to return partners’ capital, the interest may be deductible despite the fact that the direct use of the borrowed funds may be for the private use of the taxpayer. The reason is that the borrowed funds are also used for a concurrent income-related use—the replacement of funds used in deriving income. 106. That situation compares with the one where the borrowed funds replace borrowed funds that are being used solely for private use. In that situation, the interest on the replacing funds will not be deductible. Australian Tax Office’s view on Roberts and Smith 107. The ATO has issued a ruling on its interpretation of Roberts and Smith. The ATO’s view is similar to the Commissioner’s view; see TR 95/25 Income Tax: Deductions for Interest Under Subsection 51(1) of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 Following FC of T v Roberts; FC of T v Smith, issued 29 June 1995. Two addenda have been added to TR 95/25, primarily to update the references in the ruling to the Australian Income Tax Assessment Act 1997. A consistent interpretation of Roberts and Smith was applied in TR 2005/12, which relates to borrowings used to repay amounts to beneficiaries. The Commissioner’s view of the deductibility of interest on funds invested in QCs, CFCs and FIFs 108. The second issues paper on interest deductibility, IRRUIP 5, which considered the application of Roberts and Smith, discussed the issues of compliance costs. In the context of that discussion, the paper considered the deductibility of interest in investments such as qualifying companies, controlled foreign companies and foreign investment funds that give rise to both assessable and exempt income to the investor. Because these investments give rise to both assessable and exempt income, the issue arises as to whether the interest should be deductible in full. It was concluded in the issues paper that interest incurred on funds invested in these types of companies is deductible in full. If the funds were repaid with new borrowings, applying Roberts and Smith, the interest on the replacing funds would take on the deductibility status of the repaid funds. 109. Roberts and Smith is concerned with refinancing of investments, and when it applies, the deductibility status of the initial investment is taken on by the replacing funds. It is not necessary to understand the reasons for the deductibility or otherwise of the initial investment to understand the Roberts and Smith principle. Because the deductibility of interest incurred in relation to qualifying companies, controlled foreign companies and foreign investment funds is not relevant to an understanding of how the Roberts and Smith case applies, the issue is not dealt with further in this commentary or in the rulings. 36