EXPOSURE DRAFT - FOR COMMENT AND DISCUSSION ONLY | HUKIHUKI HURANGA -MŌ TE TĀKUPU ME TE MATAPAKI ANAKE Deadline for comment | Aukatinga mō te tākupu: 13 December 2024 Please quote reference | Whakahuatia te tohutoro: PUB00482 Send feedback to | Tukuna mai ngā whakahokinga kōrero ki public.consultation@ird.govt.nz Notes | Pitopito kōrero: F ACT SHEET | PUKA MEKA Income tax – residential property moving from mixed-use asset rules to standard tax rules Issued | Tukuna: Issue Date IS ##/## FS 1 This fact sheet accompanies IS XX/XX: Income tax – implications of a residential property moving between the standard tax rules and the mixed-use asset rules which considers situations where a person’s use of their residential property has changed so that it moves from being under one set of income tax deduction rules to another. This fact sheet explains what happens when residential property moves from the mixed-use asset rules to the standard tax rules. IS XX/XX FS X | Issue date Page 2 of 8 All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007. Key terms | Kīanga tau tāpua mixed use asset rules Refers to the rules for apportioning deductions if, during the income year, a property (or dwelling on a property) derives income, is used privately, and is unused for 62 days or more. residential property ring- fencing rules Refers to rules that limit the deductible expenses a person can claim in the current income year. To the extent the deduction exceeds the income, it is suspended and carried forward to a future income year. standard tax rules Refers to the rules for calculating deductible expenses incurred in deriving income from residential property if the mixed-use asset rules do not apply . Introduction | Whakataki 1.IS XX/XX Income tax – implications of a residential property moving between the standard tax rules and the mixed-use asset rules considers situations where a person’s use of their residential property has changed so that it moves from bein g u nder one set of income tax deduction rules to another. 2.This fact sheet provides an overview of the consequences of moving from the mixed- use asset rules to the standard tax rules. A move from one set of rules to another may occur in a number of different situations such as when a person stops renting out their holiday home on a casual basis and makes it available for rent on a fulltime basis (fo r ex ample, as short-stay accommodation or long-term rental). For further detail, see IS XX/XX. Determining what income tax deduction rules apply 3.If a person derives income from a residential property, they calculate their deductible ex penditure under either the mixed-use asset rules or the standard tax rules. IS XX/XX FS X | Issue date Page 3 of 8 4.Figure | Hoahoa 1 provides guidance on how a person can work out which income tax deduction rules apply in an income year. A person must keep track of the use of t he r esidential property during the income year to determine which income tax deduction rules apply for that income year. Figure | Hoahoa 1 – Determining which income tax deduction rules apply 5.This fact sheet considers how a person applies the standard income tax rules to their residential property. For information on a person’s tax treatment if the mixed-us e a sset rules apply, see IS XX/XX FS 2. Applying the standard tax rules 6.Any income a person receives from renting out a residential property is taxable in come. 7.A person must determine what deductions they can claim for expenditure incurred in deriving the rental income (see \[44\] to \[49\] of IS XX/XX). A person can deduct IS XX/XX FS X | Issue date Page 4 of 8 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] expenditure to the extent it is incurred in deriving taxable income. In general terms (and subject to any specific limitations): any expenses that relate solely to a person’s private use are non-deductible; any expenses that relate solely to the person’s income-earning activity are fully deductible; and to the extent an expense relates to both a person’s income-earning and privat e u se of the property, it will be only partly deductible and will need to be apportioned. 8.There are specific rules for calculating depreciation on items of depreciable property used in the residential property. Figure | Hoahoa 2 provides guidance on how a perso n c an work out their depreciation deduction under the standard tax rules. Figure | Hoahoa 2 – Determining depreciation deductions under the standard tax rules IS XX/XX FS X | Issue date Page 5 of 8 9.The calculation for the depreciation loss is based on the depreciable property’s adjusted tax value (ATV). The ATV is the item’s cost less any deductions for amounts of depreciation loss that the person would have been allowed if the item of depreciabl e p roperty was wholly used in deriving taxable income. This means any apportionment under the mixed-use asset rules in the prior year does not change how the ATV is calculated (see \[84\] to \[87\] of IS XX/XX). 10.When a person sells an item of depreciable property, they must calculate their depreciation recovery income or depreciation loss on sale (see from \[103\] of IS XX/XX). 11.If the residential property ring-fencing rules apply to the residential property in the income year of sale, a person can offset unused excess deductions to the extent tha t t hey derive income from the residential property (including depreciation recovery income). Residential property ring-fencing rules may limit amount of deduction 12.If a person uses the standard tax rules to calculate their deductions (including their depreciation deduction), they must also consider whether the residential property ring- fencing rules apply to suspend or limit the deduction in the current income year (see \[94\] to \[9 7\] of IS XX/XX). 13.The residential property ring-fencing rules apply unless the residential property has been used as the person’s main home for most of the income year (see \[53\] to \[55\] of IS XX/XX). 14.Generally, the residential property ring-fencing rules apply on a portfolio basis. However, a person can elect to apply the rules on a property-by-property basis instea d ( see \[65\] – \[76\] of IS XX/XX). 15.The residential property ring-fencing rules operate to prevent a person from offsetting deductions incurred for residential properties against other sources of income (fo r e xample, salary or wages). This means if the person’s rental activity makes a loss, they cannot claim the excess deductions in that income year. 16.Any excess deductions are not permanently forfeited but are suspended and may be o ffset against future income derived from residential property when the standard tax rules apply. 17.A person cannot use any excess deductions against income derived from the residential property if the mixed-use asset rules apply in an income year. This is of relevance if there is a subsequent change of use of the residential property. IS XX/XX FS X | Issue date Page 6 of 8 Unable to use prior year quarantined expenditure 18.The person may have mixed-use asset quarantined expenditure carried forward from a prior income year (see \[41\] to \[43 \] of IS XX/XX). The person cannot offset t he q uarantined expenditure if the standard tax rules apply to the residential property. T he qu arantined expenditure is not forfeited but carried forward to a future income year. 19.Example | Tauira 1 illustrates how the above tax rules apply where a residential p roperty has moved from the mixed-use asset rules to the standard tax rules. Example | Tauira 1 – Changing from mixed-use asset rules to standard tax rules Te Ariki owns a three-bedroom property in Christchurch. In the 2022–23 income year the Christchurch property was a mixed-use asset and Te Ariki used the mixed-use asset rules to calculate his net income from the Christchurch property. Te Ariki had quarantined expenditure from the 2022–23 income year of $3,000. In January 2023, Te Ariki decides to rent his Christchurch property to long-term tenants and the tenants continue to rent the Christchurch property throughout the 2023–24 income year. In the 2023–24 income year, the Christchurch property was not vacant or used privately. The Christchurch property is not a mixed-use asset in the 2023–24 income year. The standard tax rules apply to the Christchurch property for the 2023–24 income year. Te Ariki charges his tenants $600 per week (a total of $31,200 in the 2023–24 income year). Te Ariki incurred the following expenses (total $42,000) relating to the property: interest – $36,000 local authority rates – $2,50 0 house insurance – $2,600 repairs and maintenance – $900 Te Ariki can claim a deduction for expenditure to the extent it is incurred in deriving taxable income from renting his Christchurch property, provided none of the general limitations (for example, the capital limitation) apply. However, due to the interest IS XX/XX FS X | Issue date Page 7 of 8 limitation rules, his deduction for interest costs is limited to 80% ($28,800) in the 2023– 24 income year. 1 The Christchurch property is partly furnished. Te Ariki prepares a tax fixed asset register for the 2024 income year: Asset Cost Opening Adjusted Tax Value Depreciation Loss Closing Adjusted Tax Value Washing Machine $1,600 $1,120 $336 $784 Dryer $1,250 $875 $262.50 $612.50 Fridge / freezer $1,800 $1,350 $337.50 $1,012.50 As the items of depreciable property are wholly used to derive rental income, Te Ariki can claim a deduction for the entire depreciation loss ($ 936 total) unless the residential property ring-fencing rules apply and suspend a portion of the depreciation deduction in the 2023–24 income year. In the 2023–24 income year, the Christchurch property is subject to the residential property ring-fencing rules as no exclusions apply . In the 2023–24 income year, Te Ariki’s rental activity is as follows: Residential income Deductible expenditure Expenditure deductible in 2023–24 income year Excess deductions carried forward to future income year $31,200 $35,736 $31,200 $4,536 In the 2023–24 income year, Te Ariki can claim $31,200 of the expenses incurred for his Christchurch property. He has $4,536 of unused excess deductions to carry forward to the 2024–25 income year. 1 From 1 April 2025, interest deductibility will be fully restored, and a person will be able to claim 100% of the interest incurred. IS XX/XX FS X | Issue date Page 8 of 8 Te Ariki also has $3,000 of mixed-use asset quarantined expenditure relating to his Christchurch property to carry forward to future income years. About this document | Mō tēnei tuhinga Some of the Tax Counsel Office’s longer or more complex items are accompanied by a fact sheet that summarises and explains an item’s main points. While it summarises the Commissioner’s considered views, a fact sheet should be read alongside the full item to completely understand the guidance. Fact sheets are not binding on the Commissioner. See further Status of Commissioner’s advice (Commissioner’s statement, Inland Revenue, December 2012).