1 Public Guidance work programme 2024-25 A s at 10 December 2024 T his section of the work programme summarises all our Public Guidance projects based on their current progress status, with a hyperlink to further information on each item in the more detailed table that follows. Progress on existing projects since the work programme was last updated are shown in bold. Items completed since 1 July 2024 are shaded in light blue at the end of the summary, with links to published items in the more detailed table. Project no. Title Focus of tax issueNeed for item Company Trust Individ ual Land Inter- national Charities Technical uncertainty Compliance / education Refresh / update Items where public consultation has closed PUB00356 GST – Input tax – Registered members of unregistered unincorporated bodies ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00486 GST – Managed fund fees ✓✓ ✓ PUB00452 GST and Income tax – Emissions Trading Scheme tax issues for forestry ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00457 Income tax – Company amalgamation rules ✓✓ ✓ PUB00274 Income tax – Depreciation – Identifying items of depreciable property ✓✓ PUB00364 Income tax – Employee share schemes (some specific interpretive issues) (published 5 of 6, 1 remaining to be published) ✓ ✓ ✓ PUB00454 Income tax – Investing in shares through an online trading platform ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00455 Income tax – Land – LTCs and disposal of land issues ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00487 Income tax – Land – Short-stay accommodation – updating for new land rules ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00461 Income tax – Loss carry-forward – Business continuity test avoidance arrangements ✓✓ ✓ PUB00453 Income tax and FBT – Travel between home and work ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00489 Income tax – Land – Bright-line test – rollover relief ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00458 Income tax – FIF rules – Applying the cost method ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ Items currently at public consultation UB00274 PUB00482 Income tax – Land – Moving between the different land regimes (closes 13 December) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PUB00495 Income tax – Tax residence – Government service (closes 11 December) ✓✓ ✓ PUB00483 Income tax – Tax residence – Refresh of IS 16/03 (closes 11 December) ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00462 Income tax – Trade rebates and promotions (closes 18 December) ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00519 Income tax – Land – Application of s CB 3 (Profit-making undertaking or scheme) to land disposals ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓✓ Items we expect to send to public consultation next PUB00413 GST – Not-for-profit bodies – Supplies of donated goods and services (PIB) ✓✓ ✓✓ 2 Project no. Title Focus of tax issue Need for item Company Trust Individ ual Land Inter- national Charities Technical uncertainty Compliance / education Refresh / update PUB00493 GST and Income tax – Emissions Trading Scheme issues for emitters and removal activities ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PUB00460/488 Income tax – Land – Bright-line test - updating for recent changes (6 items) ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00469 Income tax – Returns of capital and dividends in lieu – Refresh of IS2966 ✓✓ ✓ PUB00484 Tax administration – Care and management duty – Review of IS 10/07 ✓✓ PUB00459 Income tax – Land – Deductibility of initial repairs ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ Items currently in progress PUB00507 FBT – Exemption for benefits related to health or safety ✓✓ ✓ PUB00485 GST – Forfeited deposits from cancelled land sale agreements ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00475 GST – Liquidations ✓✓ ✓ PUB00514 GST – Secondhand goods ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00477 GST – Short-stay accommodation – updating IS 20/04 ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00476 GST – Taxable activity ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00478 Income tax – Business activity ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00504 Income tax – Cash incentives for banking customers ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00509 Income tax – Deductibility of sponsorship expenditure – updating IS3229 ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00494 Income tax – Distributions from foreign trusts – refresh of IS 19/04 ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00491 Income tax – End of lease of farm land – expenditure on horticultural plants ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00416 Income tax – Investing in Australian unit trusts ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00400 Income tax – Short-stay accommodation where property owned by a company ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00498 Tax administration – Shortfall penalties – Not taking reasonable care ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00499 Tax administration – Shortfall penalties – Unacceptable tax position ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00513 Working for families – family scheme income ✓✓ ✓ Items not currently being worked on PUB00516 GST – Court awarded costs and disbursements ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00468 GST – Customs – Supplies to vessels temporarily in/visiting New Zealand ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00496 GST – Platform economy rules ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00511 GST – Reduced rate of GST for residential accommodation ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00515 GST – Supplies by payment service providers to merchants ✓✓ ✓ PUB00518 Income tax – Cryptoassets used in decentralised finance transactions and other issues ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PUB00510 Income tax – Deductibility of asbestos removal costs ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00517 Income Tax – Deductibility of rates and interest for new business premises (PIB) ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00506 Income tax – Forestry issues ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ 3 Project no. Title Focus of tax issue Need for item Company Trust Individ ual Land Inter- national Charities Technical uncertainty Compliance / education Refresh / update PUB00503 Income Tax – Land – Property held for resale: Tax treatment of costs of land development and other expenses (PIB) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PUB00512 Income tax – Māori authorities ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00508 Income tax – PIE income from land activities ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00492 Income tax – Purchase price allocation rules and disposal of land improvements and listed horticultural plants ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PUB00505 Income tax – Repairs and maintenance – refresh of IS 12/03 ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00497 Student loans – Determining residency of overseas borrowers ✓✓ ✓ PUB00501 Tax administration – Shortfall penalties – Abusive tax position ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00502 Tax administration – Shortfall penalties – Evasion ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00500 Tax administration – Shortfall penalties – Gross carelessness ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ Items on hold PUB00463 GST – Brokering and promoting of financial products by intermediaries ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00436 GST – Disposal of an interest in a joint venture involving land ✓✓ ✓ PUB00412 GST – Foster care payments ✓✓ ✓ PUB00473 GST – Situations that are not bare trusts ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00490 GST – Supplies of residences and other real property – updating IS 20/05 ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00467 Income tax – Flood damage repairs ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00367 Income tax – Partnerships (including limited partnerships) – General guidance ✓✓ ✓ PUB00472 Income tax – Partnerships – Withholding tax obligations for payments made to a partnership ✓ ✓ PUB00470 Income tax – Payments by an employer on death of an employee ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00266 Income tax – Payments derived from New Zealand by non-resident software suppliers ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PUB00466 Income tax – Software development costs ✓✓ ✓✓ PUB00407 Income tax – Trusts – New Zealand-Australia DTA ✓✓ ✓ PUB00364 Income tax – Employee share schemes (some specific interpretive issues) (1 remaining to be published) ✓ ✓ ✓ Items published or closed since 1 July 2024 PUB00474 GST – CZR rules – Supplies of standing timber and other crops ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ PUB00465 Income tax – Charities – Apportioning business income under s CW 42 where purposes are not limited to New Zealand ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ PUB00364 Income tax – Employee share schemes (some specific interpretive issues) (published another 3 of 6, 1 remaining to be published) ✓ ✓ ✓ PUB00480 Income tax – Interest paid on overdrawn current accounts ✓✓ ✓ 4 Detailed work programme This table contains more information about each item on the work programme including a short explanation of what the item is about, the reason for the item and how the it em is progressing. Completed items are shaded light blue. Items currently on hold and not being actively worked on are shaded grey and include a brief explanation of why progress has paused. Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00507 FBT – Exemption for benefits related to health or safety This item will consider the breadth of the exemption from FBT in s CX 24 of the ITA 2007 for benefits that an employer provides to an employee related to the employee’s health or safety. The CIR is aware of some uncertainty about the breadth of this exemption, and it will be useful to clarify when and how the provision applies. Scoping. PUB00463 GST – Brokering and promoting of financial products by intermediaries This item will provide guidance on the GST treatment where banks or other intermediaries broker or promote financial products offered by different parties to their customers. With more regulation and evolving technologies, intermediaries are using different arrangements and providing varying levels of services when offering financial products to customers. Guidance and examples will be helpful when considering the GST treatment of these various brokering, promotional or partnering arrangements. On hold pending further progress on PUB00486 GST – Managed fund fees. PUB00516 GST – Court awarded costs and disbursements This item will address the GST treatment of court awarded costs and disbursements, and will consider when s 20A of the GSTA may apply to such amounts. A need for guidance on this issue was identified when preparing IS 23/07 GST – Court awards and out-of-court settlements. New. Unallocated. PUB00468 GST – Customs – Supplies to vessels temporarily in/visiting New Zealand This item will consider how the GST rules apply to supplies made to vessels temporarily in/visiting New Zealand. This item will update earlier guidance and address some perennial issues for Temporary Import Entry vessels, vessels exempt from entry and berthage supplies made to vessels. It will support NZ Customs with the application of the GST rules. Scoped. Unallocated. 5 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00474 GST – CZR rules - Supplies of standing timber and other crops This project addresses whether the sale and purchase of standing timber or other crops is a supply of “land” for the purposes of the compulsory zero-rating of land rules (CZR rules) or a standard-rated supply of goods (being the underlying timber or crop). This item arises from a question we were asked and will clarify the GST treatment of supplies of standing timber and other crops. Published on 15 August 2024 as QB 24/05. PUB00436 GST – Disposal of an interest in a joint venture involving land This item will address the GST treatment of the disposal of an interest in a land-owning joint venture, and whether it is a disposal of an interest in land for GST purposes. Clarification is needed on the application of the GST rules to such disposals. On hold for Policy consideration of issues relating to PUB00356. PUB00485 GST – Forfeited deposits from cancelled land sale agreements This item will refresh a QB published in May 2005 on the GST consequences of a cancelled contract. With the publication of QB 23/09 on the income tax treatment of forfeited deposits from cancelled land sale agreements, it is appropriate to update the 2005 public item QB to ensure consistency in the guidance. Considering issues. PUB00412 GST – Foster care payments This item will address the GST treatment of payments made by the government to foster carers in respect of the cost of fostering a child. This item arises from the PIB review. (PIB 179-07 - GST on payments from the Department of Social Welfare to foster parents and organisations concerned with child welfare). Clarification continues to be needed. On hold pending cross-agency assistance. PUB00356 GST – Input tax – Registered members of unregistered unincorporated bodies This item will address whether GST- registered members of unincorporated bodies can claim their share of any GST input tax paid by the body when the body itself is not GST registered because it falls below the GST registration threshold. We understand there is uncertainty of treatment for members of unincorporated bodies. On hold pending Policy consideration. PUB00475 GST – Liquidations This item will address common GST issues that arise on the liquidation of a company. In addition to issues identified by Inland Revenue we will be seeking suggestions from our external stakeholders on issues they would like to see addressed. It has been identified that Inland Revenue and our customers would benefit from some general guidance on liquidations. Considering issues. 6 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00486 GST – Managed fund fees This item addresses the GST treatment of various fees charged in relation to managed funds. This project will clarify the extent to which the activities associated with a managed fund involve making exempt supplies of financial services. Considering submissions. PUB00413 GST – Not-for-profit bodies – Supplies of donated goods and services PIB 164-18 - GST - supply of donated goods and services by a non-profit body. This item arises from the PIB review. The PIB item concerns an historic administrative position where a non-profit body sells donated goods or services that include less than 5 percent of purchased goods. In that case the supply is treated as still exempt. Clarification continues to be needed. Considering issues. PUB00496 GST – Platform economy rules This item will provide greater certainty around the scope of the new platform economy rules including the meaning of "listed services" and "market place operator". The CIR is aware of some uncertainty about the breadth of the new platform economy rules and will seek to provide greater certainty as the new rules bed down. Scoped. Allocated. PUB00511 GST – Reduced rate of GST for residential accommodation This item will consider and update guidance on s 10(6) of the GSTA. This provision provides for a reduced rate of GST where a supply comprises domestic goods and services in a commercial dwelling generally for a period in excess of 4 weeks. The CIR is aware of cases where s 10(6) has been misapplied. Further guidance in this area will be useful to clarify when and how the provision applies. New. Unallocated. PUB00514 GST – Secondhand goods This item will refresh the Commissioner’s 1994 guidance on GST c laims for secondhand goods on property transactions between associated persons and will consider what goods comprise “secondhand goods” for GST purposes and when there is ‘payment’ for the supply. It is appropriate for the existing guidance to be updated to reflect current commercial practices and to re-clarify for customers the requirements for a valid secondhand goods claim. New. Allocated. 7 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00477 GST – Short-stay accommodation – updating IS 20/04 This project will look at IS 20/04: GST treatment of short-stay accommodation to identify what updating is required following the 2023 changes to the GST apportionment and adjustment rules. This project is needed to ensure existing public guidance is accurate given the changes to the GST apportionment and adjustment rules in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2022–23, Platform Economy, and Remedial Matters) Act 2023. Considering issues. PUB00473 GST – Situations that are not bare trusts This item will work through some common ownership scenarios and explain in which circumstances a bare trust relationship exists or doesn’t exist. This item is intended to supplement the analysis in QB 16/03: GST treatment of bare trusts by helping customers determine when property is or is not held in a bare trust relationship. On hold pending resolution of a related issue. PUB00515 GST – Supplies by payment service providers to merchants This project will address the GST treatment of supplies of payment processing facilities to merchants which the merchant pays a ‘merchant service fee’ to the provider. It appears there is some industry uncertainty and inconsistency in the GST treatment of these facilities, and so this project will clarify the correct GST treatment for both providers and merchants. New. Unallocated. PUB00490 GST – Supplies of residences and other real property – updating IS 20/05 This project will look at IS 20/05: GST - Supplies of residences and other real property to identify what updating is required following the 2023 changes to the GST apportionment and adjustment rules. This project is needed to ensure existing public guidance is accurate given the changes to the GST apportionment and adjustment rules in the Taxation (Annual Rates for 2022–23, Platform Economy, and Remedial Matters) Act 2023. On hold pending Policy consideration. PUB00476 GST – Taxable activity Understanding whether a person is carrying on a taxable activity and when that activity begins is a fundamental GST issue. This project intends to provide general guidance and examples on the requirements for a taxable activity and how to identify when a taxable activity begins and ends. While previously we have provided guidance on taxable activities for GST the guidance is piecemeal and the many ways of doing business is changing. The purpose of this item is to bring our existing analysis together in a refreshed, relevant and accessible item. Considering issues. 8 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00493 GST and Income tax – Emissions Trading Scheme tax issues for emitters and removal activities This item will provide general guidance on the income tax and GST consequences of the emissions trading scheme for emitters and removal activities. It will address the deductibility of emissions liabilities and the tax treatment of ETS units. There is no general guidance on the tax treatment of the emissions trading scheme. This project is related to PUB00452. Considering issues. PUB00452 GST and Income tax – Emissions Trading Scheme tax issues for forestry This item will provide general guidance on the income tax and GST consequences of the emissions trading scheme for forestry. It will address the tax treatment of different types of ETS units (some are held on capital account, others on revenue account). It will explain how to account for units that are issued to or surrendered by a person to offset carbon emissions, as well as those bought and sold whether for trading or hedging purposes. It will also address the relevant GST treatment. There is no general guidance on the tax treatment of the emissions trading scheme. This project is related to PUB00493. Considering submissions. PUB00478 Income tax – Business activity Understanding when a person is carrying on a business is fundamental to income tax. While the case law is settled the context in which we carry on business continues to change. This project intends to provide general guidance and examples on the requirements for a business and how to identify when a business begins and ends. It is some time since we have provided guidance on the business test for income tax purposes. Our existing guidance is piecemeal and our ways of doing business are evolving. The purpose of this item is to bring our existing analysis together in a refreshed, relevant and accessible item. Considering issues. PUB00504 Income tax – Cash incentives for banking customers Some banks offer 'cash back' payments to customers when they borrow to purchase residential rental properties or for their businesses. This item will consider the income tax treatment of such amounts. We are aware some customers are uncertain about the correct tax treatment of cash back amounts. This project will provide guidance on the correct tax treatment in various situations depending on the personal circumstances of the customer. Scoping. 9 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00465 Income tax – Charities – Apportioning business income under s CW 42 where purposes are not limited to New Zealand This item considers s CW 42 including how a charity should allocate its business income between NZ and overseas purposes, where its purposes are not limited to New Zealand. This project will take account of the submissions received on issues paper IRRUIP17: Charities – business income exemption. Published on 16 September 2024 as IS 24/08. PUB00457 Income tax – Company amalgamation rules This item will provide general guidance on the application of the company amalgamation rules. Customers sometimes find the amalgamation rules difficult to follow, so guidance would be helpful. Considering submissions. PUB00518 Income Tax – Cryptoassets used in decentralised finance transactions and other issues This item will clarify some issues that arise for taxpayers who undertake defi transactions, such as when there is a disposal of cryptoassets for tax purposes. There are an increasing number of cryptoasset holders undertaking defi transactions and some uncertainty about how the transactions are treated for tax purposes. New. Unallocated. PUB00510 Income tax – Deductibility of asbestos removal costs This item will consider the deductibility of the cost of removing asbestos. It will include consideration of the relevance of s DB 46 (Avoiding, remedying, or mitigating effects of discharge of contaminant or making of noise) of the ITA 2007. The CIR is aware of cases involving the removal of asbestos and a lack of public guidance on the issues. This is an opportunity to consult on IR's position. New. Unallocated. PUB00517 Income tax – Deductibility of rates and interest for new business premises (PIB) Most of PIB 64 (1971): “Setting up or moving a business – what costs may be allowed” was replaced by IS 10/06: Deductibility of business relocation costs when it was published in 2010. However, the PIB item also discussed the deductibility of rates and interest in the context of establishing a new business or holding a site as future business premises. This project will consider that remaining issue. This is one of the few remaining outstanding items from the PIB Review project started in 2011. New. Unallocated. PUB00509 Income tax – Deductibility of sponsorship expenditure – updating IS3229 In light of the new rules for donations of trading stock in s GC 1 of the ITA 2007 this item will revisit IS3229: Deductibility of sponsorship expenditure including The recent changes to s GC 1 (Disposals of trading stock or similar property) have brought into question the parameters of deductibility for gifting in the corporate Considering issues. 10 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps considering the concept of "corporate social responsibility". environment. As these situations often cross over with the concepts of sponsorship it is considered timely to revisit IS3229. PUB00274 Income tax – Depreciation – Identifying items of depreciable property This item will set out the principles to apply to identify an item of depreciable property. There is a need for a general statement setting out the principles that apply when identifying an item of depreciable property. Preparing to publish. PUB00494 Income tax – Distributions from foreign trusts – refresh of IS 19/04 The existing statement IS 19/04 considers the income tax treatment of amounts of money or property transferred to New Zealand resident taxpayers by a person overseas and whether such amounts are either beneficiary income or a taxable distribution from a foreign trust. This item will refresh the guidance published in IS 19/04 so it is up to date. Updating this item was identified during work on IS 24/01 T axation of trusts. Considering issues. PUB00364 Income tax – Employee share schemes (some specific interpretive issues) This item will consider several interpretive issues that have arisen for employee share schemes. This item would aim to resolve some of the uncertainties for transactions under the employee share scheme rules. Public consultation closed 26 April 2024. Considering submissions. Published IS 24/04 and QB 24/03 o n 12 June 2024. Published IS 24/05 and IS 24/06 o n 30 July 2024. Published IS 24/07 o n 22 August 2024. One remaining item to be published pending Policy consideration. PUB00491 Income tax – End of lease of farm land – expenditure on horticultural plants This item considers the tax treatment of expenditure a farmer incurs on planting non-listed horticultural plants or listed horticulture plants on leased land, when the lease ends. This item arose out of work done for PUB00467 o n flood damage repairs. Considering issues. PUB00458 Income tax – FIF rules – Applying the cost method This item will look at when the FIF cost method should be used and how it should be applied. The focus will be on investments in foreign shares. Customers find it difficult to calculate FIF income. More guidance is needed on how to apply the cost method when the fair dividend rate method is not practical. Public consultation closed 29 November 2024. Considering submissions. PUB00467 Income tax – Flood damage repairs This item will address the tax treatment of repairs made by businesses to rectify flood damage to their land and other property. In the wake of recent adverse weather events, urgent guidance is needed to assist flood affected businesses to understand the tax treatment of repairs. On hold pending Policy consideration. 11 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00506 Income Tax – Forestry issues This item will consider how the ITA 2007 applies to forestry, including the timing of deductions and the spreading of income. Forestry investment is a growth area. However, there is a lack of guidance about how the forestry rules in the ITA 2007 operate. New. Unallocated. PUB00480 Income tax – Interest paid on overdrawn current accounts This item will provide general guidance on the tax treatments that apply when a shareholder pays interest to a company on an overdrawn current account. Following QB 22/10 Can a close company deduct interest on a shareholder loan account where the amount is not known until after balance date?, we have been asked to provide guidance on the situation where the shareholder pays interest. Published on 5 November 2024 as IS 24/09. PUB00416 Income tax – Investing in Australian unit trusts This project will address the income tax consequences for New Zealand resident investors of investing in Australian unit trusts. Guidance will be a series of public rulings similar to those for investments into Australian limited partnerships ( BR Pub 18/01 – BR Pub 18/05). Considering issues. PUB00454 Income tax – Investing in shares through an online trading platform This item will address the income tax treatment of gains and losses arising from investing in shares through an online trading platform. It is important investors understand the correct tax treatment of those gains and losses, and when their activities will amount to trading in shares. The popularity of investing in shares through an online trading platform means that many more customers are investing in shares and deriving gains and losses. Public consultation closed 24 September 2024. Considering submissions. PUB00519 Income tax – Land – Application of s CB 3 (Profit- making undertaking or scheme) to land disposals This project will consider whether s CB 3 can apply to amounts derived from the disposal of land as part of a profit-making undertaking or scheme. We are aware of uncertainty regarding the scope of s CB 3 and whether amounts derived from the disposal of land are subject to tax only if one of the land sales rules apply. At public consultation until 14 February 2025. PUB00489 Income Tax – Land – Bright- line test – rollover relief This project will provide guidance on the application of the rollover relief rules for the bright-line test. It may be challenging for customers to understand all the circumstances in which rollover relief is available, including who is an associated person for the new rollover rule, and what the effect of rollover relief is. It is appropriate that more guidance is available for customers Public consultation closed 8 November 2024. Considering submissions. 12 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00460/488 Income Tax – Land – Bright- line test – updating public items for changes This project will update existing public items containing guidance on the bright- line test for recent legislative changes. These items include: QB 16/07, QB 17/02, QB 18/16, QB 18/17 and QB 19/13. It is related to PUB00460. This project is needed to ensure existing public guidance is accurate given the recent changes to the bright-line test. Considering issues. PUB00459 Income tax – Land – Deductibility of initial repairs This item will explain the treatment of initial repairs made following the purchase of a dilapidated building. There seems to be some confusion around the deductibility of dilapidation repairs. The matter is addressed in IS 12/03: Deductibility of repairs and maintenance expenditure b ut it seems further education is needed. Considering issues. PUB00455 Income tax – Land – LTCs and disposal of land issues This item will address various issues arising for look-through companies in relation to the disposal of land and the brightline test, in particular issues arising on entry to and exit from the LTC rules and where there are changes in shareholding interests. This item will help look through companies understand how the new land rules will interact with the LTC rules. Public consultation closed 23 September 2024. Considering submissions. PUB00482 Income tax – Land – Moving between the different land regimes People’s circumstances and how they use their property can change. This item will work through some scenarios to show how the loss ring fencing rules and the mixed- use asset rules interact when a person changes how they use their property. We recognise it can be challenging applying the land rules, but this is especially so when a person changes how they use their property – as that change can affect which land rules apply to them. At public consultation until 13 December 2024. PUB00503 Income tax – Land – Property held for resale: Tax treatment of costs of land development and other expenses (PIB) This item will review PIB 179 (1989): “Property held for resale: Tax treatment of costs of land development and other expenses”. This is one of the few remaining outstanding items from the PIB Review project started in 2011. Submissions received during the preparation of IS 23/10 Deductibility of holding costs for land suggest the accounting treatment of such costs may have an impact on ‘cost’ for tax purposes. New. Unallocated. 13 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00487 Income Tax – Land – Short- stay accommodation – updating for new land rules This project will update existing public guidance items on income tax and short- stay accommodation to reflect the new land rules. It is related to PUB00460. This project is needed to ensure existing public guidance is accurate, and still fit for purpose for taxpayers with short-stay accommodation as often they may not have tax advisors. Public consultation closed on 25 October 2024. Considering submissions. PUB00460 Income tax – Land – Updating public items for new land rules (brightline and interest limitation) This project will look at existing public guidance items to identify those items which require updating because of the introduction of the new land rules. This project is needed to ensure existing public guidance is accurate, and still fit for purpose given the wide impact of the land rules on taxpayers (who often may not have advisors). Considering issues. PUB00461 Income tax – Loss carry- forward – Business continuity test avoidance arrangements This item will consider the application of the targeted anti-avoidance rules relating to the carrying forward of losses under the business continuity test. IS 22/06: Income tax – Loss carry-forward – continuity of business activities identified there is a need for guidance on the application of the anti-avoidance rules relating to the carrying forward of losses under the business continuity test. This item will complement IS 22/06. Considering submissions. PUB00512 Income tax – Māori authorities This item will consider the income tax treatment of Māori authorities under subpart HF of the ITA 2007 and will refresh the guidance published in 2003 when the rules were first introduced. The Māori authorities rules have been in place for over 20 years and so it seems timely to revisit our guidance and refresh it for developments that have occurred over the years. New. Unallocated. PUB00367 Income tax – Partnerships – General guidance General guidance on partnerships. Including the extent of transparency, attribution, returns, changes in partners including the safe harbour rules, final dissolution, associated person rules, source rules, liability of partners as agents. Some people have indicated that they want an item on partnerships in general. On hold pending legislative changes in Taxation (Annual Rates for 2024–25, Emergency Response, and Remedial Measures) Bill. 14 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00472 Income tax – Partnerships – Withholding tax obligations for payments made to a partnership Specific guidance for payers of passive income to partnerships. The item will address the issue of whether transparency applies for withholding tax purposes. It also considers RWT-exempt status and the obligation on agents to withhold. This item is relevant for payers of passive income to partnerships, so a separate item is appropriate. On hold pending Policy consideration. PUB00470 Income tax – Payments by an employer on death of an employee When an employee dies employers will often make a payment to assist the family of the deceased employee. Sometimes the payment might be made under the employment agreement to the deceased’s estate and other times it may be a discretionary payment made by the employer to the family or a funeral home. This item will consider the tax treatment of such payments. Periodically Inland Revenue is asked for advice on this issue and given that advice is usually sought at a difficult time for the employer and families, it seems appropriate to publish some public guidance on the tax treatment of such payments. On hold pending Policy consideration. PUB00266 Income tax – Payments derived from New Zealand by non- resident software suppliers This item will clarify the income tax treatment (under NZ domestic law and double tax agreements) of payments derived from NZ by non-resident suppliers of computer software. More specifically: •the proper character of payments for supplies of computer software (whether payments are royalties, business or rental income, for services, or non-taxable receipts); and •the possible income tax treatment of each type of payment (including for NRWT). It has been suggested both internally and by external practitioners that IG0007 “Non- resident software suppliers’ payments derived from New Zealand—Income tax treatment” is out of date, particularly in light of technological developments in the way software is transacted. On hold awaiting US regulations. PUB00492 Income tax – Purchase price allocation rules and disposal of land improvements and listed horticultural plants This item considers the tax treatment of expenditure a farmer incurs on land improvements described in schedule 20, part A, and on listed horticultural plants, when the farmer sells their business. This item arose out of work done for PUB00467 o n flood damage repairs. Considering issues. 15 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00505 Income tax – Repairs and maintenance expenditure – refresh of IS 12/03 This item will refresh IS 12/03: Income tax - deductibility of repairs and maintenance expenditure - general principles. The new item will include new practical examples and look to improve the structure and readability of the current Item. Since its publication in 2012 there have been developments relevant to the deductibility of repairs and maintenance expenditure and it is timely to consider these and current issues taxpayers are experiencing in this area. Scoping. PUB00469 Income tax – Returns of capital and dividends in lieu – Refresh of IS2966 This item will refresh IS2966: Exclusion from the term "Dividends" – whether distribution made in lieu of dividends' payment which is about the factors to be taken into account in determining whether an acquisition, redemption, or cancellation of shares is made in lieu of the payment of dividends. The new item will include updated legislative references as well as more practical examples. While IS2966 dates back to 1999 and still refers to the Income Tax Act 1994, its analysis remains useful and it continues to be referred to by customers. It will be helpful to update the item. Considering issues. PUB00400 Income tax – Short-stay accommodation where property owned by a company This item will explain the income tax consequences of making a property owned by a company available for short-stay accommodation. The situation addressed in this item arose from the suite of items p reviously issued on short-stay accommodation. Considering issues. PUB00466 Income tax – Software development costs This interpretation statement will explain the income tax treatment of software development expenditure. It will update the 1993 policy statement on the income tax treatment of computer software in the appendix to TIB Vol 4, No 10 (May 1993). The need for this item was identified following submissions received on the 2016 issues paper IRRUIP10: Income tax treatment of software development expenditure. On hold pending Policy consideration. PUB00495 Income tax – Tax residence – Government service This item will explain how to apply the Government service rule when determining tax residency. In updating IS 16/03: Tax residence, it has been decided that a separate item covering the Government service rule in more detail would be helpful. This project is related to PUB00483. At public consultation until 11 December 2024. 16 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00483 Income tax – Tax residence – Refresh of IS 16/03 This item will refresh IS 16/03: Tax residence which sets out the CIR's view on the tax residence rules for individuals, companies and trusts. It is nearly 10 years since IS 16/03 was first published, and it is one of the most referred to Public Guidance items. There are various residency-related legislative amendments affecting companies and trusts it would be helpful to incorporate into the item, as well as other new developments relevant to residence. At public consultation until 11 December 2024. PUB00462 Income tax – Trade rebates and promotions This item will consider the income tax treatment of amounts received by trade customers from suppliers as rebates or as promotional items. We understand there is a need for more clarity around the tax treatment of different rebate programmes. At public consultation until 18 December 2024. PUB00407 Income tax – Trusts – New Zealand-Australia DTA This item will provide guidance for New Zealand trusts on the application of the New Zealand-Australia DTA and the resulting implications in terms of foreign tax credits, determination of residency, and permanent establishment issues. The need for this item was identified following submissions received on the issues paper IRRUIP15: Income tax – Trusts and the Australian–New Zealand Double Tax Agreement. On hold pending Policy consideration. PUB00453 Income tax and FBT – Travel between home and work This item will address the deductibility of the travel costs between home and work and explain when travel between home and work will be treated as work-related use of a motor vehicle (rather than private use or enjoyment) for FBT purposes. With the increase in working from home arrangements as a result of Covid-19 it seems appropriate for IS3448 (issued in October 2004) to be reviewed and updated. Considering submissions. Preparing to publish. PUB00508 Income tax – PIE income from land activities This item will consider whether eligible PIE income includes income from activities of developing or dividing land or erecting buildings on land for sale. There is some uncertainty around whether income from these land activities can be eligible PIE income under s HM 12 . New. Allocated. 17 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00497 Student loans – Determining residency of overseas borrowers This project will address residency issues for overseas-based student loan borrowers. Some borrowers have limited understanding of the residency rules so this guidance is intended to help them determine their residency so they can be clear about their obligations. Scoped. Unallocated. PUB00484 Tax administration – Care and management duty – Review of IS 10/07 This project will refresh IS 10/07: Care and management of the taxes covered by the Inland Revenue Acts to improve its readability and will also consider whether any updating is required, particularly in light of experiences during the COVID-19 response. IS 10/07 explains the Commissioner’s duty in the care and management of taxes. It is important to ensure it is reviewed from time to time, and especially to consider its effectiveness and relevance in the face of a major event like the COVID-19 pandemic. Considering issues. PUB00501 Tax administration – Shortfall penalties – Abusive tax position This project will review and update IS0061 on the abusive tax position shortfall penalty. Shortfall penalties are an integral part of IR’s compliance and penalties regime. Therefore, having clear and up-to-date guidance on the application of those penalties is important. New. Unallocated. PUB00502 Tax administration – Shortfall penalties – Evasion This project will review and update IS0062 on the evasion shortfall penalty. Shortfall penalties are an integral part of IR’s compliance and penalties regime. Therefore, having clear and up-to-date guidance on the application of those penalties is important. New. Unallocated. PUB00500 Tax administration – Shortfall penalties – Gross carelessness This project will review and update IS0060 on the gross carelessness shortfall penalty. Shortfall penalties are an integral part of IR’s compliance and penalties regime. Therefore, having clear and up-to-date guidance on the application of those penalties is important. New. Unallocated. PUB00498 Tax administration – Shortfall penalties – Not taking reasonable care This project will review and update IS0053 on the not taking reasonable care shortfall penalty. Shortfall penalties are an integral part of IR’s compliance and penalties regime. Therefore, having clear and up-to-date guidance on the application of those penalties is important. Scoping. 18 Project no. Title What this item is about Why are we doing this item Current status & next steps PUB00499 Tax administration – Shortfall penalties – Unacceptable tax position This project will review and update IS0055 on the unacceptable tax position shortfall penalty. Shortfall penalties are an integral part of IR’s compliance and penalties regime. Therefore, having clear and up-to-date guidance on the application of those penalties is important. Scoping. PUB00513 Working for families – family scheme income This item will consider issues that arise for customers when determining their family scheme income for working for families tax credit purposes. It has been suggested that guidance for customers to help them better understand what income is or is not included in family scheme income in various situations would be helpful. Scoping.