1 QUESTION WE’VE BEEN ASKED QB 14/05 INCOME TAX – ASC RULES: CALCULATING THE “SUBSCRIPTIONS” AMOUNT FOR AN AMALGAMATED COMPANY WHEN THE SHARES OF AN AMALGAMATING COMPANY ARE HELD BY ANOTHER AMALGAMATING COMPANY All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 unless otherwise stated. This Question We’ve Been Asked is about s CD 43(15)(a)(ii). Question 1. We have been asked whether s CD 43(15)(a)(ii) excludes an amount equal to the consideration received for shares issued by an amalgamating company that are directly or indirectly held by another amalgamating company from the “subscriptions” amount for an amalgamated company in the available subscribed capital (ASC) formula in s CD 43(1). Answer 2. Yes. An amount equal to the consideration received for shares issued by an amalgamating company that are held directly or indirectly by another amalgamating company is excluded from the amalgamated company’s subscriptions amount by s CD 43(15)(a)(ii). 3. For an amalgamated company, as with any other company, the “subscriptions” amount in the ASC formula is the consideration received for shares issued, under the definition of “subscriptions” in s CD 43(2)(b). Section CD 43(15) adds an additional amount to the “subscriptions” amount of an amalgamated company. Section CD 43(15) provides that the “subscriptions” amount of an amalgamated company includes an amount equal to the ASC of all shares in the amalgamating companies except:  shares in the amalgamating companies that are held (directly or indirectly) by another amalgamating company (s CD 43(15)(a)(ii)); and  shares in the amalgamated company (s CD 43(15)(a)(iii)). 4. Section CD 43(15)(a)(ii) operates to prevent the counting of the ASC of shares in an amalgamating company if those shares are held by another amalgamating company. 5. The purpose of the ASC formula is to determine the amount that shareholders have paid into a company as capital when subscribing for shares. The ASC of a company can be returned to shareholders tax-free in certain circumstances rather than being treated as a dividend. The reason for excluding the ASC of subsidiaries from this calculation is to avoid the double-counting of capital that has been introduced by the underlying shareholders. 6. This question arose following a previous QWBA (QB 13/02 Income Tax – Determining the “subscriptions” amount for an amalgamated company under the available subscribed capital rules) published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 25, No 6 (July 2013): 50. This QWBA should be read in conjunction with QB 13/02. Explanation 7. This Question We’ve Been Asked clarifies the effect of s CD 43(15)(a)(ii), following the publication of QB 13/02. 2 8. It had been suggested that the conclusion reached in QB 13/02 indicated that the subscriptions amount of an amalgamated company included the ASC of the shares in all amalgamating companies (other than the amalgamated company). The purpose of this QWBA is to clarify that the ASC of an amalgamated company includes the ASC of the shares in all amalgamating companies other than those shares listed in both ss CD 43(15)(a)(ii) and (iii). Section CD 43(2)(b) 9. Sections CD 43(1) and (2) provide: CD 43 Available subscribed capital (ASC) amount Formula for calculating amount of available subscribed capital (1) For a share (the share) in a company at any relevant time (the calculation time), the amount of available subscribed capital is calculated using the formula— 1 July 1994 balance + subscriptions – returns – look-through company returns. Definition of items in formula (2) In the formula in subsection (1),— (a) 1 July 1994 balance is,— (i) if the company existed before 1 July 1994, the amount calculated under subsection (3); and (ii) in any other case, zero: (b) subscriptions, subject to subsections (6) to (21), is the total amount of consideration that the company received, after 30 June 1994 and before the calculation time, for the issue of shares of the same class (the class) as the share, ignoring section HB 1 (Look-through companies are transparent): (c) returns, subject to subsections (22) and (23), is the total amount of consideration that the company paid, after 30 June 1994 and before the calculation time, on the cancellation of shares in the relevant class and that was not a dividend because of section CD 22 or CD 24 or a corresponding provision of an earlier Act: (d) look-through company returns is the total amount of consideration that the company paid, before the calculation time, on the cancellation or buyback of shares in the relevant class while the company was a look-through company, ignoring section HB 1. 10. This QWBA only considers the “subscriptions” amount in the formula. Section CD 43(2)(b) provides that the subscriptions amount of a company is the total amount of consideration that the company received, after 30 June 1994 and before the calculation time, for the issue of shares of the same class. 11. Section CD 43(2)(b) is subject to s CD 43(15) when determining the subscriptions amount of an amalgamated company. Section CD 43(15) 12. Section CD 43(15) provides: Subscriptions amount: amalgamated company (15) The subscriptions amount for a company that is an amalgamated company resulting from an amalgamation— (a) includes an amount, as if it were consideration received at the time of the amalgamation for the issue of the amalgamated company’s shares, equal to the available subscribed capital, at the time of the amalgamation, of all shares in the amalgamating companies that are— (i) of an equivalent class to the class; and (ii) not held directly or indirectly by an amalgamating company; and (iii) not shares in the amalgamated company: 3 (b) does not include any other amount for the agreement of shareholders of an amalgamating company to the amalgamation and the resulting property acquisitions by the amalgamated company. 13. Section CD 43(15) applies to a company that is an amalgamated company. An “amalgamated company” is defined in s YA 1 as the one company that results from and continues after an amalgamation and it may be one of the amalgamating companies or a new company. “Amalgamating company” is a company that amalgamates with one or more other companies under an amalgamation. Therefore, all companies involved in an amalgamation are amalgamating companies. A company that exists before an amalgamation and continues as the amalgamated company is both the “amalgamated company” and an “amalgamating company”. 14. Section CD 43(15) includes an amount (as if it were consideration received at the time of the amalgamation for the issue of the amalgamated company’s shares) equal to the ASC of all shares of the same class in the amalgamating companies. This amount, however, does not include:  the ASC of shares in an amalgamating company that are held by an amalgamating company (s CD 43(15)(a)(ii)); and  the ASC of shares in the amalgamated company (s CD 43(15)(a)(iii)). This is because the ASC of the shares in the amalgamated company is already included in the “subscriptions” amount in s CD 43(2)(b). See QB 13/2 for further clarification of this point. 15. It is further noted that s CD 43(15)(b) provides that the subscriptions amount also does not include any amounts for the agreement of shareholders to the amalgamation and the resulting property acquisitions by the amalgamated company. 16. Under s CD 43(15)(a)(ii), the shares of any subsidiaries of the amalgamating companies (including the company that becomes the amalgamated company) are not included in the calculation of the amalgamated company’s subscriptions amount. 17. By reading ss CD 43(2)(b) and (15) together, it can be seen that the subscriptions amount of an amalgamated company equals the amount under s CD 43(2)(b) plus the ASC of the shares of all the amalgamating companies other than the amalgamated company and any amalgamating companies that are subsidiaries of other amalgamating companies. 18. The reason for excluding the ASC of subsidiaries from this calculation is to avoid the double-counting of capital that has been introduced by the underlying shareholders. This is because the underlying shareholders have only subscribed for the shares in the parent company, and so that ASC value should only be included once. Otherwise it could be possible for shareholders to create extra ASC through capitalising subsidiaries, and increasing their ASC on an amalgamation. 19. We note that this item only concerns the “subscriptions” component of the formula for calculating an amalgamated company’s ASC. Other components of the formula, such as the “returns” amount, may be relevant in certain situations (eg, where there is a cancellation of shares under s CD 43(24)). Conclusion 20. The Commissioner considers that the subscriptions amount of an amalgamated company includes the amalgamated company’s ASC, as well as an additional amount that is equal to the ASC of all shares in the amalgamating companies that are of an equivalent class, except:   Examp 21. T Examp    22. T 23. T 24. T 25. T Examp   shares  the sh a amalga ples The followi law. ple 1: Vert  A Co Lt shares  B Co L t shares  C Co L t shares The three c amalgamat The ASC o f 1 July 19 The subscr Based on t amount eq 43(2)(b) p 43(15). H o subsidiarie The ASC o f 0 + (sub = 2,000 ple 2: Hori  X Co L t shares in the ama ares of any amating com ng example tical Amalg td was inco for $1 eac h td was inco to A Co Lt d td was inco to B Co Lt d companies ted compan f the amalg 994 balance + riptions amo he interpre uals the su lus the sub owever, ss s and of th f A Co Ltd i bscriptions of ASC zontal Am td was inco for $1 eac h algamated c amalgama mpanies. es are inclu gamation rporated in h. rporated i n d for $1 eac rporated in d for $1 eac amalgama ny. gamated co + subscription ount is dete etation in th ubscriptions bscriptions o CD 43(15) e amalgam s calculate A Co Ltd of 2, malgamatio rporated in h. 4 company (a ting compa uded to ass n December n December ch. n December ch. ted in Mar c ompany is c s – returns – ermined un his QWBA a s of the am of the ama )(a)(ii) and mated comp d as follow ,000) – 0 – 0 on n December as that ASC anies that a sist in expla r 2012 and r 2012 and r 2012 and ch 2013. A calculated u look-through nder ss CD and in QB 1 algamated lgamating c (iii) exclud pany from b s: r 2012 and C is already are held by aining the a issued 2,0 issued 1,0 issued 1,0 A Co Ltd rem using the fo company retu 43(2)(b) a 13/02, the s company u companies de the subs being count issued 2,0 y counted), other application 000 ordinary 000 ordinary 000 ordinary mains as th ollowing for urns nd CD 43(1 subscription under s CD under s CD scriptions of ted. 000 ordinary and of the y y y he rmula: 15). ns D f any y   26. T 27. T 28. T 29. T Refere Subject amalgam amalgam amalgam available Legislat Income T Other re QB 13/02 available  Y Co Lt shares  Z Co Lt shares The three c amalgamat The subscr Based on t amount eq 43(2)(b) p 43(15). H o subsidiarie The ASC o f 0 + (sub = 3,000 The questio concerned ASC of an a ASC formu formula re q cancellatio or CD 24). amalgamat amalgamat ences references mated compan mating compan mation subscribed ca ive reference Tax Act 2007, eferences 2 Income Tax subscribed ca d was inco for $1 eac h td was inco to Y Co Lt d companies ted compan riptions amo he interpre uals the su lus the sub owever, ss s and of th f X Co Ltd i bscriptions of ASC on asked a with the ca amalgamat la will also quires a su n of share s For exam ted compan tion are inc y ny apital es ss CD 43(1), – Determinin apital rules Ta rporated in h. rporated i n d for $1 eac amalgama ny. ount is dete etation in th ubscriptions bscriptions o CD 43(15) e amalgam s calculate X Co Ltd of 2, nd the abo alculation o ted compan be relevan btraction o s in the rele ple, s CD 4 ny held by cluded in th (2)(b), (15) a ng the “subscr ax Information 5 n December n December ch. ted in Mar c ermined un his QWBA a s of the am of the ama )(a)(ii) and mated comp d as follow ,000 + subscr ve analysis of the “subs ny. In some nt. For exa of the amou evant class 43(24) requ an amalgam he “returns” and YA 1. riptions” amou n Bulletin Vol r 2012 and r 2012 and ch 2013. X nder ss CD and in QB 1 algamated lgamating c (iii) exclud pany from b s: riptions of Y C s and exam scriptions” a e amalgam mple, the “ unt of consi (that is no uires that th mating com ” amount. unt for an ama 25, No 6 (July issued 1,0 issued 1,0 X Co Ltd rem 43(2)(b) a 13/02, the s company u companies de the subs being count Co Ltd of 1,000 mples only n amount for ations the “returns” am deration pa t a dividen he ASC of a mpany that algamated com y 2013): 50. 00 ordinary 000 ordinary mains as th nd CD 43( 1 subscription under s CD under s CD scriptions of ted. 0) – 0 – 0 need to be r determinin other items mount in th aid on the d under ss any shares are cancel mpany under y y he 15). ns D f any ng the s in the he CD 22 in an led on the