QUESTION WE’VE BEEN ASKED QB 15/05 INCOME TAX – INSURANCE – TERM LIFE INSURANCE POLICY TAKEN OUT BY EMPLOYEE WITH EMPLOYER PAYING THE PREMIUMS ON EMPLOYEE’S BEHALF All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 2007 unless otherwise stated. This Question We’ve Been Asked is about ss CA 1, CE 1 (1), CE 5, CX 4, DA 1, DA 2, RD 2, RD 3, RD 5(2) and the definition of “salary or wages” in s YA 1. Question 1. What is the income tax treatment of a term life insurance policy that is: • taken out by an employee ( the employee is the policy holder), and • the premiums are paid by the employer on the employee’s behalf? Answer 2. The employer will generally be entitled to a deduction for the premiums paid. 3. The amount of the premiums will be treated as salary or wages and, therefore, subject to PAYE. 4. Lump sums paid out under a term life insurance policy will not be taxable income of the employee (or the employee’s estate). Explanation 5. Inland Revenue recently undertook a review of all Public Information Bulletins (see http://www.ird.govt.nz/technical-tax/pib-review/). During that review two items on the income tax treatment of insurance in an employment context were identified as being out of date. The two items are “Staff insurance schemes” (Public Information Bulletin No 70 (December 1972): 11) and “Life and accident insurance policies” (Public Information Bulletin No 106 (July 1980): 2). Those PIBs covered a number of different scenarios. We intend to replace the PIBs with a series of Questions We’ve Been Asked (QWBAs) c overing common scenarios. 6. This QWBA considers the situation where an employee takes out a term life insurance policy and the employer pays the premiums. It does not cover the situation where an employer takes out a life insurance policy for the employee’s benefit. 7. Term life insurance pays out the sum insured (as a lump sum) if the life insured dies during the term of the policy. Deductibility of premiums 8. A person is allowed a deduction for an amount of expenditure or loss to the extent that it is incurred by them in the course of carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable (or excluded) income (s DA 1). Section DA 2 sets out some limitations on deductibility. For example, expenditure that is capital in nature, or expenditure incurred in deriving exempt income, is not deductible (s DA 2 (1) and (3)). 9. In most cases, s alary and wage costs will be deductible because they will satisfy the nexus test in s DA 1 and none of the general limitations will apply. The payment of a life insurance premium for an employee is a business cost just like salary or wages. Therefore, provided the costs of an employee’s salary or wages are deductible, the costs of paying the insurance premiums will be too. Amount of premium paid taxable in the hands of the employee 10. An employee’s income includes “expenditure on account” of that employee (s CE 1(1)(b)). Expenditure on account of an employee means a payment made by an employer relating to expenditure incurred by an employee (or to be incurred by an employee) (s CE 5 (1)). This is subject to certain exceptions (in s CE 5(3)), none of which are relevant here. In particular, the exclusion in s CE 5(3)(a) will not apply as the expenditure would not be deductible to the employee in the absence of the employment limitation (being a payment made to secure a capital benefit). The exclusions in s CE 5(3)(f)–(i) are not relevant as they only apply when the employer takes out the insurance policy. 11. In the situation covered by this QWBA, the employee has a legal obligation to the insurance company to pay the insurance premiums. Therefore, the amount of the insurance premiums has been incurred by the employee. The employer is paying the premiums to the insurance company. Therefore, the payment of the insurance premiums is expenditure on account of the employee and is the employee’s income. 12. A payment of expenditure on account of an employee is part of the employee’s “salary or wages” (s RD 5(2)). A payment of salary or wages is a “PAYE income payment” (s RD 3). Therefore, the PAYE rules apply and the amounts are subject to PAYE. The amount of the premiums needs to be grossed up before PAYE is calculated. That is, the amount of the premium paid is the amount net of tax. 13. As the payment of the premium is assessable income to the employee, the fringe benefit tax rules will not apply (s CX 4). 14. There are also potential other implications of having the gross amounts of the premiums included in an employee’s salary or wages. For example, there are various other circumstances where obligations, eligibility, or entitlements may be calculated based on an employee’s salary or wages (for example Kiwisaver and Working for Families Tax Credits). Income tax treatment of proceeds 15. The proceeds received by an employee (or their estate) under a term life insurance policy are not income. An amount is income if it comes within a provision of Part C of the Act (s CA 1(1)). There are no specific provisions that tax payments under term life insurance policies. 16. An amount is also income if it is income under ordinary concepts (s CA 1(2)). A lump sum payment under a life insurance policy is not income under ordinary concepts. Example 17. The following example i s included to assist in explaining the application of the law. 18. Sally takes out a term life insurance policy with XYZ Insurance Ltd (XYZ). The sum insured is payable to Sally’s family in the event of her death. Sally’s employer, Flamingo Plumbing Ltd (FPL), pays the premiums to XYZ on Sally’s behalf. FPL and Sally want to know the income tax implications of this. 19. FPL is allowed a deduction for the amounts of premium paid to XYZ. The amounts of premium paid will be treated as part of Sally’s salary or wages. These amounts are, therefore, subject to PAYE. Any lump sum paid out under the policy to Sally (or her estate) will not be subject to income tax. References Related rulings/statements “Staff insurance schemes” Public Information Bulletin No 70 (December 1972): 11 “Life and accident insurance policies” Public Information Bulletin No 106 (July 1980): 2 Subject references Expenditure on account of an employee Life insurance Legislative references Income Tax Act 2007, ss CA 1, CE 1(1), CE 5, CX 4, DA 1, DA 2, RD 2, RD 3, RD 5(2) and the definition of “salary or wages” in s YA 1