Date of issue: 23 February 2018 1 UNCLASSIFIED Question What is the income tax treatment of a personal sickness or accident insurance policy that is:  taken out by an employer (the employer is the policy holder), and  an employee (or their spouse, civil union partner, de facto partner or child) is the beneficiary? This item applies to both individual personal sickness or accident insurance policies and group policies where the employees (or associates) are the beneficiaries of the policy. Answer The employer will generally be entitled to a deduction for the premiums paid. The premiums paid will not be subject to PAYE. The premiums paid will be subject to FBT unless they are premiums paid for income protection insurance where:  the employer has a liability to pay (or contribute to) the premiums; and QB 18/05 Income Tax – insurance – personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee QUESTION WE’VE BEEN ASKED This Question We’ve Been Asked (QWBA) considers the income tax treatment of personal sickness and accident insurance policies where an employer takes out the policy for the benefit of an employee. This QWBA replaces QB 15/10: “Income Tax – Insurance – Personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” Tax Information Bulletin Volume Twenty Seven, No 10 (November 2015). This QWBA applies from 30 March 2017. Key provisions Sections CA 1, CA 2(2), CE 1(1), CE 5, CE 11, CW 34, CX 2, CX 16, CX 31, DA 1, DA 2, GB 32 and the definition of “expenditure on account of an employee” in s YA 1 of the Income Tax Act 2007. QB 18/05: 23 Feb 2018 2 UNCLASSIFIED  a claim payment under the insurance policy would be assessable income of the employee. Claim amounts paid (or that an employee is otherwise entitled to) under income protection insurance policies will be income under s CE 11. Claim amounts paid (or that an employee is otherwise entitled to) under other personal sickness or accident policies will be income only if they are income under ordinary concepts (s CA 1(2)). Claim amounts that are not income under ordinary concepts will not be subject to tax. Claim amounts that are income under s CE 11 or s CA 1(2) will be exempt income if they are payments:  made to a person because they (or another person) are incapacitated for work; and either o paid by a friendly society (s CW 34(2)(a)); or o not calculated according to a loss of earnings (s CW 34(2)(c)). If the claim payment does not meet these criteria, it will be assessable income. Explanation Scope 1. This QWBA considers the income tax treatment of personal sickness or accident insurance policies. Some personal sickness or accident insurance policies include elements of income protection insurance. There are specific provisions in the Act that apply only to income protection insurance, so income protection insurance may have a different tax treatment to other personal sickness or accident insurance. 2. This QWBA does not consider the treatment of claim payments to or from sickness, accident, or death benefits funds. 3. This QWBA also does not consider the treatment of weekly compensation purchased under s 223 of the Accident Compensation Act 2001. Background 4. Inland Revenue undertook a review of all Public Information Bulletins (see http://www.ird.govt.nz/technical-tax/pib-review/). During that review, two items on the income tax treatment of insurance in an employment context were identified as being out of date. The two items are “Staff insurance schemes” (Public Information Bulletin No 70 (December 1972): 11) and “Life and accident insurance policies” (Public Information Bulletin No 106 (July 1980): 2). Those PIBs covered a number of different scenarios. Those items were replaced with a series of Questions We’ve Been Asked (QWBAs) covering common scenarios. 5. Since those QWBAs were published changes have been made to the Income Tax Act to simplify the treatment of employer provided insurance. Those changes came into effect on 30 March 2017. It has, therefore, been decided to update and replace the affected QWBAs. 6. This QWBA considers the situation where a personal sickness or accident insurance policy is taken out by an employer for the benefit of an employee. The previous version QB 18/05: 23 Feb 2018 3 UNCLASSIFIED of this QWBA was QB 15/10: “Income Tax – Insurance – personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” Tax Information Bulletin Volume Twenty Seven, No 10 (November 2015). See QB 18/04 for discussion of situations where the employee takes out the policy and the employer pays the premiums. 7. There are many different types of insurance policies that could be sickness or accident insurance (or could include an element of personal sickness or accident insurance). These include medical insurance, income protection insurance, accident insurance, and trauma or critical illness policies. Claim payments under these insurance policies can be periodic or lump sum and can be calculated in a variety of ways. 8. Where only part of a policy comes within a particular definition, it may be necessary to apportion premiums between different types of insurance. Similarly where a claim payment under a policy is made for more than one thing, apportionment of the receipt may be required. Deductibility of premiums for employer 9. A person is allowed a deduction for an amount of expenditure or loss to the extent that it is incurred by them in the course of carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving assessable (and/or excluded) income (s DA 1). Section DA 2 sets out some limitations on deductibility. For example, expenditure that is capital in nature, or expenditure incurred in deriving exempt income, is not deductible (s DA 2(1) and (3)). 10. In most cases, salary and wage costs will be deductible because they will satisfy the nexus test in s DA 1 and none of the general limitations will apply. The payment of a sickness or accident insurance premium for an employee that is paid in connection with the employee’s employment is a business cost just like salary or wages. Therefore, provided the costs of an employee’s salary or wages are deductible, the costs of paying the insurance premiums will be too. When amount of premium is subject to FBT 11. An employee’s income includes “expenditure on account” of that employee (s CE 1(1)(b)). Expenditure on account of an employee means a payment made by an employer relating to expenditure incurred by an employee (or to be incurred by an employee) (s CE 5(1)). In this case the employer has the legal obligation to pay the premium (as they have contracted with the insurance company to take out the policy). Consequently, the payment of the premium is not expenditure on account of an employee and is not subject to PAYE. It is, therefore, necessary to consider whether FBT applies. 12. Under s CX 2, a “fringe benefit” is a “benefit” that is provided by an employer to an employee in connection with their employment (s CX 2(1)(a)) and comes within either one of ss CX 6, CX 9, CX 10, or CX 12 to CX 16 (specified benefits) or is an unclassified benefit under s CX 37 (s CX 2(1)(b)). Some benefits are also excluded from being fringe benefits by specific provisions in subpart CX (see s CX 2(1)(c)). 13. The Commissioner’s view is that the provision of an accident or sickness insurance policy where the employee is a beneficiary is a “benefit” to the employee. It provides an economic advantage to the employee as it gives the employee benefits (coverage under the policy) to which they would otherwise not be entitled. Provided the benefit is provided to an employee in connection with their employment, s CX 2(1)(a) is satisfied. It is, therefore, necessary to consider whether the policy is a specified benefit under one of ss CX 6, CX 9, CX 10, or CX 12 to CX 16, or whether an unclassified benefit arises (s CX 37). It is also necessary to consider whether any exclusion could apply. QB 18/05: 23 Feb 2018 4 UNCLASSIFIED 14. The only potentially relevant specific provision is s CX 16. Section CX 16 applies when an employer pays a “specified insurance premium” or makes a contribution to the insurance fund of a friendly society for the benefit of an employee (s CX 16(1)). The relevant parts of the definition of “specified insurance premium” are s CX 16(3)(b) and (c): CX 16 Contributions to life or health insurance ... Meaning of specified insurance premium (3) In this section, specified insurance premium means a premium paid for the benefit of an employee on an insurance policy to the extent to which the insurance policy is for— ... (b) accident or medical insurance referred to in section EY 8(3) on the life of the employee or their spouse, civil union partner, or de facto partner, or on their joint lives, or on the life of their child: (c) insurance against accident, disease, or sickness, whether fatal or not, suffered by the employee, their spouse, civil union partner, or de facto partner, or their child. 15. Personal sickness and accident policies are policies that insure against accident, disease, or sickness. Therefore, the policies covered by this QWBA will come within s CX 16 and s CX 2(1)(b) will be satisfied. 16. Where an employer provides a fringe benefit to a person associated with an employee, s GB 32 may treat the benefit as if it were provided by the employer to the employee. This is subject to the shareholder-employee exemption in s GB 32(2) and the look- through company exemption in s GB 32(2B). Therefore, subject to those exemptions, premiums paid on policies of personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by an employer for the benefit of an employee’s spouse, civil union partner, de facto partner or child will also be subject to FBT. Exclusion from FBT 17. The only potentially relevant exclusion is s CX 31. Section CX 31 provides: An employer who satisfies a liability to pay, or contribute to the payment of, a premium for income protection insurance for the benefit of an employee does not provide a fringe benefit to the employee if a payment of the insurance to the employee would be assessable income of the employee. 18. Section CX 31 will exclude from FBT such income protection insurance:  provided by an employer;  for the benefit of an employee;  where the employer satisfies a liability to pay (or contribute to) the premiums; and  a pay-out under the insurance policy would be assessable income of the employee (this requirement is considered below). 19. Where a personal sickness or accident policy is also (or also includes) income protection insurance and all of the above requirements are met, the provision of the income protection insurance will not be a fringe benefit. In all other cases, FBT will apply. Where only part of a policy is income protection insurance, apportionment may be required. Income tax treatment of claims paid 20. Whether a claim payment made under an insurance policy is taxable will depend on what it is paid for. Some claim payments will not be income (under a specific provision or ordinary concepts) and, therefore, will not be taxable. Claim payments that are QB 18/05: 23 Feb 2018 5 UNCLASSIFIED “income” may be either assessable or exempt income depending on the circumstances. The following discussion is intended to assist with determining how a claim payment under an insurance policy should be treated. Is the payment to the employee income? 21. If a personal sickness or accident insurance policy is (or includes) income protection insurance, s CE 11 may apply. Claim payments made under a policy of income protection insurance where an employer is liable to pay or contribute to the premiums are income to the employee under s CE 11. 22. There are no specific provisions that apply to make claim payments under other personal sickness or accident insurance policies income. Therefore, claim payments under these policies will be income only if they are income under ordinary concepts (s CA 1(2)). 23. Whether a claim payment under an insurance policy is income or not will depend on the relationship between the payer and the recipient and the purpose of the payment (Reid v CIR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,176). Where a claim payment is made to replace income which the recipient would otherwise have earned or where the purpose of the payments is to provide the recipient with amounts to meet their living expenses, the payments are likely to be income. Claim payments that are regular or recurring are much more likely to be income (Reid). However, a one-off claim payment may still be income (FCT v Hyteco Hiring Pty Ltd 92 ATC 4,694). 24. Therefore, the claim payments that are most likely to be income are payments that are intended to compensate an insured person for lost income (whether periodic, or lump sum) and other regular or periodic payments intended to help the insured person meet their living expenses. Other lump sum and reimbursing payments are unlikely to be income (for example, a lump sum payment made for the loss of a limb, or a payment reimbursing medical expenses). 25. Claim payments that are not “income” (either under s CE 11 or s CA 1(2)) will not be taxable. If a claim payment is “income”, it is necessary to consider whether it is assessable income or exempt income. Is the claim payment exempt income of the employee? 26. The relevant exemption provision is s CW 34. A claim payment of income made under a policy of personal sickness or accident insurance will be exempt under s CW 34 if:  It is made to a person because they (or another person) are incapacitated for work; and either o the payment is made by a friendly society; or o the payment is not calculated according to a loss of earnings. 27. If the claim payment does not meet these criteria, it will be assessable income. 28. The following diagram sets out the process for determining how a claim amount paid out under a policy should be treated. Each claim payment needs to be considered separately. As noted above, where a single claim payment is made for more than one thing, apportionment may be required: QB 18/05: 23 Feb 2018 6 UNCLASSIFIED Treatment of claim payment made to a person under a policy of personal sickness or accident insurance Application date 29. This QWBA reflects changes to s CX 16, which came into force on 30 March 2017. The QWBA, therefore, applies from that date. For the position prior to 30 March 2017, see QB 15/10: “Income Tax – Insurance – Personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” Tax Information Bulletin Volume Twenty Seven, No 10 (November 2015). 30. The following example is included to assist in explaining the application of the law. Example Keith’s employer takes out medical insurance policies for each of its senior staff. The policies pay out various amounts if the insured person contracts a disease or becomes sick. Keith’s employer is allowed a deduction for the premiums. The premiums are subject to FBT because a fringe benefit arises under s CX 16. QB 18/05: 23 Feb 2018 7 UNCLASSIFIED Keith contracts influenza and is hospitalised. Keith receives a $10,000 claim payment as a reimbursement of his hospital expenses. Keith wants to know whether to include the $10,000 in his income. The $10,000 is not income. The amount is not income under ordinary concepts. It is a one-off payment. Also, it is not paid to compensate Keith for lost income. 31. References Subject references Expenditure on account of an employee FBT Fringe benefit Income protection insurance Life insurance Personal sickness or accident insurance Legislative references Income Tax Act 2007: ss CA 1, CE 1(1), CE 5, CE 11, CX 2, CX 16, CX 31, DA 1, DA 2, GB 32, RD 3, RD 5(2) and the definition of “expenditure on account of an employee” in s YA 1 Other references “Life and accident insurance policies” Public Information Bulletin No 106 (July 1980): 2 “Staff insurance schemes” Public Information Bulletin No 70 (December 1972): 11 QB 15/10: “Income Tax – Insurance – personal sickness and accident insurance taken out by employer for the benefit of an employee” Tax Information Bulletin Volume Twenty Seven, No 10 (November 2015). Case references FCT v Hyteco Hiring Pty Ltd 92 ATC 4,694 Reid v CIR (1985) 7 NZTC 5,176