Regulatory I mpact Statement | 4 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] imposed on the analysis there is limited scope to further define the problem the policy is addressing. Consultation with the sector has not been undertaken. The RIS would hav e benefited from feedback from consultation, including the views of the stakeholders on the options considered in the RIS. Regulatory I mpact Statement | 5 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Section 1: Diagnosing the policy problem What is the context behind the policy problem and how is the status quo expected to develop? 1. The assumed policy problem is that the cost of early childhood education (ECE) is high relative to families’ incomes. The following section provides context on the ECE sector and future outlook on ECE affordability. 2. The 2022 Early Childhood Education Census showed that there were just over 181,000 children attending licensed early childhood services. Children attended for an average of 21.6 hours per week. Participation rates are highest for 3- and 4-year-olds, where 80% and 84% of children in the respective age groups were attending ECE in 2022. There were 4,597 licensed services operating at the time of the Census. 1 3. Existing regulatory systems are in place to support families with childcare costs. These range from universal and specific ECE supports, such as childcare subsidies, to broader income adequacy payments that contribute towards the cost of raising children, such as the Family tax credit and Best Start tax credit. These supports have different policy rationales, including increasing workforce participation, increasing ECE attendance rates, providing a greater range of choice for parents (both in where to send their children and whether to send them to ECE at all), and alleviating child poverty by supporting income adequacy through direct payments. 4. Childcare supports are administered by several different agencies, including the Ministry of Education (MoE), the Ministry of Social Development (MSD) and Inland Revenue (IR). Support is provided either direct to the parent or direct to the service provider. 5. Each form of support targets a slightly different group and objective, with different eligibility requirements. People may be eligible for one or more of these supports. Examples of the supports include: • The ECE Subsidy. A universal subsidy paid directly to ECE providers for all children attending the ECE service with a daily limit of 6 hours per day and a weekly limit of 30 hours per week. • 20 Hours ECE Subsidy. A subsidy paid directly by MoE to ECE providers based on the number of children enrolled. The 20 hours covered by this subsidy replace the first 20 hours of the ECE subsidy. Associated with this funding are restrictions that specify parents cannot be charged fees for the 20 hours. • The Childcare Subsidy. Administered by MSD and paid directly to the ECE service provider for children up to the age of six of low- to middle-income families 2 . This subsidy is normally paid for up to nine hours of ECE a week if the parent(s) are not working, studying or training 3 and up to fifty hours a week if the parent(s) are working, disabled, or meet other conditions required by MSD. • Donations Tax Credit. Individuals can claim 33 percent of donations up to the amount of their taxable income. ECE payments can be claimed if they are 1 Some of the census information was very recently updated for 2023 data. The total number of children in ECE has increased. 2 Families are eligible if they earn less than: $2,144 before tax a week with 1 dependent child $2,450 before tax a week with 2 dependent children $2,756 before tax a week with 3 or more dependent children. 3 Policy responsibility for the 9-hours component of Childcare Subsidy sits with Oranga Tamariki Regulatory I mpact Statement | 6 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] optional and go to general funds and the service is an approved donee organisation/charity. • Working for Families (WFF) tax credits, including the Family tax credit, In-work tax credit and Best Start tax credit. This programme is administered by Inland Revenue and MSD and provides a direct payment to families with children, including those in the early childhood age group. Best Start is targeted to parents with children aged 0 to 3 years old. 6. These above payments are periodically increased in value, either by automatic adjustment or periodic review. The exception to this is the Donations Tax Credit, which is set at a fixed proportion of charitable spending and will automatically reflect any increased donations on childcare but is limited to a fixed proportion of taxable income earned. 7. It should be noted that due to a lack of reliable access to fees data it is currently difficult for any government agency to provide advice on how effective the above interventions are in reducing ECE costs for parents and caregivers. Future outlook on ECE affordability 8. It is anticipated that without Government intervention, the current high inflation environment and trends in the price measures for the ECE sector may result in ECE costs continuing to increase. 9. Other factors for the increase in ECE costs may include lack of fees transparency resulting in inefficient markets (from information asymmetries), increasing operating costs, and demand exceeding the supply of ECE centres in some locations. Additionally, there are non-monetary regulations in place for the ECE sector which can increase the cost of delivery. 10. The recent repeal of the planned extension of 20 Hour ECE to 2-year-olds also reduces future support to some families to meet ECE costs. 11. If ECE costs do rise, an increasing number of families may no longer be able to afford some ECE hours. This may restrict their ability to work or could result in pressure on other types of family spending to maintain ECE hours, consequently reducing families’ income adequacy, work incentives and/or ECE participation rates. Limitations on Policy Analysis 12. As providing prompt support to families facing cost of living pressures, through targeted assistance with ECE costs, is a priority, the Government has directed Inland Revenue to implement a childcare tax credit by 1 July 2024 to increase the incomes of families who have children in ECE. 13. This, alongside standard policy limitations such as time constraints and lack of available data, has constrained Inland Revenue’s ability to do a comprehensive policy analysis. This section expands on those limitations and the impact they have had on the policy analysis. Lack of fees data 14. Comprehensive fees data is not available from either MSD or MoE: • MoE has an existing mechanism called the Early Learning Information collection (ELI), which collects attendance data and systems which store each child’s name, date of birth and National Student Number (NSN). However, MoE does not collect any fees data from families or providers. MoE had received funding in Budget 2023 to construct a system through which providers would report their standard fee rates to the Ministry. This system has not yet been implemented and would not provide Regulatory I mpact Statement | 7 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] granular detail on individual families’ fees, including what portion of those fees are covered by other government supports. • MSD holds comprehensive fees information for a small population, including the portion of the fee that is covered by other government support. However, this data is only held for recipients of the Childcare Subsidy ( 35,000 recipients for the 2022/23 year), therefore is not representative, and is collected via a manual process that places a high administrative burden on families, ECE providers and MSD staff. This process is not easily scalable. 15. Without comprehensive fees data, it is difficult for any government agency to determine the severity of ECE costs on families (including trends for the future), the factors that increase ECE costs (e.g., operational costs, impact of government regulation on the sector), and the efficacy of current and future government interventions in reducing ECE costs for parents and caregivers. 16. Instead, Inland Revenue has had to make assumptions about the severity of the policy problem and find alternative ways to feasibly implement a tax credit linked to childcare expenditure without easy access to current fees data. Policy design limitations 17. The Government has requested a new tax credit, “FamilyBoost”, that prioritises the following parameters: • direct payment to eligible parents on a household basis, • the payment be proportional to parents’ actual childcare costs up to a capped amount per household, • the maximum payment be abated according to household income, • a regular payment, • administered by Inland Revenue, and, • implementable by 1 July 2024 to address current cost of living pressures. 18. These parameters define the set of options officials can examine in this analysis, meaning some significantly different alternatives to those proposed in this paper have not been considered in detail. Instead, the scope of policy options presented to Ministers have been limited to variations of direct tax credits that Inland Revenue can administer to increase incomes of families utilising ECE. 19. If there had been more scope and time available to do a comprehensive options analysis, Inland Revenue (alongside other agencies) would have considered a wider range of policy options to address the problem, including: • reducing ECE fees through a direct subsidy to providers, • regulatory price controls or changes to reduce the impact of other regulatory systems that increase operational costs for providers (e.g., play space requirements), or • increases to incomes of families utilising ECE through other government support and/or wage growth. 20. This options analysis would include considering whether other agencies would be better suited to implement a new or expanded existing support instead of Inland Revenue. Lack of public consultation 21. We have not been able to undertake any consultation with the public at this stage of the policy process due to time constraints and budget secrecy conventions, despite the potential for significant compliance costs on the ECE sector and parents in implementing a childcare tax credit. For example, depending on the tax credit model selected, parents may either be required to periodically upload invoices (with ECE Regulatory I mpact Statement | 9 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] families can afford ECE, they may still be incentivised to not work if the ECE fees exceed the net income gained from working. 28. Inland Revenue does not have data available to support the implications of high ECE costs relative to income on families in New Zealand on income adequacy or various participation measures. Impacts of high ECE costs relative to income on population groups 29. High ECE costs relative to income disproportionately affects women, Māori and Pa sifika, lower-income and rural population groups. 30. Women are disproportionately impacted by high ECE costs as they are more likely to take time out of the labour force to care for children, including as sole parents. 5 This impacts on a woman’s long run labour market outcomes and increasing the gender wage gap. Therefore, any policy intervention to improve accessibility of childcare is more likely to benefit women by increasing work incentives, especially policy interventions that are targeted towards second earners or solo parents. 31. Research indicates that payment for childcare when children are at 4 or 5 years old varies by ethnicity. Survey data by Growing Up in New Zealand (Aotearoa's largest longitudinal study of child health and wellbeing) shows that “76 percent of families overall pay for care, with paying for care high among Europeans (78%) and Asians (77%), and lower among Māori (67%) and Pasifika (61%)”. 6 This means any government support targeted at alleviating ECE costs will provide a reduced benefit to Māori and Pasifika families due to these two groups being less likely to pay for childcare, either due to ECE subsidies covering the cost already, lower ECE participation, or greater participation in informal/non-cash-based childcare. 32. A reduced benefit will also apply to wider groups of parents who have low or no fees. This extends to lower income households (who are likely more eligible for other subsidies) and rural groups (who may have limited geographic access to childcare options). Alternatively, any policy intervention to reduce ECE costs relative to income may increase uptake if cost is a barrier to these groups for accessing childcare, although we are uncertain of the impact of cost on ECE participation. What objectives are sought in relation to the policy problem? 33. There are several potential objectives that a childcare tax credit could accomplish which will inform which of the potential options is preferred. 34. The Government has outlined the primary objective of “FamilyBoost” as directly increasing the incomes of families who have children in ECE ( targeted by level of household income with full abatement at $180,000 household income). 35. Other potential objectives of a childcare tax credit include: • Decreasing the amount payable for childcare costs • Greater fee transparency in the ECE sector • Increasing ECE participation • Improving children’s educational and/or development outcomes • Increasing labour market participation rates 5 82.4 percent of single parent households are led by women, and 91 percent of Sole Parent Support recipients are women (Ministry for Women). 6 See Sin, I. (2022). How do childcare experiences differ by ethnicity and for families with previous childcare access issues? Motu Economic and Public Policy Research. https://www.motu.nz/assets/Uploads/Use-of- childcare-after-access-issues-note-FINAL.pdf Regulatory I mpact Statement | 10 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] 36. These alternative objectives have not been a consideration in assessing options to implement a childcare tax credit, but it is likely that these will be impacted by achieving the primary objective nonetheless. 37. Alongside the primary objective of increasing incomes of families who have children in ECE, we have designed policy options within the parameters of the following secondary objectives: • is timely and feasible to be implemented, • aligns as closely as possible with the Government’s policy proposal, and, • minimises cost to government and compliance burden on parents. Regulatory I mpact Statement | 11 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Section 2: Deciding upon an option to address the policy problem What criteria will be used to compare options to the status quo? 38. The criteria which will be used to compare options are: • Increases in the income of eligible families • Potential to promote fee transparency • Compliance costs for providers (including ECE centres and student management system providers) • Compliance costs for parents/caregivers • Administrative costs • Fiscal cost to the government • Time required for implementation What scope will options be considered within? 39. The scope is limited to the parameters requested by the Government for the “FamilyBoost” tax credit. In addition, the administration of a childcare tax credit (if proportional to ECE expenditure) requires access to fees information that is linked to individual parents or caregivers, the children in their care, and to their family income. 40. While Inland Revenue has some of the data required to administer a childcare tax credit (i.e., income data and bank account information for some potential recipients), other essential data is held by ECE providers and parents (i.e., ECE fee payments and enrolment/attendance details, relationship and household details). 41. Other agencies (MoE and MSD) also receive some of the necessary data, but not enough to implement “FamilyBoost” by 1 July 2024. • MoE receive enrolment and attendance data for individual children from providers, but this does not include fees information. The child is also not linked to the parent in the MoE data set and neither MoE nor the ECE providers hold household income information. • MSD are provided with some fees information from ECE providers and income information from parents for the Childcare Subsidy (35,000 recipients across 2022/23), but this is limited to fees information for lower-income families, and the information is manually collected and not easily scalable to cover the target group for “FamilyBoost”. In comparison to MSD, Inland Revenue has wider access to individual income information and an existing family’s data set linking a significant number of children to parents for WFF tax credits and Child Support. 42. Without current access to the fees data, the scope of policy options has been further limited to variations of direct payments that Inland Revenue can feasibly administer using known data sources and interactions, to increase incomes of families using ECE. 43. Implementing a product that meets the parameters set out by the Government will require new legislation and regulation and cannot be implemented within the Commissioner of Inland Revenue’s existing powers. As such, there is not a non- regulatory option available. Regulatory Impact Statement | 18 \[UNCLASSIFIED\] Section 3: Delivering an option How will the new arrangements be implemented? 61. The implementation details are dependent on the option selected, and as such the following is a preliminary indication of our approach. Implementation arrangements 62. The Government has identified Inland Revenue as the administrator of the payment. Introducing a new tax credit would have a significantly high organisational impact on Inland Revenue to support the anticipated increase in initial and ongoing customer contact. 63. The organisational impacts include systems changes (either through developing a new system or utilising an existing system as a base for the tax credit) and investment into change management/staff training to support customers and ensure compliance. Additional staff would be required to manage additional contacts and support parents. This investment includes developing education and guidance thorough the Inland Revenue website to relevant stakeholders (ECE providers, student software system providers and parents) and for customer service to assist in any queries to ensure eligible parents are aware of and can access the credit. 64. Depending on the preferred option, “FamilyBoost” could come into effect as early as 1 July 2024 (Option 2), or as late as 2026 (Option 3) . The design of Option 2 has accounted for an earlier implementation date of 1 July 2024, but does give short notice to ECE providers to update their invoices and to Inland Revenue to build the tax credit. As such it comes with risks around time to deliver. Option Three allows for sufficient consultation and preparation time for all parties. 65. Consultation with the ECE sector as part of the childcare tax credit work programme presents an opportunity for discussion about improving ECE data collections more generally, either as part of, or as a complement to the implementation of a childcare tax credit. Implementation risks 66. A detailed assessment of implementation risks is yet to be compiled as it depends on which option is to be progressed. However, any option risks adding complexity to an already complex income support system and ECE support system. This can impose a burden on parents to understand and access the various supports, including requiring parents to interact with multiple agencies. Furthermore, it affects agencies’ ability to distinguish the individual and combined efficacy of income and ECE supports. 67. The other risk relevant to either option is that IT system changes pose high uncertainty due to their complexity which can extend the time it takes to build, test, and implement any new products. This means any identified timeframes are an estimate, especially when the two options are reliant on ECE providers updating their systems, either with a minor adjustment (changing their invoices to comply) or a large adjustment (supplying ECE fees information to the government). This also impacts the software providers that ECE providers use. 68. Particular to Option 2, are the risks that there will be lower take-up due to compliance costs on parents, integrity risks associated with invoices or disclosed personal incomes, the implementation date of 1 July 2024 sitting within Inland Revenue’s peak period of demand resulting in reduced levels of customer support available across Inland Revenue. Finally, there is a risk that the basic refund model will become entrenched without a replacement model ever designed and implemented. 69. Option 3 carries less integrity risk (as it would be largely automated) but is reliant on ECE providers being able and willing to update their systems to create information