Pa ge 1 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Business Transformation Programme Reporting Guidelines Prepared by Date: 18/ 06/21 v1.15 Page 2 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] About this document The purpose of this document is to provide guidance to project coordinators, project managers and sub -p rogramme/workstream leads to complete the status report templates. These guidelines have been prepared by the BT Programme Management Office (PMO) and Release Delivery Support Lead. Document control File name and path http://btsharepoint.ed.ird.govt.nz/ProgTemp/BT Reporting Guidelines Contact person Status DRAFT | FOR REVIEW | FINAL Template version 0.07 BT UiD 10825 Document review history No. Date Change Description Contact 1.00 04/09/2017 Document signed off 1.01 9/04/2018 Document updated to reflect BT Framework and other applicable changes 1.02 10/04/2018 Document updated following peer review and feedback. 1.03 17/04/2018 Document provided for review following recently released guidance around improved reporting to governance forums. 1.04 23/04/2018 Final amendments and sign off. 1.05 22/06/2018 Drafted on behalf of XX as per the recent changes. 1.06 22/06/2018 Incorporated updates and feedback from XX 1.07 22/06/2018 Final amendments and sign off. 1.08 05/08/2018 Amended as per updated reporting timing; revised status reporting guidance and PMO inform detail. 1.09 30/04/2019 Updated EV to schedule performance 1.10 01/10/2019 Minor edits, and updated links as applicable. 1.11 06/01/2020 Reviewed and updated as applicable. 1.12 08/01/2020 Second revision. Ready for further review. 1.13 17/02/2020 Updated templates section - there is no one template 1.14 15/01/2021 Updates to reflect programme reporting updates and progress. Updated RACI with current BT PMO Lead and Project Co-ordinator. Updated 2021 reporting calendar link & BT Glossary link. 1.15 18/06/2021 Review and updates to cadence and deadlines Page 3 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Document signoff (RACI) Formal Review Area Name/Title Signature Date Responsible Person 15/01/2021 Accountable Person 15/01/2021 The following people/groups have been Informed of the development and completion of this document Page 4 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Contents 1 Frequency of Reporting .................................................................................... 5 1.1 Report cadence and deadline ................................................................................ 5 2 Completing the Reporting Templates ................................................................ 5 2.1 Template location ................................................................................................ 5 2.2 Report location .................................................................................................... 5 2.3 Executive Summary and Path to Green ................................................................... 6 2.4 8- key RAG status guidelines.................................................................................. 7 2.5 Schedule Performance .......................................................................................... 7 2.6 Commentary ....................................................................................................... 7 2.6.1 Escalations and Required Decisions ........................................................................ 7 2.6.2 Key achievements................................................................................................ 7 2.6.3 Keys and Schedule Performance ............................................................................ 7 2.6.4 Key Activities/ Deliverables ................................................................................... 7 2.7 General Tips ....................................................................................................... 7 3 Programme Reporting ...................................................................................... 9 3.1 Programme Leadership Team (PLT)........................................................................ 9 3.2 Portfolio Governance Committee (PGC), Portfolio Office and Central Monitoring Agencies ......................................................................................................................... 9 3.3 BT Release Management Meeting and Release Delivery Meeting ................................ 9 APPENDIX 1: RAG status guidelines ......................................................................... 10 APPENDIX 2: The 10 Keys to Success - Management Approach ................................ 11 APPENDIX 3: Adding the RAG colour theme to your report ....................................... 13 Page 5 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 1 Frequency of Reporting 1.1 Report cadence and deadline Reporting is due fortnightly for delivery workstreams and monthly for delivery support workstreams/all of programme services. Please note that there are some exceptions so please refer to the • PMO reporting flow diagram • Report inform diagram • Reporting Summary, and • Reporting Calendar for further detail. These artefacts are located on the Reporting SharePoint site. The monthly reporting deadline aligns to the Thursday, two weeks prior to the Portfolio Governance Committee (PGC) meeting. If the PGC meeting falls on an alternate date, due to a public holiday, or other circumstances, the BT PMO will communicate and advise the specific reporting period and timeline for completing the report. • Status reports are saved in SharePoint Reporting library by 12pm on Thursday • Updated to “Final” status and “Published” by 5pm on Thursday. • The deadlines may be extended to noon on Friday with prior approval from the PMO. The BT PMO Project Coordinator will create the necessary report folders in SharePoint and circulate a reminder email at the start of the reporting week. The BT Release Delivery Support Lead conducts a quality assurance review of all reports, creates the draft the Release Summary and the BT Programme Monthly Report pack, including and BT E xecutive S ummary Status. This is reviewed by the BT PMO prior to submission to the BT Programme Manager and BT Deputy Commissioner. The BT Release Delivery Support Lead prepares the bi-monthly joint ministers executive summary and submits this to the responsible Portfolio Domain Specialist. 2 Completing the Reporting Templates 2.1 Template location The BT report template is located on the Reporting SharePoint site. The template can also be found by going to the BT SharePoint home page and clicking on Templates and Processes site (see Figure 1 below), then scrolling down to the Reporting heading. Figure 1 2.2 Report location To navigate to the status reports, click on PMO at the very top of the BT SharePoint home page then click on Reporting Library under the Standard Library heading down the left-hand side of the page (see Figure 2). Figure 2 Page 6 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] There are separate folders for the fortnightly and monthly status reports, sorted by reporting date. It is recommended that you save your report/s into this area as soon as you commence working on them. • Please ensure you update the SharePoint status from “In draft/Work in Progress” to “Final/Approved” once ready and released by the Delivery Lead. • Please publish a major version (Major 1.00) by the cut off time, as late reports may not be included in the final pack. Once your reports are uploaded to the correct folder, please ensure the “BT Workstream” and/or “Sub Programme” fields are updated as applicable (see Figures 3, 4 and 5). Figure 3 Figure 4 Figure 5 2.3 Executive Summary and Path to Green The top row of the status report, directly below the overall RAG, is for the executive level status summary. This executive summary is particularly important as is replicated into the Programme level reports which are used for both programme and external reporting. The summary should therefore be pitched at the senior executive, programme sponsor and programme leadership level. A view of progress towards key dates with a focus on exceptions and the “go to green” plan/s is very important. Remember that this is consumed by both internal and external IR executives and the Enterprise Portfolio Offi ce, so it is imperative not to overlook the need to support RAG trend and provide rationale. Where the workstream is reporting Light Amber or worse, p lease provide the “go to green plan/s” as applicable. These should include: • what’s required • what impact this will have on schedule • the status of these plans • required resources • associated risk • a measure of confidence in returning to Green Page 7 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 2.4 8-key RAG status guidelines Each status report needs to provide a RAG status against the eight keys. Please refer to Appendix 1 RAG status guidelines and Appendix 2 colour theme guidelines. 2.5 Schedule Performance Schedules are to be updated by 12 noon weekly Thursday. The BT PMO will provide a schedule performance (SP) report in PDF format by COB Thursday. These reports are located on the Programme Planning SharePoint site. Use your Snipping Tool to copy and paste the graph into your report as applicable. Any queries should be directed to the BT PMO Programme Planner. 2.6 Commentary If acronyms are used, please ensure these are written in full first with the acronym in brackets. Please refer the BT Programme Glossary and add new acronyms as required. 2.6.1 Escalations and Required Decisions List any escalations, special notes and or decisions relevant for this reporting period (this includes any risks, issues, etc you may wish to escalate). 2.6.2 Key achievements List the top two or three key achievements during the reporting period. It is important to note that the text in this key achievement area is used for reporting to Ministers and the Corporate Centre (i.e. Central Monitoring Agencies) so the text should not include any acronyms, individuals’ names, or commercially sensitive information (e.g. vendor procurement details). 2.6.3 Keys and Schedule Performance Briefly explain any relevant movement in the keys and variance in schedule performance and to refer to any risks and/or issues you may have under management. The keys that are in exception must be supported by your main go-to-green plans – which are covered in the summary. Please consider adding rationale for significant items or if schedule performance (variance against planned to date) is tracking +/- 5% ( based on volume/scope of work). 2.6.4 Key Activities/ Deliverables Provide the key “big rock”/leading activities and deliverables that anchor the workstream to the release schedule and provide a structured progress reporting framework, with RAG and completion status/commentary. 2.7 General Tips Please keep your reporting in plain English, be concise, and report in as few acronyms as possible. • Confine commentary to essential information only and cut back on non-essential detail. If the report is too lengthy it may not be read or understood • Clearly identify if support or action is required from PLT • Remember your audience – not all will have detailed knowledge of the subject matter • Please check your spelling and grammar, do not use us or we – say the team or similar Page 8 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] • Please refer to the Terminology Guidance • Please refer to the BT Framework d ocument which defines the key terms and also specifies the naming of the terms used by the Programme Page 9 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 3 Programme Reporting The report inform diagram provides an explanation of where individual sections of the reported information is used in aggregate reporting summaries, dashboards and presentations. 3.1 Programme Leadership Team (PLT) The monthly Programme Dashboard (BT Programme status update) is produced by the Release Delivery Support Lead and BT PMO Project Coordinator. This is provided to the Programme Leadership Team and Commissioner for reference. 3.2 Portfolio Governance Committee (PGC), Portfolio Office and Central Monitoring Agencies The monthly reports are also provided to the Portfolio Governance Committee (PGC), Portfolio Office and Central Agencies (Corporate Centre). The monthly Programme Dashboard (BT Programme status update) is used as the key input into the Portfolio Office report. A cut-down version of the Portfolio Office report, focussed on the 10-keys, is then provided to Central Monitoring Agencies and used as a discussion point at regular monitoring meetings, which are held bi-monthly. Central Monitoring Agencies receive the monthly PGC Dashboard including all in-scope workstream reports (refer to the Scope section of the PMO QA Monthly Reporting Process for the current list). 3.3 BT Release Management Meeting and Release Delivery Meeting The fortnightly status reports are consolidated by the Release Delivery Support Lead to produce the “Release Status Report”. These reports are used as input to the BT Release Management and Release Delivery meetings. Page 10 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] APPENDIX 1: RAG status guidelines Key Red Light Red Amber Light Amber Light Green Green Headline Highly problematic Problematic Problematic Problematic in defined areas Not problematic Not problematic Overall status Not on target to succeed. ‘Extreme’ priority rated issues, from which it is only possible to recover from with significant executive management intervention and focussed implementation of the mitigating actions. Risks are rated as ‘Extreme’ at residual level AND Mitigations are not effective. Risks are expected to eventuate. Escalation to Programme Senior Responsible Owner (SRO). Not on target to succeed. ‘Very High’ priority rated issues, from which it is predicted it is only possible to recover from with significant senior management focus to implement the mitigating actions. The profile of risks includes several ‘Extreme’ at current level and ‘Very High’ at residual level AND Mitigations are slipping or poor. Escalation to DC Transformation May not be on target to succeed. ‘High’ priority rated issues, from which it is predicted that with support, appropriate mitigation and focus will not impact the critical path. The profile of risks includes several ‘Very High’ at current level and ‘High’ at residual level. Mitigations in place but are at risk of slipping. Escalation to Release Programme Manager Deviating from target in some specific and non- critical areas. Minor / “medium level” issues with remedial actions in progress that with project/workstream lead support and focus are expected to be successful and not impact key dates There are risks that are rated as ‘Medium’ at the residual level with appropriate mitigations in place. Escalation to Project/Workstream Lead Generally, on target. Low’ level issues with effective mitigations or treatments. Some minor intervention is required in non-critical areas but expected to stay on track. There are risks that are rated as ‘Low’ at the residual level, with some rated as ‘‘Very High’ or, ‘High’ at current level - appropriate mitigations are in place. No escalation required On target. Low’ level issues with effective mitigations or treatments. Can be managed without intervention on a day to day basis. All risks relevant to this work-stream are rated as ‘Negligible’ at the residual level and none of these are rated as ‘Very High’, ‘High’ at current level. No escalation required Workstream Reporting Not possible to recover even with suitable mitigation and focus Possible to recover with significant senior management focus to implement the mitigation actions Support needed from senior management to implement the mitigating actions Minor issues that can be managed and resolved at the project / workstream level Some minor intervention is required in non-critical areas to stay on track Managed without intervention on a day to day basis The full RAG Status Definitions guidance can be found on the BT SharePoint site. Any queries should be directed to the Release Delivery Support Lead. Page 11 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] APPENDIX 2: The 10 Keys to Success - Management Approach This framework ensures: • early indication of the Programme’s health • timely information, insights and inputs to adjust plans and behaviours. Milestones/ Deliverables/Plan Risks ScopeResourcesStakeholders Issues Delivery Partnerships Interdependencies BenefitsFinancials 10 Keys to Success Business Transformation 10 Keys to Success for Reporting Overall Status Use the RAG Status Definitions to assess the RAG status. Where additional commentary is provided across your workstreams then their individual health status should also be considered in the overall health status of the s ub-Programme/Workstream. Scope This key is focussed on ensuring that the scope is realistic and managed. It aims at agreeing, managing, and modifying as required the scope of work to be delivered to accomplish the sub - Programme/Workstream objectives. Risks This key is focused on identifying risks, evaluating them and developing mitigations and contingency plans to effectively manage these and minimise impacts on the Programme. All Risks are recorded in JIRA. Issues This key is focused on identifying issues, evaluating them and developing mitigations and contingency plans to effectively manage these and minimise impacts on the Programme. All Issues are recorded in JIRA. Interdependencies This key focuses on effectively identifying, monitoring, and managing key dependencies within Business Transformation or where Business Transformation is dependent. All Dependencies are recorded in JIRA and the sub-Programme/Workstream schedules. Page 12 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Schedule This key focusses on how well the sub-Programme/Workstream is progressing with deliverables against its baselined plan. Resources This key aims at identifying, recruiting, mobilising, structuring, leading and motivating the people necessary for successful completion. Can the sub-Programme/Workstream deliver against its baseline p lan with the current level of resource, or are there resourcing issues? Stakeholder Engagement This key aims at identifying, evaluating, informing, influencing and maintaining support by individuals and groups affected by or influencing the Programme. How effective are the relationships between the sub-Programme/Workstream and its key stakeholders? Are there any issues relating to stakeholders? Delivery Partners This key reflects the Programme’s aim to establish and manage meaningful and effective relationships with third party providers to the Programme. Finance This key is reported at BT Programme level only. Benefits This key is reported at BT Programme level only. Page 13 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] APPENDIX 3: Adding the RAG colour theme to your report • Open a Word document • Click on the “Design” tab along the ribbon • Select “Browse for Themes” • Copy the following into the “File Name” text box: https://irnz.sharepoint.com/sites/BT/PMO/admin/RAG%20Status%20Colours%20PLT.thmx • Click “Open” • Within the “Design” tab, select “Colours” • Select your “Custom” theme at the top of the list and then “Customize Colours” (at the bottom) • Edit “Hyperlink” and “Followed Hyperlink” to black font, rename your theme, eg “RAG Status colours PLT” and hit “Save” • This Custom Colour theme will now be saved in Word and can be accessed via the colour pallet – Custom Colours Page 14 of 14 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] • You can then find your RAG Status Colours in Theme colours at the top. • The colour customisation is as shown: