Regulatory Impact Statement | 4 presentation of a range of quantitative analysis of the key fiscal and distributional elements of the package. The key reason the assurance panel considers this RIS does not fully meet the RIS criteria is the absence of public consultation on the specific proposals/options beyond discussions with private sector software providers and payroll service providers. Although the pre-election policies of all the parties forming the current Government included tax cuts, the specific proposals that are the subject of this RIS have not been formally consulted on. However, the Panel does acknowledge the limitations associated with the Budget-sensitive nature of these proposals. Regulatory Impact Statement | 5 Section 1: Diagnosi ng the policy proble m W h a t i s t h e c o n t e x t b e h i n d t h e p o l i c y p r o b l e m a n d h o w i s t h e st a t u s q u o e x p e c t e d t o d e v e l o p? 1. New Zealand’s progressive personal income tax (PIT) system means individuals pay higher marginal tax rates as their incomes rise above certain income thresholds. When prices and incomes rise from generalised inflation and wage growth, but nominal income tax thresholds remain unchanged, individuals end up paying a larger proportion of their income in tax. 2. The structure of the PIT system was most recently changed in 2021, with the introduction of a 39% rate for income over $180,000. All other rates and thresholds have been in place since 1 October 2010. Personal incomes have risen since that time, leading to higher average tax rates on personal income. The current rates and thresholds are shown in Table 1. Table 1: Current personal income tax rates For each dollar of income Tax rate Up to $14,000 10.5% Over $14,000 and up to $48,000 17.5% Over $48,000 and up to $70,000 30% Over $70,000 and up to $180,000 33% Over $180,000 39% 3. This phenomenon of rising incomes and fixed tax thresholds, known as “fiscal drag”, increases the amount of PIT revenue collected and has been a significant means by which governments have addressed growing fiscal pressures since 2010. 4. Since 1 October 2010 (the last time personal income tax thresholds were adjusted) the most significant impact from fiscal drag has been on individuals whose incomes had just crossed the $48,000 threshold at the time (assuming their incomes have continued to grow in line with average wage growth). This is because of the steep increase in their marginal tax rate from 17.5% to 30%. 5. The median full-time wage and salary worker earned $48,024 in the year ended June 2011 and paid $7,427 in personal income tax. In the year ended June 2023, the median full-time wage and salary worker earned $73,417 and paid $15,148 in personal income tax. Owing to the effect of fiscal drag, their average tax rate (the total tax paid per dollar of income) increased by 5.1 percentage points from 15.5% to 20.6% between 2011 - 2023. Their marginal tax rate also increased from 30% to 33%. 6. To completely offset the impact of fiscal drag for the median earner, personal income tax thresholds would have to be lifted by the same proportion that the median wage has increased, i.e., by 53%. This would substantially reduce the revenue collected by the personal income tax system and would likely not be a fiscally sustainable option. 7. If adjustments to PIT thresholds are not made, fiscal drag is projected to continue in the future as incomes continue to grow. In the 2024 Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update, average wages were forecast to increase by 16.6% between 2024 and 2028. 8. As more earners move into the higher tax brackets, there is a broad flattening in the taxation of incomes and the progressivity of the PIT system decreases. With the increase in the minimum wage to $23.15 per hour from 1 April 2024, a minimum-wage earner working 40 hours per week will earn $48,284 per year. This means that under Regulatory Impact Statement | 6 current settings, all full-time earners will have a marginal tax rate (the rate they pay on an additional dollar of income) of 30% or more and the most progressive stages of the personal tax system will be below the level of the full-time minimum wage. 9. Similar impacts can be seen for tax credits that have fixed income thresholds where credits start to abate. The Independent Earner Tax Credit (IETC) was introduced in 2009 to provide a targeted tax reduction of up to $520 per year to earners between $24,000 and $48,000 who do not receive other transfer payments. The IETC abates at a rate of 13 cents for every dollar earned over $44,000 and fully abates at $48,000. These abatement thresholds have not been adjusted in the 15 years since the IETC was introduced, meaning the target population has changed significantly. 10. For example, a full-time worker on the minimum wage in 2009 earned around $26,000 and would have received the full IETC payment assuming they met other eligibility requirements. In 2024, an individual working 40 hours per week on the minimum wage would earn just over the income limit of $48,000 and would not receive the IETC. W h a t i s t h e p o l i c y p r o b l e m o r o p p o r t u n i t y? 11. As described above, fiscal drag has the potential to erode the progressivity of the personal income tax system and has other impacts that may not align with Government objectives: • The increase in annual tax liability from fiscal drag is uneven across income levels, with the greatest impact occurring as the $48,000 income threshold is crossed. Full-time minimum wage earners will therefore be heavily affected in coming years. • The average rate of tax on total personal income increases over time, reducing economic efficiency as people’s decisions are more heavily impacted by tax. • The increase in tax from fiscal drag is arguably less transparent than explicit changes to tax settings and may engender less public debate. • When inflation exceeds wage growth, people’s tax burden increases even as their ability to pay for goods and services decreases. 12. The desired level of progressivity in the PIT system is a judgement for ministers to make. Any decision to address fiscal drag by adjusting PIT thresholds will also depend on the revenue needs of the Government and their economic goals. W h a t o b j e c t i v e s a r e s o u g h t i n r e l a t i o n t o t he p o l i c y p r o b l e m ? 13. In the National-ACT coalition agreement, a commitment was made to: “Ensure the concepts of ACT’s income tax policy are considered as a pathway to delivering National’s promised tax relief, subject to no earner being worse off than they would be under National’s plan.” 14. Both the National Party and the ACT Party announced plans for PIT relief during the 2023 general election, with the stated objectives as summarised in Table 2. 15. The New Zealand First Party also campaigned on tax relief in response to fiscal drag, and a commitment was made in the National-New Zealand First coalition agreement to, “by or before 2026, assess the impact inflation has had on the average tax rates faced by income earners.” Regulatory Impact Statement | 11 29. Fiscal impact: All options significantly reduce tax revenue over the forecast period (OFP). This policy analysis was prepared in the context of the Government’s intention to fund this package from within Budget 2024 allowances, which was advised by the Treasury in its Briefing to the Incoming Minister of Finance in 2023 and is consistent with the objective of fiscal sustainability. Therefore, these packages would be considered fiscally sustainable when looked at in the wider context of the Budget decisions they are being taken in – as long as they are not so costly that it would no longer be possible to fund within allowances. However, the Treasury has advised the Government to reduce the cost of Budget 2024, and where possible to support a return to surplus. Whilst all the plans would therefore be viewed as fiscally sustainable in theory, there was a difference in cost, which may impact the feasibility of funding some of the plans within Budget 2024 allowances, and consistency with the goal of returning to surplus: • Option 3 has the largest impact of at least $15 billion OFP ($6.1 billion in 2027/28). • Option 2 and Option 4 have impacts of around $10-11 billion OFP ($2.8 billion in 2027/28). • Options 5a, 5b and 5c have the smallest impact of around $8-9 billion OFP ($2.2 - $2.3 billion in 2027/28). • The two variations on Option 3 cost around $6 billion (3a) and $12 billion (3b) OFP, and $1.8 billion (3a) and $5.0 billion (3b) in 2027/28. 30. Efficiency: Personal income tax has a negative impact on economic efficiency to the extent that it affects people’s income earning decisions (in other words, distorting behaviour). All options would be expected to have positive impacts on efficiency by reducing the amount of tax levied on personal income, thereby decreasing distortions to work, investment and savings decisions. The removal of the 39% rate in Option 3 would have a relatively larger impact per dollar of fiscal cost, but the limited population affected would mitigate the aggregate benefits. For those already in work, the decision to work more or fewer hours can be influenced by effective marginal tax rates (EMTR – the fraction of each additional dollar earned that is lost to tax and reduced transfers). Changes that significantly reduce effective marginal tax rates would be expected to enhance incentives to work additional hours and may also encourage workers to increase their wage prospects by upskilling. This could have positive implications for overall labour supply and the productive capacity of the economy. Other factors will also contribute to a person’s decision to work, however, so it is uncertain whether they will respond to increased incentives, and we have not formally modelled the impact of the options on overall labour supply. Annex 1 contains analysis of the impact of the options on EMTRs. The expansion of the IETC will have opposing impacts on financial returns from work. While it will increase overall returns for earners between $44,000 - $70,000, it will also have a negative impact on marginal returns for earners between $66,000 - $70,000, which may reduce their incentive to work additional hours. It is therefore likely that this objective could be achieved more effectively by removing the IETC and making other changes to tax and transfer settings for the same fiscal cost. 31. Distributional impacts: Each option has different distributional impacts, with Options 3 and 4 being more targeted to reducing tax for higher-income earners, and Options 2 and 5 being more targeted to middle-income earners and those impacted by fiscal drag. As the desirability of a particular income distribution is a judgement for ministers, officials do not comment on whether an option is preferable regarding distributional impacts. Annex 2 contains analysis of the distributional impacts of the options. Regulatory Impact Statement | 12 Option 2 is most directly targeted towards addressing fiscal drag, as it makes proportional increases to all of the PIT thresholds that were in place in 2010, thus achieving the exact opposite effect as fiscal drag. The PIT threshold adjustments in Option 2 would reduce the annual tax liability of someone earning the 2023 median full- time wage ($73,417) by $902, reducing their average tax rate by 1.2 percentage points to 19.4%. This compensates for around one quarter of the average tax rate increase from fiscal drag since 2011. The expansion of the IETC would not benefit these earners as they will earn above the new threshold. Fully compensating for the accumulated fiscal drag since 2011 would therefore require an adjustment to PIT thresholds around four times larger than the adjustments in Option 2, which would likely increase the cost by a similar proportion. This would not be a fiscally sustainable option without substantial changes to government spending and/or revenue in other areas. Adjustments to personal income tax thresholds will have flow-on impacts to other components of the tax and transfer system: a. New Zealand Superannuation rates will increase due to both the direct impact of the PIT threshold adjustments and the indirect impact of being tied to the net average wage. b. Student allowances will increase as the rates are set gross in legislation. c. Main benefits will be unaffected by the tax changes as the rates are set net of tax in legislation. 32. Integrity: The revenue-raising capability of the personal income tax system depends on taxpayer compliance, which may be influenced by people’s perceptions of the fairness of the tax system. To the extent adjustments to tax thresholds in response to fiscal drag improve perceptions of fairness, we would expect some small positive impacts on compliance from Options 2 and 5. Option 3 would also be expected to improve integrity by reducing the gap between the company tax rate and the top personal tax rate, thereby reducing incentives for tax avoidance. 33. Macroeconomic impacts: Treasury modelling shows that tax relief funded through an increase in government debt is expected to put some upward pressure on inflation and therefore interest rates. However, if tax relief is funded through an equivalent decrease in government spending, then the overall effect is a slight decrease in modelled interest rates. This is because the “fiscal multiplier” for tax relief is assumed to be lower than for government spending, meaning the decrease in government spending more than offsets the increase in spending by recipients of tax relief. To the extent that tax relief is funded within Budget 2024 operating allowances, a slight decrease in inflation pressures and therefore slightly lower interest rates would be expected. 34. Administrative and compliance costs: Options 2 and 5 are relatively simple changes to the PIT system and would have minimal impacts on administrative and compliance costs. However, implementation in the middle of the tax year would place one-off costs on Inland Revenue, employers and third-party payroll providers. Option 4 would be more complex owing to the changes in marginal tax rates. Option 3 would be the most complex change owing to the introduction of the tax offset (a tax credit paid out at the time of taxation); effectively compensating for the higher bottom marginal tax rate. Introducing the offset would create substantial costs for private and public sector payroll providers and Inland Revenue. For taxpayers, the offset would likely lead to more end-of-year tax bills and place additional burden on those who have more than one source of income and the income from the secondary source occurs in the abatement zone for the tax offset. Those with a second job would Regulatory Impact Statement | 13 have to apply for tailored tax codes each year as the abatement zone is not reflected in the secondary tax codes. 35. Other government commitments: The ACT-National Coalition Agreement made a commitment to no earner being worse off than they would be under National’s plan (Option 2). Option 3 – the ACT manifesto plan – did not meet this test, even with the use of a tax offset to compensate for the higher bottom tax rate. Variations on this plan – Options 3a and 3b – were developed in order to meet this test, but the use of the tax offset in these plans was considered to be a complex change that contradicted the aim of simplifying the tax system. Options 4, 5a, 5b and 5c also did not meet this test, although to a lesser degree than Option 3. In general, it would not be possible to deliver greater tax relief at some parts of the income spectrum compared to Option 2, while also ensuring no earner is worse off, without increasing the fiscal cost compared to Option 2. 36. Overall assessment: Options 2 and 5 are considered to be positive changes overall. They go some way to addressing the impacts of fiscal drag and have minimal negative consequences apart from the large fiscal cost. Insofar as ministers are willing to trade off the fiscal cost to meet their other objectives and can manage the cost within Budget allowances, officials support these options. Option 4 may also be supported if ministers were more focused on the goal of flattening the PIT system by reducing the number of thresholds and rates, noting that some low-income households would be made significantly worse off. However, officials do not support Option 3 as it would create significant additional compliance costs and it is unlikely that the fiscal cost could be managed within Budget allowances without making large sacrifices to other Government priorities. W h a t o p t i on i s l i k e l y t o b e s t a d d r e s s t h e p r o b l e m , m e e t t h e p o l i c y o b j e c t i v e s , a n d d e l i v e r t h e h i g h e s t n e t b e n e f i t s? 37. Option 2 effectively addresses the policy problem of fiscal drag while having minimal negative consequences on other policy objectives, except for the large fiscal cost. The cost could be reduced through the alternatives in Option 5. Option 3 delivers larger efficiency gains but at a much larger fiscal cost, while also producing significant administrative effort and causing some earners to be worse off than under Option 2. Officials therefore support the broad approach in Option 2 (the National manifesto plan), with the following further recommendations: a. consider cost-saving alternatives (Option 5) to support a return to surplus, b. delay implementation to 1 October 2024 to reduce the fiscal cost, minimise administrative demands for Inland Revenue and ensure all taxpayers receive the benefit of the tax changes on time, c. do not proceed with the proposed IETC expansion. The longstanding view of officials has been that the objective of improving work incentives could be achieved more effectively by removing the IETC and making other changes to tax and transfer settings for the same fiscal cost. See T2017/164: Removing the Independent Earner Tax Credit 2 for further discussion of the IETC, and d. prevent the tax changes flowing through to student allowances. Alignment with the benefit system is a principle of the student support system, and since main benefits will not increase from the tax changes, the same approach should be taken for student allowance. 2 https://www.treasury.govt.nz/sites/default/files/2017-11/b17-3659148.pdf Regulatory Impact Statement | 16 43. The changes to RWT will also be made on 31 July 2024. The changes are increasing the income thresholds for the various personal tax rates, but they are not changing the rates themselves. While payers of resident withholding income will need to update their information on RWT and some recipients may need to adjust their selected RWT rates, there should be no changes to the actual withholding system that RWT payers use. In addition, if people are using the incorrect RWT rate, any under or overpayment can be corrected as part of the end of year tax assessment process that Inland Revenue runs. 44. The other consequential tax types including), PIE tax, FBT, ESCT and RSCT will be adjusted from the beginning of the next tax year (1 April 2025). This will allow more time to make the changes and reduce the complexity of the changes. This will in turn reduce compliance costs for employers. The trade-off for this is that investors and employees will receive the benefit of the changes from a later date, and this will be a permanent difference. Third parties 45. Third parties such as payroll software providers and payroll service providers will need to make changes to their systems and their software to implement the personal income tax changes. Officials consulted with private sector software providers and payroll service providers to understand the timeframes needed to make changes. The time required is dependent on the level of complexity of the changes. 46. Ideally, payroll software providers would be given 3 months’ notice of upcoming changes. This is based on a timeframe of 6 weeks to complete and test the changes before providing the software to their clients 6 weeks before the implementation date. This is because clients need to load information for pay runs into their system before they make the payments. Some pay information can be input as much as a month before the pay run and as such the new software would need to be in place for this information to be processed correctly. 47. Shortening this timeframe to 2 months would likely mean clients would receive the software 2 weeks before implementation, instead of 6 weeks. This would likely mean some employees would have their tax calculated under status quo thresholds for a payment after the implementation date. However, this could be corrected in subsequent pay periods, or the difference picked up in the end of year tax assessment process. 48. Similarly, payroll service providers would ideally be given 3 months’ notice of upcoming changes to the Pay as You Earn (PAYE) rules. Shortening this timeframe to 2 will increase the likelihood of errors. However, these could be corrected in subsequent pay periods, or the difference picked up in the end of year tax assessment process. 49. Some public sector organisations with specific payment challenges will need longer to implement the changes due to the special characteristics of the payments they make (i.e., this is not relevant to their standard departmental payroll functions). These include the payments made by the Ministry of Social Development (benefits, allowances and pension systems); Accident Compensation Corporation (compensation system) and the Ministry of Health (doctors and nurses payroll systems). 50. The identified organisations make payments that are subject to PAYE to a significant number of beneficiaries, superannuitants, compensation claimants and the health workforce. If they are unable to update their payment systems in time, incorrect Regulatory Impact Statement | 17 amounts of tax will be deducted, and the recipients (other than beneficiaries) will be likely to receive less of their payments than they are entitled to. 51. These organisations could be given advance notice, prior to Budget Day, on a Budget Secret basis, or errors could be addressed by Inland Revenue during the end of year tax assessment process. The Ministry of Social Development have provided initial indications that approximately three months lead in time (from the Cabinet decision) will be required for it to progress the necessary IT, legislative and operational changes in time; the Accident Compensation Corporation would need 8-13 weeks; and Health New Zealand would need approximately 4 months. Implementation date 52. In 2010 (the last time thresholds were increased), 1 October was the date chosen in order to allow sufficient time for implementation as detailed. Officials have recommended the same date is chosen for these changes. A shorter delivery window is possible, but brings a higher likelihood of increased errors, which in turn will create an increased workload for Inland Revenue during the end of year tax assessment process. 53. The Cabinet Paper recommends progressing the PIT changes from 31 July 2024. With the changes being announced on Budget Day (30 May), this will allow approximately two months for third parties such as payroll software providers and payroll service providers to implement the changes. As noted above, these third parties would ideally be given 3 months’ notice of upcoming changes. 54. Despite this shortened timeframe, we would generally expect most employers to be able to pay their employees under the updated tax scales from 31 July. There are likely to be some exceptions and some incorrect calculations, but these are able to be corrected in subsequent pay runs or as part of the end of year tax assessment process completed by Inland Revenue. Legislative change 55. The tax changes will be included in Budget night legislation. H o w w i l l t h e n e w a r r a n g e m e n t s b e mo n i t o red, ev a l u a ted, a n d re v i e wed? 56. Inland Revenue will continue to monitor the tax system in a range of ways to maintain the integrity of the tax system. Inland Revenue also regularly reports to the Government on the amount of tax being collected. It is not anticipated that any additional monitoring, evaluation or review above that which already occurs will be required as a result of the proposed changes. Regulatory Impact Statement | 18 Annex 1: I mpac t of Opti on 2 on effective margi nal tax rates Treasury modelling can estimate the distribution of EMTRs for the New Zealand population. Table 6 shows the number and characteristics of people who we estimate will experience a change in EMTRs from Option 2 in the year ending 31 March 2027. This analysis was only completed for Option 2 as this was the main option being considered at this stage in the advice process. It is important to note that not all people with income within the income tax ranges in Table 6 would experience the impacts shown – it will be dependent on their receipt of any benefits or tax credits, as well as the design of the final tax package. The personal income tax threshold changes and extending the income range of the Independent Earner Tax Credit reduce EMTRs for 335,000 people (positive impact on work incentives) and increase EMTRs for 85,000 people (negative impact on work incentives). Adding the proposed family-based tax credit changes (the In-Work Tax Credit and FamilyBoost) increases the EMTRs for a further 45,000 people (negative impact on work incentives). These people are in coupled families with children, and are spread across the first 4 income tax bands ($0 to $180,000). Modelling did not indicate an increase in EMTRs for sole parents. These tax credits increase people’s EMTRs because of the way the credits abate as incomes grow. Although people’s income is increased by the credits, their EMTR also increases as they cross the abatement threshold and their payment reduces with each extra dollar of income. This negatively impacts their incentive to work. The proposed changes impact abatement in different ways: a. The increase to the In-Work Tax Credit by $25 per week means the payment will take longer to abate to zero, as the abatement rate is constant. This means some people whose payment would otherwise have fully abated will now receive an abating payment. b. As FamilyBoost is a new credit, people who receive it and whose family income is within the abatement range ($140,000 to $180,000) will have an increased EMTR because of the abatement of the credit. Regulatory Impact Statement | 20 Annex 2: Distri butional analys is of options Option 2 Officials provided distributional analysis of the PIT threshold and IETC changes in Option 2 in combination with other tax and transfer policies included in Budget 2024. These included the $25 per week increase to the In-Work Tax Credit (IWTC) and the introduction of the FamilyBoost policy, which gives parents a rebate of up to $75 per week for money spent on early childhood education fees. These four policies together are referred to as “the package”. Distributional analysis provided in advice was based on economic forecasts from the 2023 Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update, and household data from the 2021 Household Economic Survey (HES). The Cabinet Paper includes distributional analysis based on the latest available economic forecasts and household data (i.e., 2024 Budget Economic and Fiscal Update forecasts and 2023 HES data). The distributional analysis in this Regulatory Impact Statement therefore differs slightly from what is in the Cabinet Paper. Overall, the package increases the income of 93% of households 3 by $30 per week 4 on average. Households with children gain by $39 per week on average. A small number of households (0.5% of all households) have their income reduced from the package by $1 per week on average, due to an unintended interaction with the tax threshold adjustments and the calculation of part-year benefit payments. 135,000 households (7%) are unaffected. Many of these will be receiving main benefits and have no change because benefit rates are set in after-tax terms. Household impacts are in comparison to household incomes at the same point in time (the year ending 31 March 2027) if the policy change was not made. Gains and losses do not indicate whether a household is better or worse off compared to the previous year, but only how their projected income in 2027 with the policy change compares to their projected income in 2027 without the policy change. Figure 1 shows the weekly impact of the package on household incomes, grouped by equivalised income quintiles. 5 The number of households in each quintile who have their income increased or reduced is also shown (e.g., 394,000 households in the third quintile have their income increased by $32 per week on average). Only households in the first quintile have their income reduced, by $1 per week on average. These are households who receive main benefit income for only part of the year, and receive a slight reduction in benefit income due to an unintended interaction with the tax threshold adjustments and the calculation of part-year benefit payments. It is unlikely this could be avoided by designing the package differently. The first quintile contains the smallest number of gaining households (290,000). Most of the households unaffected by the package are in the first quintile (100,000 out of 135,000). Households in the first quintile also gain by the least on average ($13 per week). This reflects the fact that people receiving main benefits, who have relatively low incomes, do not gain from the package as benefit rates are set in after-tax terms. The largest weekly gain goes to 3 Households are defined as one or more people living together in a private dwelling and sharing facilities. A household could contain more than one family, which is defined as a single person or couple and any dependent children. 4 This is a measure of change in household disposable income. Note that while we have used equivalised household income to compare groups, the average gains and losses are not adjusted for household size or composition. 5 Income equivalisation accounts for different household compositions (e.g., the number of adults and children) to allow for like-for-like comparisons across households. Two households with different compositions (e.g., a single person compared to a couple with two children) need different levels of income to meet the same standard of living. Equivalisation attempts to account for the additional income needed to support more people and also economies of scale due to shared housing costs, utilities, etc. Regulatory Impact Statement | 21 the fifth quintile, reflecting the fact that the maximum gain from the PIT threshold adjustments occurs at a relatively high individual income level ($78,100). Figure 1: Impact on household incomes by equivalised income quintile Officials also provided analysis of how each individual component of the package impacts household incomes. The individual package components impact households as follows: i. The PIT threshold changes increase net incomes for 1.831 million households (93% of all households) by an average of $25 per week. These changes will also reduce net incomes for a further 9,000 households (0.5% of all households) by an average of $1 per week due to an unintended interaction with the personal income tax threshold adjustments and the way part-year benefit payments are calculated. ii. The IWTC increase increases net incomes for 160,000 households (8% of all households; 25% of households with children), including around 4,000 households that do not gain from the PIT threshold changes, by an average of $20 per week. iii. The IETC expansion increases net incomes for 381,000 households (19% of all households) by an average of $10 per week. iv. FamilyBoost increases net incomes for 80,000 households (4% of all households and 12% of households with children) by an average of $34 per week. The majority of these households are in the bottom half of the equivalised income distribution, and the lowest earning households gain by the most on average. Individual-level analysis shows the impacts of the package by demographic group. Note that this analysis was developed later in the process and is based on the latest available economic forecasts and household data (i.e., 2024 Budget Economic and Fiscal Update forecasts and 2023 HES data). Compared to the overall population, relatively fewer Māori, Pacific Peoples and women benefit from the package. Overall, 83% of individuals gain by an average of $16 per week. This compares to 74% of Māori gaining, 73% for Pacific Peoples, and 81% for women. Average gains for Māori and Pacific Peoples are equal to the overall population, while women gain by slightly less ($15 per week on average) due to lower incomes. By contrast, almost all seniors benefit from the changes (97%) due to the near-universal receipt of NZ Super, but by a smaller amount ($13 per week).