\[IN CONFIDENCE\] POLICY AND REGULATORY STEWARDSHIP Tax policy report: High-Wealth Individuals Research Project: April 2022 update Date: 6 April 2021 Priority: Medium Security level: In Confidence Report number: IR2022/125 Action sought Action sought Deadline Minister of Revenue Note the contents of this report Refer to the Minister of Finance for their information NA Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Felicity Barker Project Director, Wealth Research Project Rebecca Bilby Policy Advisor s 9(2)(a) IR2022/125; High Wealth Individual Research Project: Progress update Page 1 of 8 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] 6 April 2022 Minister of Revenue High-Wealth Individuals Research Project: April 2022 update Executive Summary 1. This report provides you with an update on various aspects of the High-Wealth Individuals Research Project. Collection of information 2. The family details questionnaire achieved a high response rate, giving us confidence that we had successfully contacted most of the individuals in the initial population. In February, the entity collection was sent to HWIs and their partners. The purpose of this collection is to identify all non-portfolio entities (and trusts) linked to the family unit. The questionnaire was due to be returned by 4 April 2022. At the date of this report, we have received around 360 responses with around 100 people having sought extensions. 3. The financial collection is planned for June 2022. This collection will ask questions on portfolio investments, trusts, real property, and realised capital gains. Methodology 4. The Project will use the following three income measures to calculate effective tax rates (ETRs): taxable income, gross cash income, and economic income. Foreign income will be included to the extent it is taxable in New Zealand. Capital gains will be included within the gross cash income (realised gains) and economic income measures (realised and accrued gains). 5. One principle we will follow in calculating ETRs is symmetry between the income definition and taxes included. This means that for gross cash income we will include the share of corporate or trustee tax relating to realisation events. For economic income, we will include the tax entities paid in proportion to the families holding of those entities. Some taxes will be excluded from our analysis on materiality grounds or because they are difficult to collect information on. 6. We intend to estimate GST paid based on HWI’s estimated consumption. We do not have direct measures of consumption of the population so will need to estimate their consumption. We are considering different approaches to this. 7. Gifts and inheritances will be included in our calculation of income to the extent that these gifts and inheritances subsequently generate income. We will seek information on the value of inheritances from the individuals. Data progress 8. Following the construction of our database, we can now provide summary statistics for the lead individuals from the HWI population on a taxable income measure. This information is already held by Inland Revenue in our database. IR2022/125; High Wealth Individual Research Project: Progress update Page 2 of 8 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Purpose 9. This report updates you on progress on the High-Wealth Individuals Research Project (the Project). 10. The major milestones in the Project since the last update have been processing the family details survey responses and issuing the second information collection, the entity collection. Collection of information Family details and entity collections 11. The family details collection has ended. This questionnaire achieved a high response rate, giving us confidence that we had successfully contacted most of the individuals in the initial population. The information has been processed and updated into our secure database ready for the next step of the process. 12. In late February, the entity collection was sent to HWIs and their partners. The purpose of this collection is to identify all non-portfolio entities (and trusts) linked to the family unit. As with the family details collection, these requests were issued under section 17GB of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) meaning that individuals are legally required to respond. 13. In the entity collection, non-trust entities are required to be disclosed where the family unit (including through trusts) owned more than 10% of the entity in any year from 2016-2021. Each family members ownership interest (percentage ownership) is then separately reported. Both direct and indirect interests in entities are required to be disclosed. For trusts, a trust is required to be disclosed if a family member was a beneficiary, settlor or appointer of a trust with gross assets over $1 million in any year 2016-2021. 14. The questionnaire was due to be returned by 4 April 2022. Some recipients (around 100) have requested and been granted an extension of time until 29 April. At the date of this report, we have received around 360 responses (out of a total population of around 650). 15. Our initial population was 406 high-wealth family units. We have excluded around 30 family units from the collection on the following grounds: compassionate grounds, non-resident for the entire period of the study, or they provided evidence that their net wealth was well below $20 million for the entire period of the study. Where we have good internal data on individuals excluded from the collection on compassionate grounds, these people may remain in the study population. Furthermore, there were 15 people in the population who we have not been able to contact through any means. This leaves a final population of around 361 family units for the collection. 16. The financial collection is planned for June 2022. This collection will ask questions on portfolio investments, trusts, real property, and realised capital gains. For entities income and balance sheet measures, Inland Revenue generally already has this information through the IR10 statement. There are however gaps in this information for the population. For this reason, we are intending to undertake a separate targeted collection of entity financial information in late June. This will involve only asking individuals for this information when we have insufficient internal information. s 9(2)(h) IR2022/125; High Wealth Individual Research Project: Progress update Page 3 of 8 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Methodology Update on methodology 17. We have held two meetings on the methodology with the Methodology Advisory Group (MAG) and a third will be held in April. As you will recall, the MAG is a group of 10 experts from the economic, legal, accounting and statistical fields. Three notes were prepared for the MAG, on income bases, included taxes and capital gains. Below is a summary of some key points. Income 18. The Project will use the following three income measures to calculate effective tax rates (ETR): i. Taxable income = Personal taxable income as defined by New Zealand tax law (this will include taxable capital gains). This provides a comparator for the other two measures, which use an income base broader than taxable income. ii. Gross cash income = Personal taxable income + untaxed realised capital gains and accrued gains on portfolio investments. 1 This measure is based on how a realisation-based capital gains tax may be designed. iii. Economic income = Personal taxable income + untaxed realised gains + accrued capital gains. 19. Economic income will also include a secondary measure that includes imputed rental income from owner-occupied housing. This is a measure of the value one obtains from living in their own home, as opposed to renting it out. 20. Foreign income will be included to the extent it is taxable in New Zealand. 2 Calculation of capital gains 21. Capital gains will be included within the gross cash income (generally, realised gains) and economic income measures (realised and accrued gains). 22. While any assets could potentially give rise to capital gains, we are limiting our focus to the asset types most likely to give rise to material and measurable gains. The assets that we will calculate capital gains for are: • real property (residential and non-residential), • businesses (companies, partnerships, and trusts), and • financial (portfolio) assets. 23. Capital gains will be calculated for the period of the study (2016 – 2021). Accrued gains (for economic income) will be calculated for every year of 2016- 2021, either based on modelled annual values or listed prices. As New Zealand does not have a capital gains tax, the calculation of realised gains for assets without a listed price requires the establishment of a ‘cost base’. We intend to use 1 April 2016 (or the 2016 balance date) as the valuation date for the cost 1 This measure is largely based on realised gains, however, to reduce compliance costs income from portfolio investment will be calculated as an aggregate of Closing balance less Opening balance (less contributions, plus capital pay outs). 2 This avoids many of the problems of whether and how to include foreign taxes in the tax measure, including how to source that information. It also avoids questions of how to treat gains and losses from currency movements, which in some cases may dominate other gains. For income taxable in New Zealand, foreign tax credits will be recognised. IR2022/125; High Wealth Individual Research Project: Progress update Page 6 of 8 \[IN CONFIDENCE\] Analysing information Data progress – Taxable Income example 36. Following the construction of our secure database, we can now provide summary statistics for the lead individuals from the population on a taxable income measure. This information is already held by Inland Revenue. 37. Both taxable income and the ETR have been calculated using fields from the Individual Income Tax return (IR3). We still need to adjust for individuals who did not need to file an IR3 for a specific year, had negative taxable income, and include Portfolio Investment Entity (PIE) income and tax. 38. The summary statistics below include income received directly by the individual from: income with tax deducted, interest and dividends, Trust and Estate, Partnerships, overseas, property. See the appendix for further details on income types included. 39. We have calculated the ETR by taking the tax calculated on the above sources dividing by the above-mentioned taxable income. The analysis demonstrates current tax rates for individuals, that being the progressive marginal tax scale. The purpose of the taxable income ETR is to provide a comparator to the broader ETR measures we will calculate. 40. Table 1 and the graph below show summary statistics for the HWI population who filed an IR3 compared with all IR3s filed for the 2016 – 2020 tax years. Table 1. Summary Statistics for HWI lead individuals IR3s vs. All IR3 Filers 41. These figures may differ from those in the upcoming Treasury analytical note which is based on assumptions and scenarios rather than Inland Revenue data. HWIs 1st Quartile Median Mean 3rd Quartile Taxable Income 88,114 238,347 747,128 588,256 ETR 0.23 0.29 0.25 0.31 All Poplulation 1st Quartile Median Mean 3rd Quartile Taxable Income 16,057 34,646 46,437 60,585 ETR 0.11 0.15 0.15 0.18