AX INFORMATION BULLETIN This is an Inland Revenue service to people with an interest in New Zealand taxation. ISSN 0114-7161 T Vol 14, No 4 April 2002 CONTENTS Get your TIB sooner on the internet 2 This month’s opportunity for you to comment 3 New legislation Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001 (2001/93) 4 Legislation and Determinations 2002 International Tax Disclosure Exemption ITR13 6 Foreign currency amounts – conversion to NZ currency 10 Standard Practice Statement IR-SPS INV-251Voluntary disclosures 16 Notice of current status of Standard Practice Statement 20 Legal decisions – case notes Setting aside of bankruptcy notice 22 Moti Singh v Commissioner of Inland Revenue Child Support appeal unsuccessful, judicial review partially successful 23 Philip Alan Johnson v CIR & Family Court at Waitakere & Tania Raewyn Hewitt Non-standard balance date approved for pipfruit growers 26 Regular features Due dates reminder 27 Your chance to comment on draft taxation items before they are fi nalised 29 This TIB has no appendix 2 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) GET YOUR TIB SOONER ON THE INTERNET This Tax Information Bulletin is also available on the internet in PDF format. Our website is at: www.ird.govt.nz It has other Inland Revenue information that you may fi nd useful, including any draft binding rulings and interpretation statements that are available, and many of our information booklets. If you fi nd that you prefer to get the TIB from our website and no longer need a paper copy, please let us know so we can take you off our mailing list. You can do this by completing the form at the back of this TIB, or by emailing us at IRDTIB@datamail.co.nz with your name and details. Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 3 THIS MONTH’S OPPORTUNITY FOR YOU TO COMMENT Inland Revenue produces a number of statements and rulings aimed at explaining how taxation law affects taxpayers and their agents. Because we are keen to produce items that accurately and fairly refl ect taxation legislation, and are useful in practical situations, your input into the process—as perhaps a user of that legislation—is highly valued. The following draft items are available for review/comment this month, with a deadline of 31 May 2002. Ref. Draft type Description ED0027 Standard Practice Statement Requests to amend assessments ED0029 Standard Practice Statement Remission of penalties and interest Please see page 29 for details on how to obtain a copy. 4 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) NEW LEGISLATION HEALTH AND DISABILITY SERVICES (SAFETY) ACT 2001 (2001/93) The Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001 was enacted on 30 November 2001. It establishes a system under which the Ministry of Health designates private sector providers of health care services. It makes a number of consequential amendments to defi nitions in the Inland Revenue Acts relating to hospitals and healthcare. Child Support Act 1991 and Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 An amendment to section 73(3) of the Child Support Act 1991 reads: Hospital patient means a person who is – (a) a patient in a hospital care institution within the meaning of section 58(4) of the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001; or (b) repealed (c) a resident in an institution certifi ed under the Alcoholism and Drug Addiction Act 1966. An amendment to section 2(1) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 reads: Hospital – (a) means an institution – (i) that is a hospital care institution within the meaning of section 58(4) of the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001; or (ii) whose principal purpose is to receive and treat people needing medical treatment or suffering from a disease; and (b) includes all clinics, dispensaries, offi ces, outpatient departments, services, and undertakings, maintained in connection with, or incidental to, such an institution. In section 58(4) of the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001: Hospital care institution – (a) means premises used to provide hospital care, in accordance with section 9; but where only parts of any premises are used for that purpose, means only those parts and any other parts used for ancillary purposes; and (b) at a time before 1 October 2004, includes a licensed hospital (within the meaning of section 118 of the Hospitals Act 1957). Section 9 of the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001 provides: A person providing health care services of any kind must do so – (a) while certifi ed by the Director-General to provide health care services of that kind; and (b) while meeting all the relevant service standards; and (c) in compliance with any conditions subject to which the person was certifi ed by the Director- General to provide health care services of that kind; and (d) in compliance with this Act; and (e) if the services are rest home care, or geriatric services that are hospital care, in compliance with any applicable regulations under section 53(1)(a). In section 118 of the Hospitals Act 1957: Licensed hospital means a hospital in respect of which a licence is in force, or is deemed to be in force, under this Act. Hospital means any premises in which two or more patients are maintained at the same time, other than – (a) an institution that, immediately before the commencement of the Mental Health (Compulsory Assessment and Treatment) Act 1992, was a licensed institution under section 9 of the Mental Health Act 1969; (b) an institution in which habitual inebriates or any other persons are detained under the authority of any Act, unless any individual (other than a person so detained) is maintained therein. Income Tax Act 1994 The defi nition of principal caregiver is amended. It now reads: In paragraph (a) of the defi nition of qualifying person and in Part KD, in relation to a dependent child, means the person (whether or not he or she is the parent of the child) who, in the opinion of the Commissioner, has the primary responsibility for the day-to-day care of the child, other than on a temporary basis; but does not include – Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 5 (a) any body of persons (whether incorporated or unincorporated); or (b) any person who is the proprietor of, or employed in – (i) a residence established under the Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act 1989; or (ii) any residential disability care institution (within the meaning of section 58(4) of the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001); or (iii) any other institution in which the child is being cared for. In section 58(4) of the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001: Residential disability care institution – (a) means premises used to provide residential disability care, in accordance with section 9; but where only parts of any premises are used for that purpose, means only those parts and any other parts used for ancillary purposes; and (b) at a time before 1 October 2004, includes a home registered under Part II of the Disabled Persons Community Welfare Act 1975. Section 9 of the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001 is described above. Application date These amendments come into force on 1 October 2002. 6 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) LEGISLATION AND DETERMINATIONS This section of the TIB covers items such as recent tax legislation, accrual and depreciation determinations, livestock values and changes in FBT and GST interest rates. 2002 INTERNATIONAL TAX DISCLOSURE EXEMPTION ITR13 Introduction Section 61 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (TAA) requires people to disclose interests they hold in foreign entities. Under section 61(1) of the TAA, a person who has a control or income interest in a foreign company or an interest in a foreign investment fund (FIF) at any time during the income year must disclose the interest held. However, section 61(2) allows the Commissioner of Inland Revenue to exempt any person or class of persons from this requirement if disclosure is not necessary for the administration of the international tax rules (as defi ned by section OZ 1) contained in the Income Tax Act 1994 (ITA). Under section 61(2), the Commissioner has issued an international tax disclosure exemption that applies for the income year ended 31 March 2002. This exemption may be cited as “International Tax Disclosure Exemption ITR13”. The full text appears at the end of this item. Scope of exemption The scope of the 2002 disclosure exemption is the same as the 2001 exemption. Interests held by residents Disclosure is required by residents for: – an interest held in an FIF – an “income interest of 10% or greater” held in a foreign company. The disclosure obligation applies in respect of all foreign companies regardless of the country of residence. An “income interest of 10% or greater” is defi ned in section OB 1 of the ITA. For the purposes of determining exemption from disclosure it includes: 1. an income interest held directly in a foreign company 2. an income interest held indirectly through any interposed foreign company 3. an income interest held by an associated person (which is not a controlled foreign company) as defi ned by section OD 8(3) of the ITA. Example If a husband and wife each hold an income interest of 5% in a Cayman Islands company, the interests would not be exempt from disclosure because the husband and wife are associated persons under section OD 8(3)(d). Under the associated persons test they are each deemed to hold the other’s interests, so they each hold an “income interest of 10% or greater”, which must be disclosed. They are not required to account for attributed foreign income or loss under the controlled foreign company rules. However, they would have to account for FIF income or loss under the FIF rules. In this example, the husband and wife must disclose their interests as interests in a foreign company and as interests in an FIF. However, only the FIF interests should be disclosed on an IR 478, IR 439, IR 440, IR 441, IR 442 or IR 443 form (see “Overlap of interests” on the following page). Foreign company interests A resident who holds a control or income interest in a foreign company must disclose that interest, regardless of the company’s country of residence. The 2002 international tax disclosure exemption also makes no distinction about residence, and any interest in a foreign company that is an “income interest of 10% or greater” must be disclosed. Disclosure is to be made on an Interest in a foreign company disclosure schedule (IR 477 or IR 479) form. The disclosure exemption makes no distinction on the residence of a foreign company for these reasons: • Attributed (non-dividend) repatriation rules apply to an “income interest of 10% or greater” in a controlled foreign company (CFC) regardless of the CFC’s country of residence. • To identify tax preferences applied by the taxpayer (whether or not specifi ed in Schedule 3, Part B of the ITA) in respect of an interest held in a foreign company that is resident in a Schedule 3, Part A of the ITA jurisdiction (ie, Australia, Canada, Federal Republic of Germany, Japan, Norway, United Kingdom and the United States of America). Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 7 • The requirement for a CFC that is resident in a country not listed in Schedule 3, Part A of the ITA to attribute foreign income or loss from 1 April 1993. Foreign investment fund interests An interest in a foreign entity must be disclosed if it constitutes an “interest in a foreign investment fund” specifi ed within section CG 15(1) of the ITA. These types of interest must be disclosed: – rights in a foreign company or anything deemed to be a company for the purposes of the ITA (eg, a unit trust) – an entitlement to benefi t from a foreign superannuation scheme – an entitlement to benefi t from a foreign life insurance policy – an interest in an entity specifi ed in Schedule 4, Part A of the ITA (no entities were listed when this TIB went to press). However, any interest that does not fall within the above types or which is specifi cally excluded as an interest in an FIF under section CG 15(2) does not have to be disclosed. The following are listed in section CG 15(2) as exclusions from what constitutes an interest in a FIF: – an “income interest of 10% or greater” in a CFC (separate disclosure is required of this as an interest in a foreign company) – an interest in a foreign company that is resident and liable to income tax in a country or territory specifi ed in Schedule 3, Part A of the ITA (ie, Australia, Canada, Federal Republic of Germany, Japan, Norway, United Kingdom and the United States of America) – an interest in an employment-related foreign superannuation scheme – a qualifying foreign private annuity, unless an election has been made to remain within the FIF regime, by the due date for fi ling the person’s 2002 tax return. (See Inland Revenue’s booklet Overseas private pensions (IR 257) for more information) – interests in foreign entities held by a natural person other than in that person’s capacity as a trustee, if the aggregate cost or expenditure incurred in acquiring the interests remains under $50,000 at all times during the income year – an interest held by a natural person in a foreign entity located in a country where exchange controls prevent the person deriving any profi t or gain, or disposing of the interest for New Zealand currency or consideration readily convertible to New Zealand currency – an interest in a foreign life insurance policy or foreign superannuation scheme acquired by a natural person before he or she became a New Zealand resident for the fi rst time, for a period of up to four years. A resident who holds an interest in an FIF at any time during the 2002 income year must disclose the interest and calculate FIF income or loss on the form Interest in foreign investment fund disclosure schedule (IR 439, IR 440, IR 441 or IR 443). The FIF rules allow a person four options to calculate FIF income or loss (accounting profi ts method, branch equivalent method, comparative value method and deemed rate of return method). Therefore, the Commissioner has prescribed four forms to disclose and calculate FIF income or loss from an interest in an FIF using one of the methods. The respective forms to use for whichever FIF income calculation method you choose to apply is as follows: – IR 439 for the accounting profi ts method – IR 440 for the branch equivalent method – IR 441 for the comparative value method – IR 443 for the deemed rate of return method. Overlap of interests A situation may arise where a person is required to furnish a disclosure for an interest in a foreign company which is also an interest in an FIF. For example, a person with an “income interest of 10% or greater” in a foreign company that is not a CFC is strictly required to disclose both an interest held in a foreign company and an interest held in an FIF. However, to meet the disclosure obligations only one disclosure return (either the IR 477 or IR 479, or the IR 439, IR 440, IR 441 or IR 443) is required for each interest a person holds in a foreign entity. Here are the general rules for determining which disclosure return to fi le: 1. Use the appropriate IR 439, IR 440, IR 441, IR 442 or IR 443 form to disclose all FIF interests, and in particular: – an interest in a foreign company which is not resident in a Schedule 3, Part A country and is not a CFC (regardless of the level of interest held) – an income interest of less than 10% in a CFC which is not resident in a Schedule 3, Part A country – an interest in a foreign life insurance policy or foreign superannuation scheme, regardless of the country or territory in which the entity was resident. 8 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) 2. Use the IR 447 or IR 479 forms to disclose an “income interest of 10% or greater” in a foreign company (regardless of the country of residence) that is not being disclosed on an IR 439, IR 440, IR 441, IR 442 or IR 443 form. Disclosure is not required on any of the forms for an income interest of less than 10% in a foreign company (whether a CFC or not) which is also not a FIF interest. An example is an interest that is covered by the Schedule 3, Part A exclusion from the FIF rules. Interests held by non-residents The 2002 disclosure exemption removes the need for interests held by non-residents in foreign companies and FIFs to be disclosed. This would apply, for example, to an overseas company operating in New Zealand (through a branch) in respect of its interests in foreign companies and FIFs. The purpose of the international tax rules is to make sure that New Zealand residents are taxed on their share of the income of any overseas interests they hold. However, under the international tax rules non-residents are not required to calculate or attribute income under the CFC regime (section CG 6(1) of the ITA 1994). In addition, under section CG 16(4) of the ITA 1994 a non-resident is not to be treated as deriving or incurring any FIF income or loss. The disclosure of non-residents holdings in foreign companies or FIFs is not necessary for the administration of the international tax rules. Summary The 2002 international tax disclosure exemption removes the requirement of a resident to disclose an interest held in a foreign company (if the interest is not also an interest in a FIF) that does not constitute an “income interest of 10% or greater” (ie, it is less than 10%). The disclosure exemption is not affected by the foreign company’s country of residence. Further, an interest in a FIF must be disclosed. The 2002 disclosure exemption also removes the requirement for a non-resident to disclose interests held in foreign companies and FIFs. Persons not required to comply with section 61 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 This exemption may be cited as “International Tax Disclosure Exemption ITR13” 1. Reference This exemption is made under section 61(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. It details interests in foreign companies in relation to which any person is not required to comply with the requirement in section 61 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 to make disclosure of their interests, for the income year ending 31 March 2001. This exemption does not apply to interests in foreign companies that are interests in FIFs, unless that interest is held by a non-resident of New Zealand. 2. Interpretation In this exemption, unless the context otherwise requires, expressions used have the same meaning as in section OB 1 of the Income Tax Act 1994 or the international tax rules (as defi ned by section OZ 1 of the Income Tax Act 1994). 3. Exemption (i) Any person who has an income interest or a control interest in a foreign company (not being an interest in an FIF), in the income year ending 31 March 2002, is not required to comply with section 61(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 in respect of that interest and that income year, unless the interest held by that person during any accounting period of the foreign company (the last day of which falls within that income year of the person), would constitute an “income interest of 10% or greater”, as defi ned by section OB 1 of the Income Tax Act 1994, as if the foreign company was a controlled foreign company. (ii) Any non-resident person who has an income interest or a control interest in a foreign company or an interest in an FIF in the income year ending 31 March 2002, is not required to comply with section 61(1) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 in respect of that interest and that income year if either or both of the following apply: – no attributed foreign income or loss arises in respect of that interest in that foreign company by virtue of section CG 6(1) of the Income Tax Act 1994, and/or Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 9 – no FIF income or loss arises in respect of that interest in that FIF by virtue of section CG 16(4) of the Income Tax Act 1994. This exemption is made by me acting under delegated authority from the Commissioner of Inland Revenue pursuant to section 7 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. This exemption is signed on the 22nd day of March 2002. Max Carr National Manager, Corporates 10 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) The tables in this item list exchange rates acceptable to Inland Revenue for converting foreign currency amounts to New Zealand currency under the controlled foreign company (CFC) and foreign investment fund (FIF) rules for the 12 months ending 31 March 2002. The conversion rates for the fi rst six months of each income year are published in the Tax Information Bulletin following the end of the September quarter, and the rates for the full 12 months rates at the end of each income year. To convert foreign currency amounts to New Zealand dollars for any country listed, divide the foreign currency amount by the exchange rate shown. Table A Use this table to convert foreign currency amounts to New Zealand dollars for: – branch equivalent income or loss under the CFC or FIF rules under section CG 11(3) of the Income Tax Act 1994 – foreign tax credits calculated under the branch equivalent method for a CFC or FIF under section LC 4(1)(b) of the Income Tax Act 1994 – FIF income or loss calculated under the accounting profi ts, comparative value (except if Table B applies) or deemed rate of return methods under section CG 16(11) of the Income Tax Act 1994. Key X Y “x” is the exchange rate on the 15th day of the month, or if no exchange rates were quoted on that day, on the next day on which they were quoted. “y” is the average of the mid-month exchange rates for that month and the previous 11 months. Example 1 A CFC resident in Hong Kong has an accounting period ending on 30 September 2001. Branch equivalent income for the period 1 October 2000 to 30 September 2001 is 200,000 Hong Kong dollars (HKD). HKD200,000 ÷ 3.2712 = NZ$61,139.64 A similar calculation would be needed for an FIF, using the branch equivalent or accounting profi ts methods. Example 2 A taxpayer with a 31 March balance date purchases shares in a Philippines company (which is an FIF) for 350,000 pesos (PHP) on 7 September 2001. Using the comparative value or deemed rate of return methods, the cost is converted as follows: PHP350,000 ÷ 20.8480 = NZ$16,788.18 Alternatively, the exchange rate can be calculated by averaging the exchange rates “x”, which apply to each complete month in the foreign company’s accounting period. Example 3 A CFC resident in Singapore was formed on 21 April 2001 and has a balance date of 30 September 2001. During this period, branch equivalent income of 500,000 Singapore dollars (SGD) was derived. (i) Calculating the average monthly exchange rate for the complete months May to September 2001: (0.7621 + 0.7570 + 0.7460 + 0.7545 + 0.7329) ÷ 5 = 0.7505 (ii) Conversion to New Zealand currency: SGD500,000 ÷ 0.7505 = NZ$666,222.52 FOREIGN CURRENCY AMOUNTS – CONVERSION TO NZ CURRENCY Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 11 Table B Table B lists the end of month exchange rates acceptable to Inland Revenue for the 12 month period ending 31 March 2002. Use this table for converting foreign currency amounts to New Zealand dollars for: – items “a” (market value of the FIF interest on the last day of the income year) and “c” (market value of the FIF interest on the last day of the previous income year) of the comparative value formula – foreign tax credits paid on the last day of any month calculated under the branch equivalent method for a CFC or FIF under section LC 4(1)(a) of the Income Tax Act 1994. Example 4 A New Zealand resident with a balance date of 30 September 2001 held an interest in an FIF resident in Thailand. The market value of the FIF interest at 30 September 2001 (item “a” of the comparative value formula) was 500,000 Thailand baht (THB). THB500,000 ÷ 17.7151 = NZ$28,224.51 Note: If you need an exchange rate for a country or a day not listed in these tables, contact one of New Zealand’s major trading banks. Round the exchange rate calculations to four decimal places wherever possible. 12 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) Country Foreign currency to NZ$ Currencies17-Apr-0115-May-0115-Jun-0116-Jul-0115-Aug-0117-Sep-0115-Oct-0115-Nov-0117-Dec-0115-Jan-02 15-Feb-0215-Mar-02 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate United StatesDollarUSD0.41070.41990.41770.40680.43050.42310.41540.42010.41860.42220.42210.4308 0.43370.42860.42230.41950.41770.41810.41950.42150.42120.41910.41850.4198 United PoundGBP0.28600.29530.29800.28950.30110.28770.28600.29100.28790.29110.29500.3032 Kingdom0.29540.29360.29150.29070.29050.29000.29100.29240.29220.29120.29130.2927 AustraliaDollarAUD0.80330.80650.79290.79820.82340.82110.82030.80870.80600.81630.81520.8231 0.79050.78890.78930.79020.79560.79900.80460.80980.81060.81190.81240.8112 AustriaSchillingATS6.36826.59746.66776.54356.55916.31836.26996.53496.3411 6.58646.53626.51616.50966.47716.45676.44646.45946.4528 BahrainDollarBHD0.15460.15800.15790.15320.16220.15500.15700.15830.15770.15900.15920.1624 0.16330.16140.15910.15800.15730.15710.15770.15850.15830.15750.15730.1579 BelgiumFrancBEF18.658019.330219.535719.176819.218118.512418.372519.164718.5801 19.298019.151419.092619.073918.978618.918518.889018.928118.9088 CanadaDollarCAD0.64100.65030.63480.62470.66130.66190.64900.66840.65350.67390.67180.6860 0.65390.64850.64170.63870.63870.64130.64540.65060.65120.65150.65280.6564 ChinaYuanCNY3.40353.47273.45503.36903.56633.50853.43723.48243.46553.49863.49163.5705 3.59103.54833.49543.47243.45733.46103.47273.48943.48733.47083.46523.4767 DenmarkKroneDKK3.44963.57533.61013.54023.54693.41843.39553.53403.45023.50853.58653.6255 3.57063.54153.53003.52603.50733.49563.49173.49783.49193.49243.50083.5201 European EuroEUR0.46290.47950.48460.47580.47670.45880.45570.47540.46200.47230.48290.4879 Community0.47880.47510.47370.47320.47080.46930.46850.46950.46860.46890.47020.4729 FijiDollarFJD0.94820.95140.94890.94340.97580.95660.94940.94990.94850.95870.97160.9776 0.94990.94450.94060.93970.94180.94380.94830.95310.95320.95250.95410.9567 FinlandMarkkaFIM2.75192.85072.88152.82842.83412.73012.70972.82662.7403 2.84652.82482.81612.81332.79922.79032.78582.79172.7888 FranceFrancFRF3.03643.14533.17943.12073.12703.01162.98973.11883.0235 3.14263.11863.10913.10603.09053.08053.07563.08113.0770 French FrancXPF55.199257.160457.736956.780956.859254.754454.341956.652654.848556.299557.588054.4535 Polynesia57.004756.584156.427156.385656.124155.950955.871555.974255.850155.876356.043056.0562 Ger manyDeutsche-DEM0.90550.93800.94810.93070.93250.89830.89160.93000.9016 mark0.93640.92930.92650.92560.92100.91810.91660.91850.9176 GreeceDrachmaGRD157.7170163.3811165.1719162.1237162.4279156.4763155.3103161.9891157.0643 162.2371161.1412160.9472160.9072160.3126159.8472159.6414160.0003159.8399 Hong KongDollarHKD3.20213.27063.25643.17183.35723.30283.23963.27673.26423.29143.29153.3598 3.38043.34083.29193.27033.25633.25973.27123.28663.28433.26793.26313.2737 IndiaRupeeINR19.191319.595119.517519.061520.159120.092719.844520.079219.919820.262920.401920.8615 19.818919.697019.525819.450419.435419.504519.629319.767619.782719.742119.781419.9156 IndonesiaRupiahIDR4,443.08004,783.02004,685.40504,611.95503,655.93503,861.84504,140.65504,479.00004,268.73504,398.26004,315.62504,302.8250 3,999.94724,061.10894,104.45274,136.50384,157.26564,154.79404,204.64224,284.16794,296.47934,305.73884,321.42754,328.8617 IrelandPoundIEP0.36440.37750.38150.37450.37530.36150.35880.37430.3628 0.37690.37410.37300.37260.37070.36960.36900.36970.3693 ItalyLiraITL896.1792928.4040938.3783921.1974922.9090889.1167882.3324920.4047892.3644 926.6862919.6184916.7794915.9008911.2976908.4173907.2422909.1274908.1857 JapanYenJPY51.134151.688650.658050.750652.414049.641950.328251.072153.288055.702955.823455.5169 48.674248.638648.608148.749549.179249.381950.001850.838751.175551.408451.889452.3349 KoreaWonKOR546.4550544.1300538.8400528.3250548.8800549.3500535.2950536.0100534.1900550.4550550.9950565.2550 511.6304512.3263513.2556514.5704520.5995525.1079532.2446540.8733541.6600539.8854541.0046544.0150 KuwaitDollarKWD0.12610.12900.12880.12510.13160.12870.12700.12850.12800.12950.12980.1323 0.13280.13130.12940.12870.12790.12780.12840.12910.12900.12840.12830.1287 Table A: Mid-month and 12-month cumulative average exchange rate Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 13 MalaysiaRinggitMYR1.56241.59421.58601.54671.63711.61071.57801.59881.59091.60611.60291.6390 1.64841.62881.60451.59401.58711.58881.59421.60191.60091.59331.59081.5961 NetherlandsGuilderNLG1.02011.05671.06821.04851.05051.01201.00441.04781.0158 1.05501.04701.04381.04281.03771.03441.03271.03481.0338 NorwayKroneNOK3.75353.83713.86673.78353.85183.68083.62413.73323.71363.75353.75823.7825 3.89563.85633.83293.82253.80473.79113.78173.78113.77203.76353.75673.7615 PakistanRupeePKR24.841725.550026.081325.820927.218127.026725.647325.531825.352525.182725.194525.6853 24.127524.190424.341824.483324.857325.122325.326925.672125.704025.634825.655925.7611 Papua New KinaPGK1.23801.19481.25521.27261.36011.35801.36671.42231.45701.44371.44301.4684 Guinea1.20481.20471.21821.22641.24921.26361.28451.30861.32431.32851.34201.3566 PhilippinesPesoPHP20.411321.014221.260421.373021.948721.603821.380021.734221.647121.576421.538721.8346 20.153720.255320.376520.463820.700220.848021.050221.240121.282921.194321.280521.4435 PortugalEscudoPTE92.794096.127997.162695.380695.566892.060591.368295.314092.4083 95.989195.252594.955694.863194.387594.087793.938094.134294.0390 SingaporeDollarSGD0.74270.76210.75700.74600.75450.73290.75350.76660.76750.77410.76660.7833 0.75530.74980.74240.74040.73940.73930.74380.75110.75310.75310.75460.7589 Solomon DollarSBD2.09912.15642.16652.11312.23552.20722.19152.23282.24732.31172.37372.4858 Islands2.19562.17262.14412.13402.12982.13642.15092.17272.18162.18682.20292.2350 South AfricaRandZAR3.29613.33993.35713.35983.55923.64503.78064.05385.10004.83134.86085.0060 3.21613.21463.22363.23753.28753.32933.39633.49233.63543.74683.87034.0158 SpainPesetaESP77.007479.771480.635079.155679.305976.401275.827379.096876.5821 79.656579.048778.805878.728178.332678.083077.957878.120178.0302 Sri LankaRupeeLKR35.666037.387837.351236.493038.491438.000837.212538.517638.746039.204539.250940.4836 34.746234.910335.047735.129935.527435.846736.329237.006437.248937.399537.599538.0671 SwedenKronaSEK4.18724.31574.47114.38654.40154.42984.33604.44144.41234.35094.44574.4532 4.11974.11874.15814.18014.20714.23124.26304.31144.32924.34524.36304.3859 SwitzerlandFrancCHF0.70510.73440.74040.71960.72270.68700.67580.69810.68200.69900.71650.7132 0.73590.72930.72510.72330.71790.71430.71200.71150.70890.70680.70680.7078 TaiwanDollarTAI13.510013.775014.330014.215014.885014.625014.320014.465014.425014.765014.755015.0450 13.756713.675013.633813.660413.766613.868314.016314.170214.201314.218314.293314.4263 ThailandBahtTHB18.559018.985418.847618.445419.199218.623018.475718.585518.223618.393018.303718.5017 18.113818.155918.193918.212018.332918.392118.500418.630918.609018.538718.553418.5952 To n g aPa’angaTOP0.85120.87360.88180.87560.92600.92170.91330.91190.91210.91880.92650.9354 0.80910.81430.82320.82920.84580.85570.86900.88320.88770.89080.89640.9040 VanuatuVatuVUV61.147461.063259.807259.714862.042960.497160.569560.444760.366160.572461.339561.8369 60.964060.595260.135660.013960.086160.183460.521960.838960.812260.630360.656960.7835 Western TalaWST1.38281.38441.37791.36631.49661.46941.45131.47491.47371.48031.49591.5111 Samoa1.40081.39211.38211.37811.38461.39271.40361.41781.42381.42761.43561.4470 Country Foreign currency to NZ$ Currencies17-Apr-0115-May-0115-Jun-0116-Jul-0115-Aug-0117-Sep-0115-Oct-0115-Nov-0117-Dec-0115-Jan-02 15-Feb-0215-Mar-02 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 12-month rate 14 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) CountryCurrenciesCode30-Apr-0131-May-0129-Jun-0131-Jul-0131-Aug-0128-Sep-0131-Oct-0130-Nov-0131-Dec-0131-Jan-0228-Feb-0228-Mar-02 United States DollarUSD0.41190.41670.40610.41200.44140.40150.41410.41230.41540.41580.41960.4356 United Kingdom PoundGBP0.28680.29200.28830.28880.30280.27230.28490.28940.28630.29370.29620.3056 AustraliaDollarAUD0.80820.81190.80190.81470.82970.82360.82010.79620.81190.82070.81350.8252 AustriaSchillingATS6.35216.68496.61246.47746.62336.01606.28986.38816.4519 BahrainDollarBHD0.15520.15690.15320.15520.16620.15140.15610.15550.15660.15660.15810.1641 BelgiumFrancBEF18.619019.587619.375418.983419.406817.623918.433218.717918.9061 CanadaDollarCAD0.63110.64360.61790.63010.68180.63320.65360.65250.66000.66080.67420.6940 ChinaYuanCNY3.41193.45103.36213.41293.65753.32443.42913.41523.43813.44303.47663.6068 DenmarkKroneDKK3.44623.62333.57503.50343.58223.25053.40083.45483.48963.57413.60783.7058 European Community EuroEUR0.46180.48600.48060.47090.48140.43730.45730.46430.46900.48150.48540.4988 FijiDollarFJD0.94270.95200.93100.94830.98090.92530.94910.93380.95620.96010.96550.9830 FinlandMarkkaFIM2.74562.88912.85782.79962.86222.59982.71922.74812.7882 FranceFrancFRF3.02933.18783.15323.08583.15822.86863.00013.04593.0763 French Polynesia FrancXPF55.101957.970857.353056.133457.459852.187554.496255.355055.903557.388057.872759.4372 GermanyDeusche- mark DEM0.90340.95070.94020.92120.94180.85540.89570.90840.9176 GreeceDrachmaGRD157.3611165.6059163.7821160.4554164.0478148.9991155.8209158.2346159.8296 Hong Kong DollarHKD3.21203.24953.16643.21293.44283.13073.22933.21513.23843.24223.27193.3965 IndiaRupeeINR19.197719.462518.982619.298320.717119.063219.761019.661919.917220.009820.324121.0907 IndonesiaRupiahIDR4,885.06004,750.71504,650.01004,000.07503,941.94003,885.13504,308.87004,296.07004,351.47004,295.28004,277.22004,209.5700 IrelandPoundIEP0.36350.38260.37820.37070.37860.34430.36010.36550.3692 ItalyLiraITL894.16940.88930.57911.78932.17846.64885.63898.85908.19 JapanYenJPY51.118550.123150.620451.525752.707648.000650.516951.007654.438655.138556.373757.7640 KoreaWonKOR547.1650536.9400528.8450533.9650562.9350520.9100533.5950519.4400545.3950541.1900553.3050573.8600 KuwaitDollarKWD0.12650.12810.12520.12640.13440.12240.12640.12640.12750.12790.12910.1338 MalaysiaRinggitMYR1.56631.58411.54341.56681.67911.52621.57421.56781.57841.58071.59611.6557 Nether- lands GuilderNLG1.01771.07101.05921.03781.06100.96371.00791.02331.0335 NorwayKroneNOK3.74553.84603.77623.76183.88123.53993.64853.69323.72923.77083.74193.8389 PakistanRupeePKR25.061026.051725.619626.149028.038625.575225.261724.936624.941324.835725.046725.9994 Papua New Guinea KinaPGK1.17241.30831.29651.29801.40091.30991.37771.44101.45461.40611.41211.4890 PhilippinesPesoPHP20.887020.962421.107721.744222.499920.481021.384321.293521.332121.194821.423522.0803 PortugalEscudoPTE92.584297.413896.459094.402696.512987.663791.681593.087194.0196 SingaporeDollarSGD0.74810.75250.73870.74250.77030.70710.75380.75420.76800.76190.76930.8016 Solomon Islands DollarSBD2.11112.15782.10892.15352.29402.10092.19482.19912.23912.31962.37822.6909 South Africa RandZAR3.28223.33013.26633.38603.69953.57503.89244.24254.97244.74504.77744.9734 SpainPesetaESP76.833980.743779.947178.499280.094072.748776.087277.247578.0251 Sri LankaRupeeLKR36.537737.725336.538336.913639.464235.943437.626438.172338.440738.686939.076441.2883 SwedenKronaSEK4.19764.41224.41714.35804.57554.29734.39464.39784.35864.43564.40754.5031 SwitzerlandFrancCHF0.71090.74080.73120.71100.72950.64730.67180.68260.69470.70920.71640.7306 TaiwanDollarTAI13.550014.140013.980014.300015.245013.835014.270014.170014.530014.515014.705015.2150 ThailandBahtTHB18.652718.820518.304418.722119.463717.715118.378618.081018.202318.146918.259918.7443 To n g aPa’angaTOP0.85740.87580.86590.88740.94980.88960.90700.89970.91230.90920.91960.9445 VanuatuVatuVUV60.461560.183559.036660.128662.237658.922360.324059.423060.677760.300560.785062.4995 Western Samoa TalaWST1.37921.37611.35101.37831.50531.41391.46981.45751.47381.46591.48861.5177 Table B: End of month exchange rates Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 15 16 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) STANDARD PRACTICE STATEMENT IR-SPS INV-251 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURES This statement also appears in Tax Information Bulletin, Vol 14, No 4. Introduction This Standard Practice Statement (SPS) applies to voluntary disclosures under section 141G of the Tax Administration Act 1994. It establishes guidelines for making a voluntary disclosure, the timing of notifi cation and what constitutes a voluntary disclosure. Application This SPS replaces SPS INV-250 and will apply from 1 May 2002. The major change from SPS INV-250 is in respect of the Commissioner’s practice regarding prosecution in the event of a voluntary disclosure. The new practice is that prosecution may be undertaken in cases of evasion and fraud when a post-notifi cation disclosure is made. Pre-notifi cation disclosures will still have full immunity from prosecution. Summary A taxpayer may make a voluntary disclosure either before being notifi ed of a pending tax audit or investigation (“pre-notifi cation disclosure”) or after the fi rst notifi cation but before the audit or investigation starts (“post-notifi cation disclosure”). The disclosure must be full and complete. The minimum details required are: – taxpayer’s details (name, trade name, IRD number, address, date of birth or incorporation, contact telephone number and contact times) – the nature of the errors or omissions – an explanation as to why the errors or omissions occurred – adequate information to enable an assessment of the tax shortfall to be made – a declaration signed by the taxpayer, if possible – further information as is necessary to make an assessment. A full and complete disclosure will result in a reduction in the applicable rate of shortfall penalty. Where a pre-notifi cation disclosure is made, Inland Revenue will not consider prosecution. For a post-notifi cation disclosure, prosecution may be considered in cases of evasion or a similar offence (those offences listed in section 143B of the Tax Administration Act 1994). All legislative references in this SPS are to the Tax Administration Act 1994 unless otherwise specifi ed. Background The New Zealand tax system is based on voluntary compliance. It relies on taxpayers meeting their obligations under the tax laws, for example, fi ling tax returns and returning all income. The voluntary disclosure system provides an incentive to taxpayers to determine their correct tax liability. It also refl ects the savings to Inland Revenue from voluntary admissions of irregularities and other benefi ts of cooperation by taxpayers. By making a full and complete voluntary disclosure, a taxpayer will get the advantage of reduced levels in any shortfall penalty imposed. If a taxpayer makes a pre-notifi cation disclosure, the level of any shortfall penalty will be reduced by 75%. If a post-notifi cation disclosure is made, the reduction in shortfall penalty will be 40%. Legislation Section 141G of the Tax Administration Act 1994 provides as follows 141G Reduction in penalty for voluntary disclosure– (1) A shortfall penalty payable by a taxpayer under any of sections 141A to 141E may be reduced if, in the Commissioner’s opinion, the taxpayer makes a full voluntary disclosure to the Commissioner of all the details of the tax shortfall, either (a) Before the taxpayer is fi rst notifi ed of a pending tax audit or investigation (referred to in this section as “pre-notifi cation disclosure”); or (b) After the taxpayer is notifi ed of a pending tax audit or investigation, but before the Commissioner starts the audit or investigation (referred to in this section as “post-notifi cation disclosure”). Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 17 (2) The Commissioner may from time to time– (a) Specify the information required for a full voluntary disclosure; and (b) The form in which it must be provided. (3) The level by which the shortfall penalty is reduced– (a) For pre-notifi cation disclosure is 75% (b) For post-notifi cation disclosure is 40%. (4) The taxpayer is deemed to have been notifi ed of a pending tax audit or investigation, or that the tax audit or investigation has started, if– (a) The taxpayer; or (b) An offi cer of the taxpayer; or (c) A shareholder of the taxpayer, if the taxpayer is a close company; or (d) A tax advisor acting for the taxpayer; or (e) A partner in partnership with the taxpayer; or (f) A person acting for or on behalf of or as a fi duciary of the taxpayer,– is notifi ed of the pending tax audit or investigation, or that the tax audit or investigation has started. (5) An audit or investigation starts at the earlier of– (a) The end of the fi rst interview an offi cer of the Department has with the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s representative after the taxpayer receives the notice referred to in subsection (4); and (b) The time when– (i) An offi cer of the Department inspects information (including books or records) of the taxpayer after the taxpayer receives the notice referred to in subsection (4); and (ii) The taxpayer is notifi ed of the inspection. Standard Practice Voluntary disclosure methods Taxpayers can make a voluntary disclosure in any one of the following ways: – by visiting an Inland Revenue offi ce – by telephone call – by letter, fax or email – during an interview. Visits and telephone calls If a taxpayer makes a voluntary disclosure by visiting or telephoning Inland Revenue, as much information as possible will need to be provided by the taxpayer. Any Inland Revenue offi cer is able to record a voluntary disclosure when a taxpayer comes into or contacts Inland Revenue. Inland Revenue will request taxpayers making a voluntary disclosure to sign a form refl ecting their disclosure. Written disclosure If a voluntary disclosure is received in writing between the time of fi rst notifi cation of the audit and the fi rst interview, it will be referred to the auditor who is conducting the audit or investigation. The auditor will incorporate this as correspondence relating to the audit or investigation. An acknowledgment will be made that the disclosure has been received. During the fi rst interview For disclosures made during the fi rst interview, the Inland Revenue auditor will consider whether the disclosure is complete and reveals all the relevant information necessary to ascertain the correct tax position. Notifi cation Subsection 141G(4) provides that a taxpayer has been notifi ed of a pending audit or investigation, or that the tax audit or investigation has started, if any of the following persons have received notifi cation: – the taxpayer – an offi cer of the taxpayer – a shareholder of the taxpayer (for close companies) – a tax advisor acting for the taxpayer – a partner in a partnership – a person acting for, or on behalf of, or as a fi duciary of the taxpayer. An offi cer includes a director, secretary, receiver or liquidator. It does not include an employee. Time of notifi cation Notifi cation will occur at the earlier of the date of receipt by the taxpayer or agent of the written advice or the time of a telephone call advising the commencement of the audit or investigation. If the exact time of receipt of the written notice becomes crucial, it will be ascertained from the expected time for the mail to reach its destination as prescribed by section 14(2) of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Any telephone call advising of an audit or investigation will be followed up by written advice as soon as possible. 18 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) Unannounced visits In the case of unannounced visits, the time of the notifi cation will be the date of fi rst contact with the taxpayer. Date an audit or investigation starts Section 141G(5) states that a tax audit or investigation starts at the earlier of: – the end of the fi rst interview an Inland Revenue offi cer has with the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s representative, after the taxpayer receives the notice, and – the time when: – an offi cer of Inland Revenue inspects information (including books or records) of the taxpayer after the taxpayer receives notice, and – the time the taxpayer is notifi ed of the inspection. Taxpayer’s authorised representative present at interview If the taxpayer does not attend the fi rst interview but instead sends a representative, the taxpayer cannot claim the benefi t of a post-notifi cation disclosure for any additional tax shortfall revealed after the interview. This is the case even if the representative was not given any information by the taxpayer from which to make a disclosure. Disclosure by a subsidiary of a company An audit of a parent company, or a subsidiary of that company, may necessitate the audit of other subsidiaries within the group. In such cases, disclosure would depend upon which entity had been notifi ed. If the parent company had received notifi cation that the audit was restricted to that entity, then any disclosure made by the subsidiary is voluntary disclosure prior to notifi cation of an audit. However, if another company in the group has been notifi ed that the audit is being extended, any disclosure made by that other company would be considered a disclosure after notifi cation of an audit. When a company has a branch or branches, they are considered to have been notifi ed at the same time as the company, as they are part of the company and not separate entities. Full disclosure Any voluntary disclosure will initially be considered, subject to the applicable time bar, as a request for an amendment of an assessment under section 113 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 or section 27(2) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. The disclosure must be full and complete. It is not up to the Commissioner to elicit the required information from the taxpayer. This does not necessarily mean disclosing the discrepancies to the last dollar, but does require providing enough information to enable the auditor, investigator or offi cer to make an assessment. Each case will have to be considered on its own merits. If a taxpayer is not able to provide full details at the fi rst point of contact with Inland Revenue, the Commissioner will allow the taxpayer reasonable time to obtain more information. The time period for obtaining this information will be negotiated between the taxpayer and the Inland Revenue offi cer. Once this information is provided and the disclosure is considered full and complete, the date of the voluntary disclosure will be the date of the fi rst point of contact. Minimum details required To satisfy full and complete disclosure, the following minimum details must be provided: – taxpayers details (name, trade name, IRD number, address, date of birth or incorporation, contact telephone number and contact times) – the nature of the errors or omissions – an explanation as to why the errors or omissions occurred – adequate information to enable an assessment of the tax shortfall to be made – a declaration signed by the taxpayer, if possible – further information as is necessary to make an assessment. Where this information is not provided, the Commissioner will consider on a case-by-case basis whether the information provided is suffi cient to satisfy the full and complete disclosure requirements. In doing so, the Commissioner will have regard to the taxpayer’s reasons for not making the specifi ed information available. More than one tax shortfall Each tax shortfall is considered separately. If there is more than one tax shortfall, one being the subject of voluntary disclosure and the other being detected by an audit, the shortfall detected by the audit will not come within the voluntary disclosure regime. If the items are identical or similar, they will be treated as one tax shortfall. Therefore, for a full and complete voluntary disclosure, both items will need to be disclosed prior to the end of the fi rst interview. If one of the items is not disclosed until after the fi rst interview, this will result in the taxpayer not satisfying the requirements of a full and complete disclosure. Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 19 Disclosure of another tax type If an audit is being carried out on one tax type and the taxpayer makes a voluntary disclosure regarding another tax type, and they have not been notifi ed that the other tax type is being audited, the taxpayer will qualify for voluntary disclosure prior to notifi cation of an audit as long as the disclosure meets all other requirements. Disclosure of another period It is common for a notice of intention to carry out an audit to state that a particular year or period is to be audited, but previous years or periods may be looked at if necessary. The year or period referred to only is examined in the fi rst instance. If the taxpayer has not been advised that an earlier year or period is being examined, the taxpayer is able to make a pre-notifi cation disclosure for that year or period. Disclosure where Inland Revenue already knows of the shortfall In situations where the information provided is required by law or Inland Revenue knows there is a tax shortfall and has verifi cation of that shortfall, the taxpayer cannot make a voluntary disclosure. An example of this is when an employer fi les their employer monthly schedule without an accompanying payment. The employer cannot voluntarily disclose the non-payment of the PAYE as Inland Revenue will know that payment has not been made. For further information on this refer to Standard Practice Statement INV-260, Notifi cation of a Pending Audit or Investigation published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 12, No 2. Disclosure forms Where possible it is desirable for the protection of both the taxpayer and Inland Revenue that disclosures be in writing and signed by the taxpayer. Voluntary disclosure (IR 282A) form, which covers both pre-notifi cation and post-notifi cation disclosures, has been prepared for this purpose. However, Inland Revenue will also accept other written and verbal disclosures without the need for the taxpayer to complete the form. Prosecution and Publication of Name If a voluntary disclosure is full and complete: • Inland Revenue will not consider prosecution action for pre-notifi cation disclosures. • In post-notifi cation cases, prosecution may be considered in cases of evasion or similar offences (those offences listed in section 143B of the Tax Administration Act 1994). • There will be no publication of the taxpayer’s name in the New Zealand Gazette. This Standard Practice Statement was signed by me on 11 April 2002. Margaret Cotton National Manager Technical Standards 20 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) NOTICE OF CURRENT STATUS OF STANDARD PRACTICE STATEMENT STANDARD PRACTICE STATEMENT IR-SPS RDC 6.1 ARRANGEMENTS FOR PAYMENT OF TAX DEBT – as published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 13, No 4 (April 2001). Standard Practice Statement (IR-SPS) RDC 6.1 will now only apply to arrangements entered into before 1 April 2002. With effect from 1 April 2002, the Taxation (Benefi ciary Income of Minors, Services-Related Payments and Remedial Matters) Act 2001 amended the Tax Administration Act 1994, as it applies to arrangements for payment of tax debt. IR-SPS RDC 6.1 is currently being reviewed and will be updated to refl ect these legislative changes and those proposed in the Taxation (Relief, Refunds and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 2001. Margaret Cotton National Manager (Technical Standards) Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 21 22 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) LEGAL DECISIONS – CASE NOTES This section of the TIB sets out brief notes of recent tax decisions made by the Taxation Review Authority, the High Court, the Court of Appeal and the Privy Council. We’ve given full references to each case, including the citation details where it has already been reported. Details of the relevant Act and section will help you to quickly identify the legislation at issue. Short case summaries and keywords deliver the bare essentials for busy readers. The notes also outline the principal facts and grounds for the decision. Where possible, we have indicated if an appeal will be forthcoming. These case reviews do not set out Inland Revenue policy, nor do they represent our attitude to the decision. These are purely brief factual reviews of decisions for the general interest of our readers. SETTING ASIDE OF BANKRUPTCY NOTICE Case: Moti Singh v Commissioner of Inland Revenue Decision date: 5 April 2002 Act: Insolvency Act 1967 Keywords: Bankruptcy notice, application to set aside Summary The applicant was unsuccessful in his attempt to have a bankruptcy notice set aside. Facts A bankruptcy notice was issued on 16 November 2001 following the entry of a fi nal judgment for $84,473.94 in the District Court. The bankruptcy notice claimed an additional $10,247.08 in costs, making a total of $94,721.02. The debtor applied to have the notice set aside. The grounds advanced by the debtor to set aside the notice were that: 1. He had a counterclaim, set-off or cross-demand against the Commissioner that equalled or exceeded the amount claimed, which he could not have set up in the action in which judgment was obtained. 2. The Commissioner had seized approximately $87,000 from the debtor’s bank accounts dating back to November 1992 on the pretext that the debtor owed some $129,000 in outstanding taxes and various penalties. 3. He had persistently disputed the alleged tax liability and had requested the matter be determined by the TRA, which the Commissioner had been delaying. 4. The Commissioner had previously undertaken not to bankrupt him until his taxation appeal had been determined by the TRA. 5. The judgment upon which the Commissioner’s claim is based was defective and the debtor would be seeking judicial review of that judgment. 6. Unless his tax liability is fi nalised conclusively he is in no position to satisfy the judgment debt. 7. The Commissioner’s conduct in seeking the bankruptcy notice was an abuse of the process of the court and the Commissioner was motivated by vindictiveness and vendetta. The debtor also put forward Bill of Rights and Human Rights arguments relating to the right not to be subjected to cruel, degrading, inhuman or disproportionately severe treatment or punishment. Decision Master Gendall dealt with the application under section 19(1)(d) and section 20 of the Insolvency Act 1967, and rule 41 of the Insolvency Rules 1970. On the fi rst ground of the debtor’s application, the Master found that, while a credit of some $35,000 had already been given, there would still be a substantial amount outstanding under the bankruptcy notice, even if a further contingent tax credit were granted. He also noted that the debtor had not appealed or reviewed the judgment upon which the Commissioner relied in this matter, nor had the debtor appealed a separate tax matter decided in the TRA. Accordingly, the Master was not satisfi ed that the debtor had set up any matters that he could not have set up in the District Court proceedings, or similarly in any counterclaim, set-off or cross demand proceedings. The second ground was dismissed as having no substance in it for setting aside a bankruptcy notice. Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 23 As to the third ground, Master Gendall noted that the debtor’s tax position had been conclusively determined by the TRA, and the debtor had been unable to place before the Court in the current proceedings any other material to support this ground. For his fourth ground, the debtor relied on an affi davit sworn by an offi cer of Inland Revenue. However, the affi davit pre-dated the entry of fi nal judgment against the debtor. There was no stay of execution of the fi nal judgment, and the debtor could not put forward any evidence to support his allegations in regard to this point. The ground was dismissed. The fi fth ground was also dismissed, as the debtor was unable to satisfy the Court that he would be seeking judicial review of the judgment and had any real prospects of success were he to do so. In order to succeed on the sixth ground, the debtor had to satisfy the Court that either – a) the amount of the judgment debt has been paid, or b) that the debtor has a counterclaim, set-off or cross demand that equals or exceeds the amount of the judgment debt or sum ordered to be paid and that he could not set up in the action in which the judgment was obtained. As previously noted by the Master, the debtor was unable to do this, and this ground, too, was dismissed. Likewise, the seventh ground was also dismissed. Master Gendall found no evidence of abuse of process or that the Commissioner was motivated by vindictiveness and vendetta. The Master then turned to the last of the grounds put forward by the debtor—the “novel” arguments raised under the Bill of Rights Act and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The debtor contended that the Commissioner’s “overwhelming desire” to bankrupt him breached section 9 and Article 7. However, nothing was placed before the Court to substantiate the claims and they were dismissed. Master Gendall also questioned the relevance of the arguments to the matter at hand. Accordingly, the debtor failed to satisfy the requirements of the Insolvency Act and the application to set aside the bankruptcy notice was dismissed. CHILD SUPPORT APPEAL UNSUCCESSFUL, JUDICIAL REVIEW PARTIALLY SUCCESSFUL Case: Philip Alan Johnson v CIR & Family Court at Waitakere & Tania Raewyn Hewitt Philip Alan Johnson v Tania Raewyn Hewitt & CIR Decision date: 20 March 2002 Act: Child Support Act 1991 Keywords: Departure orders, judicial review Summary The appellant (applicant) was unsuccessful in his appeal of the Family Court’s decision upholding the Commissioner’s determinations, but partially successful in his judicial review of the Commissioner’s determinations. Facts The Child Support Act 1991 provides a mechanism for determining the amount of child support a non-custodial parent is required to pay. This is known as the formula assessment and is based on the taxable income of that parent and other factors. However, either the liable parent or the custodial parent can apply for a departure from the formula assessment in certain cases. Mr Johnson and Ms Hewitt were married in 1993. Their son, Samuel, was born at the end of 1995 and they separated in 1996. Ms Hewitt, the custodial parent, applied to the Commissioner for departures from the formula assessment in November 1998 and again in February 2000. The November 1998 application resulted in a departure from the formula assessment, and Mr Johnson’s income was set at $38,000 for the purposes of determining his child support liability. The February 2000 application resulted in another departure order and Mr Johnson’s income being set at $36,000. Mr Johnson made an application to the Family Court for a departure order from the Commissioner’s determinations. The Family Court declined the application on 10 April 2001. This case was a combination of two proceedings. Mr Johnson appealed against a decision of the Family Court and also sought to judicially review the Commissioner’s determinations. 24 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) Decision The Appeal O’Regan J analysed the Child Support Act and the different roles of the Commissioner and the Family Court in determining child support liability. O’Regan J noted that Part 6A of the Act (which established a new procedure whereby parents could apply for departures from the formula assessment) had been overlayed on top of the existing Act with little indication as to how the new and old Parts were to interact. The two main issues focused on were whether the Family Court can make retrospective departure orders and whether the Family Court can make suspension orders that effectively terminate liability. O’Regan J concluded that the Family Court did not exercise an appellate function over determinations of the Commissioner and that its jurisdiction to review determinations was not limited to the specifi c grounds relied on by the applicant before the Commissioner. However, section 104 made it clear that the great majority of cases before the Family Court should have been fi rst heard by the Commissioner. O’Regan J also noted various problems with the legislative framework. There were inconsistencies in the right to go to the Family Court once the Commissioner has heard an application. O’Regan J considered that section 104 “requires a comprehensive overhaul, a task which rightly belongs to Parliament.” (paragraph \[46\]) O’Regan J set out a useful summary of the proper procedure most cases would follow at paragraph \[48\] of the judgment. An application to the Family Court is not an appeal, but rather a second overlapping review process. After analysing the legislation O’Regan J concluded that neither the Commissioner nor the Family Court has the power to make retrospective departure orders from assessments relating to a previous year, except in limited circumstances. O’Regan J also held that the power under section 117 to suspend or alter liability for payments was a temporary one. It could not be used to “effectively expunge a party’s liability.” (paragraph \[72\]) O’Regan J considered that, when the decision of the Family Court in this case was assessed against his analysis of the legislation, it was clear that Mr Johnson’s appeal could not succeed. His Honour concluded: “Mr Johnson’s appeal against the Family Court decision fails in all respects.” (paragraph \[78\]) The Judicial Review O’Regan J quickly disposed of the majority of Mr Johnson’s grounds for judicial review. His Honour held that the review offi cer was entitled to fi nd that Mr Johnson had the potential to earn more money as he had discretion to assess evidence and make conclusions. Similarly, the review offi cer could not be said to be wrong and unreasonable in concluding that Mr Johnson had failed to provide requisite information. It could not be said that the 1998 and 2000 determinations were without foundation. However, Mr Johnson was successful in his argument that the Commissioner had made an error of law in the 2000 determination in determining what the statutory phrase “earning capacity” meant in section 105(2)(c)(i) of the Child Support Act. O’Regan J considered that the Commissioner had interpreted the phrase “earning capacity” to mean “the potential to earn more money if steps are taken to improve one’s marketability or employment prospects.” (paragraph \[91\]) O’Regan J considered that “only the reasonable abilities of the liable parent and the opportunities reasonably available to him or her are to be assessed.” (paragraph \[95\]) O’Regan J concluded that the Act does not impose an obligation on a parent to increase their skill base in order to earn more money (and therefore pay more child support) beyond the requirement that he or she utilised their existing skills and opportunities. Therefore, O’Regan J ordered that the determination relating to the 2000 year be remitted back to the Commissioner for reconsideration in light of the correct understanding of the statutory language, as outlined in his judgment. 25 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) 26 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) NON-STANDARD BALANCE DATE APPROVED FOR PIPFRUIT GROWERS The Commissioner has approved a non-standard balance date for pipfruit growers of 31 December. Currently, orchardists and pipfruit growers may apply for a non-standard balance date of 1 April to 30 June. With effect from the 2003 income year, pipfruit growers who meet the criteria for having a non-standard balance date, as set out in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 5, No 11 (April 1994), may apply to the Commissioner to have a balance date of 31 December approved. For other orchardists, the Commissioner will continue to recognise that the period 1 April to 30 June may be appropriate. Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 27 MAY 2002 6 Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deductions per annum) • Employer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due • Employer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 20 Employer deductions Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deductions per annum) • Employer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Small employers (less than $100,000 PAYE and SSCWT deductions per annum) • Employer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due • Employer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 31 GST return and payment due FBT return and payment due JUNE 2002 5 Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deductions per annum) • Employer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due • Employer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 20 Employer deductions Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deductions per annum) • Employer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Small employers (less than $100,000 PAYE and SSCWT deductions per annum) • Employer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due • Employer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 30 GST return and payment due DUE DATES REMINDER REGULAR FEATURES 28 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14, No 4 (April 2002) 29 Name Address Draft interpretation statement Comment deadline ED0027: Requests to amend assessments 31 May 2002 Draft standard practice statement Comment deadline ED0029: Remission of penalties and interest 31 May 2002 Items are not generally available once the comment deadline has passed Affi x Stamp Here No envelope needed—simply fold, tape shut, stamp and post YOUR CHANCE TO COMMENT ON DRAFT TAXATION ITEMS BEFORE THEY ARE FINALISED This page shows the draft public binding rulings, interpretation statements, standard practice statements and other items that we now have available for your review. You can get a copy and give us your comments in these ways: The Manager (Field Liaison) Adjudication & Rulings National Offi ce Inland Revenue Department PO Box 2198 Wellington By post: Tick the drafts you want below, fi ll in your name and address, and return this page to the address below. We’ll send you the drafts by return post. Please send any comments in writing, to the address below. We don’t have facilities to deal with your comments by phone or at our other offi ces. By internet: Visit www.ird.govt.nz On the homepage, click on “The Rulings Unit welcomes your comment on drafts of public rulings/interpretation statements before they’re fi nalised...” Below the heading “Think about the issues”, click on the drafts that interest you. You can return your comments by internet. 30 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 14 No 4 (April 2002) INLAND REVENUE NATIONAL OFFICE PO BOX 2198 WELLINGTON TELEPHONE (04) 472 1032