A guide to the Re-ordered Tax Acts An explanation of changes, and comparative tables of sections This TIB appendix deals with recent tax legislation. The following Acts were enacted in December 1994: • Income Tax Act 1994 • Tax Administration Act 1994 • Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994 The new Acts resulted from the Income Tax Bill 1994, the Tax Administration Bill 1994 and the Taxation Review Authorities Bill 1994 respectively, which were introduced into Parliament in October 1994. These new Acts re-order the Income Tax Act 1976 and the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974. The comparative tables in this appendix cross-refer sections of the new and old Acts. Issued as an appendix to TIB Volume Six, No.9 (February 1995) 2 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income Tax Act 1994, Tax Administration Act 1994, and Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994 - the re-ordered tax Acts Introduction The three new Acts which will replace the Income Tax Act 1976 and the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 have been passed. Provisions relating to the calculation of tax liabilities are contained in the Income Tax Act 1994. Administra- tive provisions, such as return filing obligations and objection procedures from the Income Tax Act 1976 and other sections from the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974, are located in the Tax Administration Act 1994. Provisions relating to the establishment and operation of the Taxation Review Authorities have been transferred to a separate Act, the Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994. Income Tax Act 1994 1 Tax Administration Act 1994 1 Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994 1 Charging sections Administrative sections Sections covering TRA operation/establishmen Income Tax Act 1976 1 Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 1 The new legislation is not intended to change any law, apart from the two issues which are explained on page 4. A provision stating this is contained in each of the new Acts. The provisions of the new Acts have been arranged in a new and more logical order, and minor drafting changes have been made to modernise the wording of the legislation. When the new Acts come into force All three Acts come into force on 1 April 1995. The Income Tax Act and the Tax Administration Act apply, where appropriate, for the 1995-96 and subsequent income years. Certain provisions of the Income Tax and Tax Adminis- tration Acts can therefore apply earlier than 1 April 1995 to taxpayers who have early balance dates. For example, for a taxpayer who has a balance date of 30 October (an accounting year from 1 November to 30 October) the new Acts can apply from 1 November 1994. Other provisions which are clearly on an annual basis, such as section 92 of the Tax Administration Act \[Commissioner to make assessments\] and section NC 1 of the Income Tax Act \[Application of PAYE rules\], will apply from 1 April 1995 regardless of a taxpayer’s balance date. Background The Consultative Committee on the Taxation of Income from Capital, chaired by Mr Arthur Valabh, released its Final Report in October 1992. In this report it recom- mended that the Income Tax Act and the Inland Rev- enue Department Act be reorganised into a more coherent scheme with a logical structure. A major deficiency in the current Acts is the lack of any logical order or structure that reflects the various roles of quantifying taxable income. Provisions are repetitive and cumbersome, and drafting styles are archaic and inconsistent. Advantages of the re-ordering are that it makes the legislation easier to understand and assists in interpreta- tion. It will also facilitate progressive revision of the legislation. The approach taken in the re-ordering is explained in the Second Report of the Working Party on the Reor- ganisation of the Income Tax Act 1976, released in September 1993. That Working Party was also chaired by Mr Valabh. No change to existing law The reorganisation is not intended to change the interpretation or effect of the existing income tax law. However, in order to create a coherent and logical scheme within the Acts, it has been necessary to break up provisions relating to specific tax regimes. Interpre- tational questions may arise about the effect of the provisions as they appear in the re-ordered Acts. Each Act includes a specific provision which stipulates that the reorganisation, and changes of style and language are not intended to change the law. The Courts will have regard to those provisions in deciding any issue which arises. Income Tax Act 1994 - key features Most changes occur in this Act. Departures from the current legislation relate to: • structure • numbering system • placement of definitions. Structure The structure reflects a coherent scheme and purpose by recognising that accounting records are the starting point for calculating tax liabilities. 3 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) N Withholding Taxes and Taxes on the Income of Others Obligations of persons to withhold tax from or pay tax on income or income equivalents O Definitions and Related Matters Meanings of terms that appear in more than one section Y Amendments, Repeals, Savings, and Transitional Provisions Time savings and transitional provisions; Schedules Each Part of the new Act begins with Subpart B. Generic purpose provisions that contribute to a clearer understanding of the Part and facilitate an understand- ing of the structure of the Act will be drafted and inserted as Subpart A, as part of the re-write exercise - see “Future direction”, below. Other structural features are: • Grouping of Subparts within Parts has tended to be on the basis of moving from general to specific provi- sions. • Provisions that provided that references to income year included references to corresponding non- standard accounting years and so on have been amalgamated in section OF 2. (For example, section OF 2(2)(h)(iii) signposts the treatment which was previously reflected in section 75(4)). • Matrimonial property provisions have been amalga- mated in Part FF. Some of the original matrimonial property provisions have been archived, as they were reproduced in a slightly modified format. (For exam- ple, the effect of the proviso to section 65(2)(a) of the Income Tax Act 1976 is reflected in section FF 3, but the drafting is modified to reflect the format of the new Act). • Each Part contains a Subpart Z entitled “Terminating Provisions” which is reserved for provisions that have temporary operative effect and will cease to exist over the passage of time. Numbering system Each Part and Subpart within a Part of the re-ordered Income Tax Act is lettered alphabetically, and provi- sions have been ordered within each of those Subparts. Sections within each Subpart are numbered consecu- tively in ordinary numerals. Subsections, paragraphs and subparagraphs are either renumbered or relettered (refer to the Tables of Conversion, or “Keys”, later in this issue). The alphanumeric numbering system has two principal benefits: • Each section reference provides a guide to the content and subject matter associated with the relevant provision. • The system can easily accommodate insertions of new provisions each time the Act is amended. The approach (referred to as the “transactions ap- proach” in the Working Party’s report) is: Revenue less Expenditure (deductions)(Parts B - D) adjustedTiming/apportionment/ fortax avoidance(Parts E - G) equalsNet income(Parts H & I) givingTax liability rise to(including surcharges)(Part J) offset byRebates/credits for tax paid(Parts K & L) leavingTax to pay or be refunded(Part M) The new Act is divided into 16 Parts, with the short title and commencement provision (section A 1) falling outside the Part structure. The new Parts are: A Purpose and Construction Purpose and interpretation B Core Provisions Basic and fundamental provisions relating to the quantification and imposition of the tax liability C Income Further Defined Scope of taxable income or income equivalents D Deductions Further Defined Scope of expenditures; clawbacks E Timing of Income and Deductions When income is taxable and expenditure deductible F Apportionment and Recharacterised Transactions Treatment of transactions with more than one purpose; transactions where form differs from substance G Avoidance and Non-Market Transactions Treatment of tax avoidance; market value of non- market transactions H Treatment of Net Income of Certain Entities Net income or losses of different kinds of taxable entities IAssessment of Income and Treatment of Losses Calculation of assessable income and eligibility to, and restrictions from, carrying forward losses J Surcharges Imposition of surcharges K Rebates Entitlement of taxpayers to different types of rebates L Credits Entitlement of taxpayers to credits for taxes paid M Tax Payments Quantification and payment of provisional and terminal tax; operation of memorandum accounts under the full imputation, dividend withholding payment, and branch equivalent tax regimes continued on page 4 4 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) 64M • RWT rules, previously Part IXA • SSCWT rules, previously Part XC • Time bar, previously section 25 • Trust rules, previously sections 227 to 233. Placing the definitions after the substantive provisions in an Act is a major departure from the normal treat- ment. This was done because of the very large number of definitions used in the Income Tax Act. Their placement in the front of the Act would detract from the substantive provisions. Tax Administration Act 1994 - key features The Tax Administration Act is a consolidation of the administrative and procedural provisions originally contained in the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 and the Income Tax Act 1976. This Act deals with the basic elements on which the operation of the tax system is based, and with the structure of the Inland Revenue Department. Structure The Act is structured around the relationship between the Commissioner of Inland Revenue and the taxpayer. Key elements of this relationship are: • the flow of information from taxpayers to the Com- missioner through tax returns • the assessment of tax liability by the Commissioner • the objection process • payments from taxpayers to the Crown • the obligations imposed on taxpayers to comply with the law and the consequences of failing to do so. The Tax Administration Act is divided into 15 Parts (each representing a key element in the relationship). The short title and commencement provision are outside the Part structure. Because this Act is much smaller than the Income Tax Act, it uses a conventional numbering system rather than the alphanumeric section numbering adopted in the Income Tax Act. The new Parts are: IPurpose and Construction Purpose and interpretation II Commissioner and Department Establishment of Inland Revenue Department; appointment of officers III Information, Record-Keeping, and Returns Commissioner’s powers to obtain information; taxpayer’s obligations to keep records; other obliga- tions to keep and provide records; requirements to file returns IVSecrecy from page 3 Reference to a section begins with an alphabetical reference to the Part and Subpart in which the provision is contained. For example, a reference to section MD 4 (previously section 394ZZZJ \[Refund of income tax not to exceed amount of imputation credit balance\]) indi- cates that the section appears in Part M - Tax Payments, Subpart D - Refunds. This type of section identifier is more informative than one entitled 394ZZZJ, and will enable users to become more aware of the modular structure of the Act, as they become accustomed to the numbering system. For example, over time users will become familiar with the notion that Part M “deals with Tax Payments”, and that Subpart D of Part M “deals with Refunds”. Another feature of the new numbering system is that it is more flexible. Unwieldy and cumbersome section references such as 394ZZZJ will be unnecessary in the future. Each Subpart of the Act will now be amended as a separate and discrete module. As new provisions are inserted in the Income Tax Act 1994, it will be possible to add new sections at the end of any relevant Subparts to which the new sections relate without interrupting the sequential numbering of provisions. Definitions Part O Subpart B, “General Definitions”, contains a dictionary of all terms that have specified meanings found in the Income Tax Act 1994. Definitions of terms which are used in more than one section are grouped in section OB 1. Generally, when a term is used in only one section, the definition is in that section, and a cross-reference to that definition is included in section OB 1. Sections OB 2, OB 3, OB 4 and OB 5 contain the meanings of source deduction payment, qualifying company, pay-period taxpayer, non-resident investment company and income tax. Subpart Z, “Transitional Definitions”, contains a list of new terms that are used in the Income Tax Act 1994 which refer to particular sections or Parts in the 1976 Act. For example, where the Income Tax Act 1976 referred to “sections 64B to 64L” the reference in the new Act reads the “accruals rules”, which is defined to mean those sections that were previously sections 64B to 64L. Similar terms have been defined for other commonly found references. These are: • Consolidation rules, previously sections 191C to 191WC • Dividend withholding payment rules, previously Part XIIB • FBT rules, previously Part XB • FIF rules, previously section 245R to 245RN • Imputation rules, previously Part XIIA • International tax rules, previously Part IVA • Life insurance rules, previously section 204 to 205F • NRWT rules, previously Part IX • PAYE rules, previously Part XI • Provisional tax rules, previously Part XII • Qualified accruals rules, previously section 64B to 5 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) New policy The only new policy that arose in the re-ordering process is contained in this Act. Two changes have been made to satisfy Bill of Rights considerations. • If Inland Revenue seeks to enter a private dwelling to obtain information, and the occupier refuses entry, a judicial warrant must be obtained before entering (section 16(3) to (7) of the Tax Administration Act 1994). • Witnesses at a Commissioner’s inquiry will be protected if they give self-incriminating evidence (section 19 (3) and (4) of the Tax Administration Act 1994). These changes were also enacted in the Inland Revenue Department Amendment Act (No. 2) 1994. Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994 - key features This Act contains provisions concerning the establish- ment and operation of Taxation Review Authorities. This Act contains five Parts, with the short title and commencement provision falling outside the Part structure. It also uses a conventional numbering system. As in the Tax Administration Act, definitions have been placed at the front of the Act in section 3. Other terms found in the Taxation Review Authorities Act, depend- ing on the context, import the meanings given to them by the Income Tax Act 1994 and the Tax Administra- tion Act 1994. Stylistic changes to the three new Acts All references to archaic terms such as aforementioned, thereof or thereon have been replaced with terms found in modern plain language. Other expressions such as as the case may be were edited from the legislation where their presence served no purpose and where this would not create any ambiguities. Other stylistic changes include: • the use of gender-neutral language unless the context required a distinction to be drawn between males and females • the use of “running heads” on each page of the new Income Tax Act which indicate the contents of each page of the legislation • the change in date format - for example, 1 January 1995 rather than 1st day of January 1995 • replacing the expression for the purposes of with in this section, in the context of definitions Officers’ responsibility to maintain secrecy VRulings and Determinations Commissioner’s determinations relating to financial arrangements and petroleum mining operations VIAssessments Commissioner’s authority to issue assessments and make determination of losses VII Interest Commissioner’s authority to charge and pay interest VIII Objections Taxpayer’s rights to object to assessments and determinations; right to apply for a case stated IXAdditional Tax Commissioner’s right to charge additional tax for late payment and to charge special additional taxes XRecoveries Methods of recovering unpaid tax and tax deduc- tions XIRemission, Relief, and Refunds Remission and relief from paying tax; Commis- sioner’s authority for making refunds XII Offences and Penalties Imposition of penal tax; objections to penal tax assessments; recovery of unpaid penal tax Description of offences; proceedings, evidence and penalties relating to offences XIII Miscellaneous Regulation making and other powers XIV Transitional Provisions and Savings Time savings and transitional provisions; Sched- ule Definitions Because there are fewer definitions in the Tax Adminis- tration Act than in the Income Tax Act 1994, the definitions in the former have been placed at the front of the Act, in section 3, instead of at the end of the sub- stantive provisions. Some cases specifically cross-refer to meanings given in section OB 1 of the Income Tax 1994. Other terms found in the Tax Administration Act, depending on the context, import the meaning given to them in the Income Tax Act 1994. An example would be the term “RWT rules”. Where a term is used in only one section, the definition is in that section, and a cross-reference to that definition is included in section 3. continued on page 6 6 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) provides for the application of the rest of section 140AA with effect from 1 April 1989. The applica- tion provision is no longer necessary and has been omitted. 3. It may rely on a provision which has been repealed or has ceased to have operative effect. For example, section 63(2B) of the Income Tax Act 1976 provides that a dividend is exempt if fringe benefit tax is paid on it under section 336N(8). Since section 336N(8) has been repealed, section 63(2B) is no longer effective, and has been omitted. 4. It may have relied on a repealed regime, scheme or an office that no longer exists. For example, section 130 of the Income Tax Act 1976 allowed a deduc- tion to taxpayers approved under a stock unit increase programme approved by the Rural Banking and Finance Corporation of New Zealand. That programme has ceased, so section 130 is redundant and has been omitted. 5. It may have expanded or limited the meaning of a term used in the Act, and as a result been placed in section OB 1 of the Income Tax Act 1994, or section 3 of the Tax Administration Act or the Taxation Review Authorities Act. For example, section 188C(1)(d) of the Income Tax Act 1976 provides information about the definition of resident mining operator and other terms. Since the defini- tions of those terms are now included in section OB 1 of the Income Tax Act 1994, section 188(1)(d) has been omitted. 6. It may have been intended to be transitional in nature. For example, section 197D of the Income Tax Act 1976 was not re-enacted because the subject matter with which it was concerned, Harbour Boards, no longer exists. 7. It may duplicate or perform the same function as another provision. For example, see section 394ZC (1), (3), and (4) of the Income Tax Act 1976 and section CF 6(1) and (2) of the Income Tax Act 1994. Savings provisions The new Acts have comprehensive savings provisions which provide that a reference to a provision of the old Act may be construed as a reference to the correspond- ing provision of the new Act, if the context of the reference permits, and vice versa. (See sections YB 5 of the Income Tax Act 1994 and 227 of the Tax Adminis- tration Act.) Comparative tables Schedule 23 to the Income Tax Act 1994 lists: • sections of the Income Tax Act 1976 and correspond- ing provisions of the Income Tax Act 1994 and the Tax Administration Act 1994 (Part A) • sections of the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 and corresponding provisions of the Tax Administra- • the use of numerals rather than words to express quantities (except where a sentence begins with an amount); • omitting redundant expressions such as of this Act or of this section where the context permitted this; All cross-references within a provision to other sections, Parts, or Subparts of the Income Tax Act 1976 that have been broken up in the re-ordering process have been rationalised and limited to those sections that were relevant. Example 1 Section 185(5)(b) of the Income Tax Act 1976 contained a reference to section 188. The new equivalent of section 188 of the Income Tax Act 1994 has been split into 4 new sections, IE 1, IF 1, GC 2 and OF 2. In the Income Tax Act 1994 a reference to section 188 therefore would be to sections IE 1, IF 1, GC 2, and OF 2. However, section EI 10(5)(b) (the equivalent of 185(5)(b)) only refers to IE 1, and IF 1. The other new sections that came from old section 188 are irrelevant in the context of section EI 10(5)(b) and have not been included. Example 2 The Income Tax Act 1976 contained references to Part IV and Part IVA (as a consequence of section 245X). Part IV has been broken up in the Income Tax Act 1994, and references to Part IV in the new Act have generally been replaced by the terms general assessment or general income tax assess- ment made by the Commissioner. In a few cases, the expression Part IV was replaced with a reference to Parts B, C, E, and F of the Income Tax Act 1994. See section OZ 1(2), (3), and (4). Redundant provisions Provisions that no longer had operative effect or that were identical and duplicated for no substantive reason were not re-enacted. A provision may have been redundant for any of the reasons listed below: 1. It may have ceased to have effect on a date before 1 April 1995. For example, section 61(3) of the Income Tax Act 1976 provided that the first $100 of interest, dividends, or investment society dividends earned between 1 April 1989 and 30 September 1989 was exempt from tax. As that section is no longer effective, it has been omitted. 2. It may have provided that a certain provision has an application date before 1 April 1995 (the applica- tion date for the Income Tax Act 1994). For exam- ple, section 140AA(2) of the Income Tax Act 1976 from page 5 7 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) • sections of the Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994 and corresponding provisions of the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 (Part F). These tables are reprinted in this TIB. Future direction The next step is to re-write the Acts in plain language. This task will be completed over a number of years. The re-write exercise will start with the Core Provisions (Part B of the Income Tax Act 1994). The rewritten legislation relating to that Part is expected to be intro- duced this year. Comparative tables of old and new provisions The following pages contain tables of old and new provisions of the tax Acts. These tables are taken from Schedule 23 of the Income Tax Act 1994. They show which sections of the previous tax Acts correspond to the provisions of the new Acts, and vice versa. Notes: 1. The letters “TAA” in the 2nd or 3rd column of any table indicate that the provision referred to appears in the Tax Administration Act 1994. 2. The letters “TRA” in the 2nd or 3rd column of any table indicate that the provision referred to appears in the Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994. 3. The letters “IRD” in the 2nd or 3rd column of any table indicate that the provision referred to was a provision of the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974. 4. The letters “Amdt”, followed by a reference to a statutory provision, indicate that the provision referred to was a provision of an Act amending the Income Tax Act 1976. 5. Other provisions referred to in the 2nd or 3rd column of any table are provisions of the Income Tax Act 1994 or the Income Tax Act 1976, as the case may require. 6. Provisions shown as omitted have been omitted because they are either spent or redundant. tion Act 1994 and the Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994 (Part B) • definitions sourced from the Income Tax Act 1976 and the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974, and their placement in the new Acts (Part C) • sections of the Income Tax Act 1994 and correspond- ing provisions of the Income Tax Act 1976 (Part D) • sections of the Tax Administration Act 1994 and corresponding provisions of the Income Tax Act 1976 and the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 (Part E) 8 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 1(1), (2)A1 (1), (2) (3)omitted Part I - Interpretation 2definitionsOB 1- definitionOB 6(a) definitionsTAA 3(1) definitionsomitted 2A(1), (2)OF 1(1), (2) (3)OF 2(1) (3)TAA 3(3) 3(1) - definitions OB 1- (3)CF 8- 4(1)(a),(ba),(c)-(g) CF 2(1)(a) - (g) (1)(i) - (m)CF 2(1)(h) - (l) (1A), (2), (2A)CF 2(2) - (4) (3) - definitionOB 1- (4) (relettered)CF 2(5) (6), (7), (7A)CF 2(6) - (8) (8) - (11)CF 2(9) - (12) (12)omitted (13), (14)CF 2(14), (15) (15) - (20)CF 2(15) - (20) 4A(1)(a),(c),(ca)-(cd) CF 3(1)(a) - (f) (1)(i),(ia),(j),(k) CF 3(1)(g) - (j) (1)(l) and (n)omitted (1)(m)CF 3(1)(k) (2) - definitions CF 3(13) (2) - definitions OB 1- (3) - definitionCF 3(14) (3) - definitions OB 1- (3A)omitted (4), (4A), (5) -CF 3(2) - (10) (11) (11A), (12)CF 3(11), (12) (13)OF 2(1) 4B(1)CF 6(1) (2)CF 6(2) (3) - (6)omitted 5(1)OB 5(1) (2) - definitions OB 1- (3), (4)OB 5(2), (3) (5)OF 2(2) (6)OB 5(4) 6(1) - (4)OB 2(1) - (4) 7(1), (2)OD 1(1), (2) 8(1), (2)OD 7(1), (2) 8A-OD 2- 8BdefinitionsOB 1- definitionsOD 5(10) 8C(1) - (3)OD 3(1) - (3) 8D(1) - (4)OD 4(1) - (4) 8E(1)GC 3(1) (1)OD 5(1) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 8E(1)FF 1(1) (2)(a)FF 1(2) (2)(b), (3)OD 5(2), (3) (4)GC 3(2) (5) - (10)OD 5(4) - (9) 8F-OD 6- Part II - Returns and Assessments 9-TAA 33 - 9A-TAA 41 - 10(1)TAA 42 (1) (1)HD 1(1) 11(1), (2)TAA 43 (1), (2) 12(1) - (6)TAA 44 (1) - (6) 13-TAA 79 - 13A-TAA 63 - 14-TAA 80 - 14A(1) - (3)TAA 36 (1) - (3) 15(1) - (3)TAA 38 (1) - (3) 16(1) - definitionsTAA 39 (5) (2), (3)TAA 39 (1), (2) (4)omitted (5)KB 2- (6)IB 4- (7), (8)TAA 39 (3), (4) 17(1) - definitionTAA 37 (6) (2) - (6)TAA 37 (1) - (5) 18-TAA 34 - 19(1), (1A), (2), (3) TAA 92 (1) - (4) (4)omitted (5)TAA 92 (5) 20(1), (2)IB 1(1), (2) 21(1), (2)TAA 106 (1), (2) 21A(1)TAA 21 (8) (2) - (8)TAA 21 (1) - (7) 22(1) - (4)GC 1(1) - (4) 23(1), (2)TAA 113 (1), (2) 24-TAA 107 - 25(1), (2)TAA 108 (1), (2) 26-TAA 114 - 27-TAA 109 - 28(1), (2)TAA 110 (1), (2) 29(1) - (6)TAA 111 (1) - (6) Part III - Objections to Assessments 30(1), (2)TAA 126 (1), (2) 31(1)TAA 127 (1) (2)TAA 134 - (3)TAA 127 (2) 32(1), (1A), (2)TAA 135 (1) - (3) 33(1) - (9)TAA 136 (1) - (9) (9A) - (9F)TAA 136 (10) - (15) (10), (11), (11A) TAA 136 (16) - (18) (12), (13)TAA 136 (19), (20) Part A - Income Tax Act 1976 Provisions of Income Tax Act 1976 corresponding to provisions of 1994 Acts 9 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 33A(1) - (11)TAA 137 (1) - (11) 34(1) - definitions TAA 3(1) (2) - (4)TAA 128 (1) - (3) 34A(1) - definitionTAA 3(1) (1) - definitions TAA 120 (6) (2)TAA 120 (1) (3) (relettered)TAA 120 (2) (4), (5)TAA 120 (3), (4) (6)TAA 185 (c) (7)omitted (8)TAA 120 (5) 35-TAA 129 - 36(relettered)TAA 125 - Part IV - Income Tax 37definitionOB 1- 38(1), (2)BB 1(1), (2) (3)omitted 39(1) - (3)BB 2(1) - (3) 40(1) - definitionKF 1(4) (2) - (4)KF 1(1) - (3) 42(1) - definitions KF 2(5) (2) - (5)KF 2(1) - (4) 47(1), (2)KZ 1(1), (2) 49(1) - definitionKG 1(3) (1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitionTAA 3(1) (2)KG 1(4) (3), (4)KG 1(1), (2) 49A(1) - definitions KE 1(3) (2), (3)KE 1(1), (2) 50A- (relettered)KC 2- 50C(1) - definitionOB 1- (1) - definitions KC 3(3) (2), (3)KC 3(1), (2) 50D(1) - (3)KC 1(1) - (3) 54(1) - definitions KC 4(2) (2)KC 4(1) 56(1)KF 3- (1) - definitionomitted 56A(1) - definitionKC 5(4) (2) (relettered)KC 5(1) (3)omitted (4), (5)KC 5(2), (3) 57(1)BB 10- (2) (relettered)KB 1- 59(1) - definitions OB 1- (1)-defs.,(2) - (9) omitted (1) - definitions CB 1(2) 60(1) - definitionCB 2(4) (1) - definitionCB 4(2) (1) - definitionCB 5(2) (1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitions omitted (2), (3)CB 2(2), (3) 61(1), (1A)CB 7(a), (b) (2) (relettered)CB 3(a) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 61(2)(c), (d), (f)omitted (2A) (relettered) CB 3(b) (3), (5)CB 3(c), (d) (9) (relettered)CB 8(1)(a) (10), (11A), (12) CB 5(1)(a) - (c) (13)omitted (14) (relettered) CB 1(1)(a) (15) (relettered) CB 9(a) (16) (relettered) CB 9(b) (17) (relettered) CB 2(1)(a) (18) (relettered) CB 2(1)(b) (19) (relettered) CB 2(1)(c) (21)omitted (22) (relettered) CB 5(1)(d) (23)CB 4(1)(a) (23A)omitted (24), (25)CB 4(1)(b), (c) (26) (relettered) CB 4(1)(d) (27) (relettered) CB 4(1)(e) (28) - (30)CB 4(1)(f) - (h) (31)CB 9(c) (32) (relettered) CB 4(1)(i) (33), (34)CB 4(1)(j), (k) (35), (36)CB 5(1)(e), (f) (37)CB 9(d) (38) (relettered) CB 2(1)(d) (39) - (43)CB 5(1)(g) - (k) (44)CB 4(1)(l) (46)CB 1(1)(b) (47)CB 2(1)(e) (48) (relettered) CB 8(1)(b) (49) (relettered) CB 5(1)(l) (50)CB 9(e) (51), (52)CB 1(1)(c), (d) (53) (relettered) CB 6(a) (54)CB 6(b) (55) (relettered) CB 6(c) (56) (relettered) CB 5(1)(m) (57)omitted (58)CB 7(c) (59) (relettered) CB 9(f) (60)CB 9(g) (61)omitted (62)CB 5(1)(n) (63)CB 3(e) (64)CB 5(1)(o) (65) (relettered) CB 6(d) (66)CB15- 62(1), (2)CB 8(2), (3) 63(1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitionOB 6(b) (2)omitted (2A)CB 10(1) (2B), (2C)omitted (2D) - definition LF 2(3) (2E), (2F), (2G) omitted (2H), (2J)CZ 4(1), (2) 10 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 63(2K), (2L)CB 10(2), (3) (3) - (5)omitted 64(1) - definitionCB 11(6) (2) - (6)CB 11(1) - (5) 64A(1) - definitions CB 14(2) (1) - definitionOB 6(1)(b) (2)CB 14(1) 64B(1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitions TAA 3(1) (2)EH 7- (3) - definitions OB 1- (4)OF 2(2) 64BA (1)-(3), definitionsOB 1- 64C(1),(2),(2A),(2B) EH 1(1) - (4) (3), (4), (4A)EH 1(5) - (7) (5) - (7)EH 1(8) - (10) 64CA -EH 2- 64D(1)-(7),(7A),(8)EH 3(1) - (9) 64E(1) (relettered)TAA 90 (1) (2) - (9)TAA 90 (2) - (9) 64F(1)(a) - (d), defs. EH 4(9) (1)(e) - definition OB 1- (2) - (6)EH 4(1) - (5) (7), (7A)omitted (7B), (7C), (8)EH 4(6) - (8) 64FA (1), (2), (3)omitted 64FB (1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitionEZ 9(5) (2) - (4)EZ 9(1), (3), (4) 64G(1) - (5)EH 5(1) - (5) 64H(1), (1A), (2), (3) TAA 60 (1) - (4) 64I(1) - (5)EH 6(1) - (5) 64J(1) - (3)GD 11(1) - (3) 64K(1), (2)omitted 64L(1), (2)EH 8(1), (2) 64M (a) - (f)EH 9- (c)FF 2- 65(1)(a), definitions OB 1- (1)(b)(i)CE 3(2)(a) (1)(b)(ii)FF 5- (1)(c)CE 3(2)(b) (1)(d) - (f)CE 1(2)(a) - (c) (1A) (relettered) CE 1(2)(d) (1B)(a)omitted (1B)(b)CH 1(2) (2)(a) excl provisoBB 4(a) (2)(a) provisoFF3- (2)(b)BB 4(b) (2)(c), (ca)CC 1(a), (b) (2)(d), (da), (db) CC 1(c) - (e) (2)(e) excl proviso BB 4(c) (2)(e) provisoFF 4- (2)(ea), (eb)CG 1(a), (b) (2)(f)CD 1(1) (2)(g)CE 1(1)(e) (2)(h)CD 2- (2)(j)CE 1(1)(a) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 65(2)(j) excl provisoCF 1- (2)(j) excl provisoCH 1(1) (2)(ja) - (jc)CE 1(1)(b) - (d) (2)(k), (ka)CE 3(1)(a), (b) (2)(l)BB 4(d) 67(1) - definitionCD 1(13) (1) - definitionOB 1- (2), (3)OD 8(4), (5) (4) (relettered)CD 1(2) (5) - (9)CD 1(3) - (7) (9A)CD 1(8) (9B), (9C)FF 6(1)(a), (b) (10), (11)CD 1(9), (10) (12)GD 9(1) (13), (14)CD 1(11), (12) (14)FF 6(2) (14)GD 9(2) 69(1) - definitionCH 2(8) (2) - (6)CH 2(1) - (5) (6A), (7)CH 2(6), (7) 70(1) - (8)EN 1(1) - (8) 71(1) - definitionsCZ 1(5) (2) - (5)CZ 1(1) - (4) 72definitionOB 1- 73(1) - definitionsCB 12(7) (1) - definitionTAA 130 (6) (2) - (7)CB 12(1) - (6) (8) - (11)TAA 130 (1) - (4) (12)TAA 138 (1) (13)TAA 130 (5) (14) - (16)TAA 138 (2) - (4) 73A-CB 13- 74(1) - definitionsOB 1- (2)(a)CE 2- (2)(b) (relettered) CJ 1(1) (2A)DL 1(1) (3), (3A), (4)DL 1(3) - (5) (5)CJ 1(2) (6)FF 7- (7)CJ 1(3) (8) - (14)DL 1(6) - (12) (15)DL 1(2) (16) - (18)DL 1(13) - (15) (19)OF 2(2) 75(1) - (3)EB 1(1) - (3) (4)(a), (b)OF 2(2) (4)(a), (b)EB 1(4) (4)(c) -OB 1- definitions 76(1) - (3)EC 1(1) - (3) (4)OF 2(2) 76A(1) - definitionsEZ 7(7) (2) - (4), (4A),EZ 7(1) - (5) (5) (6)OF 2(2) (7)EZ 7(6) 77(1) - (3)EB 3(1) - (3) 11 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 78(1) - (3)BB 5(1) - (3) (4) - (6)EZ 9(2) - (4) 79(1) - (3)EE 2(1) - (3) 80(1), (2)EB 2(1), (2) 81A(1)EJ 1- 82(1), (2)EN 4(1), (2) 83(1) - (4)EN 2(1) - (4) (4A)FF 8- (5)EN 2(5) 84(1) - definitions EN 3(6) (2) - (6)EN 3(1) - (5) 85(1) - definitionOB 1- (2) - (4), (4A)EE 1(1) - (4) (4B) - (4D)EL 1(2) - (4) (4E), (4F)EE 1(5), (6) (5) - (7)EE 1(7) - (9) (8)FB 3- (9)EE 1(10) (10)OF 2(2) 85A-FC 4- 86(1)EL 1(1) (2) - definitionEL 1general (2) - definitions OB 1- (3)OF 2(2) 86A(1), (2)EL 2(1), (2) (3)(a), (b)EL 2(3)(a), (b) (3)(c)omitted (4)(a) - (e)EL 2(4)(a) - (e) (4)(f)omitted (5) - (8)EL 2(5) - (8) 86B(1) - (4)EL 3(1) - (4) 86C(1) - (8)EL 4(1) - (8) 86D(1) - definitions OB 1- (2) - (7)EL 5(1) - (6) (8)FF 9- 86E(1) - (7)EL 6(1) - (7) 86F(1) - (4)EL 7(1) - (4) (5) - (7)EZ 4(1) - (3) (8) - definitionEZ 4(5) (8) - definitionOB 1- 86G-EL 8- (1) - definitions EL 9(4) 86H(1) - definitionOB 1- (2) - (4)EL 9(1) - (3) (5), (6)FF 10(1), (2) 86I(1) - definitions OB 1- (2) - (7)EL 10(1) - (6) (8)FF 11- (9)EL 10(7) 86J(1)-(4), definition EM 1(1) - (4) (5)(a)EM 1(5)(a) (5)(b)(i) (+ new) FF 12- (5)(b)(ii)EM 1(5)(b) (5)(c), (d)EM 1(5)(c), (d) 86K(1) - (3)omitted 86L(1) - definitionEZ 1(10) (2) - (10)EZ 1(1) - (9) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 86L(11)omitted 87(1) - (4)omitted 87A(1) - definitions EZ 2(5) (2) - (5)EZ 2(1) - (4) (6)OF 2(2) 90(1) - definitionFB 4(5) (2), (3)FB 4(1), (2) (3A)FB 4(4) (4)FB 4(3) 91(1) - definitionOB 1- (2), (2A), (3), (4) GD 1(1) - (4) 91A(1) - definitionOB 1- (2), (3)FF 13(1), (2) 92(a) excl 2nd prov EJ 2(a) (a) 2nd provisoomitted (b)EJ 2(b) 94(1) - (11)omitted 95(1) - (10)omitted 96(1) - definitions FC 11(6) (2) - (6)FC 11(1) - (5) 97(1) - (3)GD 3(1) - (3) (4)GD 3(4) (4)GD 3(5) 98(1) - definitions GD 10(4) (1) - definitions TAA 3(1) (2) - (4)GD 10(1) - (3) 99(1) - definitions OB 1- (2)BB 9- (3) - (5)GB 1(1) - (3) (6)GZ 1- 100(1) - definitionCF 7(2) (2)CF 7(1) 101-BB 6- 102(3), (4)FB 1(1), (2) 104-BB 7- 104A (1) - definitions EF 1(7) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2) (relettered)EF 1(5) (2A)EF 1(6) (2B) (rearranged) EF 1(8) (3) - (6)EF 1(1) - (4) (7)OF 2(2) (8) - definitions OB 1- 105(1) - definitionOB 1- (2), (3)DE 1(1), (2) 105A -DF 9- 106(1)(a)BB 8 (a) 106(b), (ba), (c)DJ 1(a) - (c) (d)GD 4- (e)DD 1(a) (f),(fa)-(fc),(g)DB 1(1)(a) - (e) (h) (relettered)DD 1(b) (j)BB 8(b) (k)BB 8(c) (l)DD 1(c) (m), (ma)DF 1(a), (b) (n) (relettered)DO 1- 12 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 106(o)BB 8(d) (2)(a), (aa),(b),(c) DB 1(2)(a) - (d) 106A (1) - definitionOB 1- (1) - definitions DK 1(8) (2) - (4)DK 1(1) - (3) (5)omitted (6) - (9)DK 1(4) - (7) (10)OF 2(2) 106B (1)(a)DH 1(1) (2)DH 1(2) (3)(a)DH 1(3) (4) - definitions OB 1- (5)OF 2(2) 106C (1), (2)DH 2(1), (2) 106D (1) - (7)DH 3(1) - (7) 106E -DH 4- 106F (1)omitted (2)DK 2- 106G (1) - definitions DG 1(4) (1) - def., (2),(3) OB 1- (4) - (6)DG 1(1) - (3) (7)FB 5- 107(1)FC 5(1) (1A)FF 14- (2)FC 5(2) (3)(a), (b)FC 5(3) (3)(c) (+new)FF 14- 107A (1) - definitionEG 19(9) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2)OF 2(2) 108(1) - (3)EG 1(1) - (3) 108A (1), (2)EG 2(1), (2) 108B (1) - (6)EG 3(1) - (6) 108C (1) - (7)EG 4(1) - (7) 108D (1) - (4)EG 5(1) - (4) 108E -EG 6- 108F -EG 7- 108G -EG 8- 108H (1) - (3)EG 9(1) - (3) 108I (1), (2), (2A)EG 10(1) - (3) (3) - (10)EG 10(4) - (11) 108J (1) - (8)EG 11(1) - (8) 108K (1) - (6)EG 12(1) - (6) 108L -EG 13- 108M (1), (2)EG 14(1), (2) 108N (1) - definitionEG 15(5) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2) - (4)EG 15(1) - (3) (5)FF 15- (6)EG 15(4) (7)GC 6- 108O (1) - definitionOB 1- (2), (3), (3A), (4) EG 16(1) - (4) 109(1) - definitions DO 2(2) (2)DO 2(1) 110(1) - definitions EZ 3(5) (1A), (2), (3A),EZ 3(1) - (4) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 110(7) (8)OF 2(2) 111(1), (2)EG 17(1), (2) 111A -FF 16(1) 113A (1) - definitionsEG 18(6) (1A), (2), (3)EG 18(1) - (3) (4) excl provisoEG 18(4) (4) provisoomitted (5)EG 18(5) 117(1) - (7)EG 19(1) - (7) (8)FF 16(2) (9),(10),definitionsEG 19(8), (9) (11)(a) in part -EG 19(9) definition (11)(a) in part -OB 1- definition (11)(b)OB 1- (11)(c), (d)EG 19(10)(a), (b) 124(1), (2)DJ 10(1), (2) (3)OF 2(2) 127(A1)DO 3- (1) - (6)DZ 3(1) - (6) (7)OF 2(3) 127A (1)DZ 2(1) - (7) (8)OF 2(3) 128(1) - definitionOB 1- (2) - (7)DZ 4(1) - (6) (8)OF 2(3) 128A (1) - definitionOB 1- (2), (3)DO 4(1), (2) (4) (relettered)DO 4(3) (4A), (5)DO 4(4), (5) (6)OF 2(3) 128B (1) - definitionOB 1- (2), (3)DL 2(1), (2) (4) (relettered)DL 2(3) (5)OF 2(3) 128C (1) - definitionOB 1- (2), (3)DO 5(1), (2) (4) (relettered)DO 5(3) (5)OF 2(3) 129(1) - (16)omitted 130(1) - (10)omitted 131(b)DO 6- 133(1) - (3)EK 1(1) - (3) (4)OF 2(2) 133A (1) - (6)omitted 134(1) - (4)DO 7(1) - (4) (5)OF 2(3) 135(1) - (3)DL 6(1) - (3) 136-DJ 11- 137(1) - definitionsEZ 6(2) (2)EZ 6(1) 138(1) - (3)EO 5(1) - (3) 139(1), (2)DZ 1(1), (2) 140-omitted 140A (1) - definitionED 1(4) 13 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 140A (2)ED 1(1) (3) (unlettered) - ED 1(4) definitions (4), (5)ED 1(2), (3) 140AA (1)ED 2- (2)omitted 140AB -ED 3- 140B (1) - definitions OB 1- (1)(a), definitions ED 4(7)(a) (1)(b), definitions omitted (1) (c)-(f), defs.ED 4(7) (b) - (e) (2)ED 4(1) (2A)omitted (3), (4)ED 4(2), (3) (5) - definitions OB 1- (6), (6A), (7)ED 4(4) - (6) (8)omitted 141(1), (2)DJ 3(1), (2) 142(1) - (4)EZ 5(1) - (4) 143(1), (2)DJ 6(1), (2) 144(1), (2)DJ 9(1), (2) 147(2)DJ 4- 148(1) - definitionDD 2(2) (2)DD 2(1) 149(1), (2)DF 2(1), (2) 150(1)omitted (2A), (2B)DF 3(1), (2) (2C)omitted (2D), (2E)DF 3(3), (4) (2F)EO 1- (8)OF 2(2) 151(1) excl provisoDF 4(1) (1) provisoFF 17- (2)DF 4(2) 152(1), (2)DF 5(1), (2) 153(1) - definitions OB 1- (2)DF 6(1) (3), (4)CC 2(1), (2) (4)DF 6(2) 156A (1) - (13)omitted 156B (1) - (8)omitted 156C (1) - (8)omitted 156D (1) - (12)omitted 156E (1) - (8)omitted 156F (1) - (11)omitted 156G (1) - (6)omitted 163-DJ 7- 164(1), (2)DJ 8(1), (2) 165(1) - definitions DJ 5(4) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2) - (4)DJ 5(1) - (3) 166(1) - definitionOB 1- (1) - definitions DF 7(3) (4), (5)DF 7(1), (2) 167B (1) - definitions DF 8(3) (2), (3)DF 8(1), (2) 168(1) - definitionCC 3(2) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 168(1) - definitionDL 3(7) (1) - definitionOB 1- (2)DL 3(1) (3)CC 3(1) (4),(5),(5A)-(5C) DL 3(2) - (6) 169(1) - (3), (5), (6) DC 1(1) - (5) (7)OF 2(2) 172(1) - definitionDC 2(5) (2) - (5)DC 2(1) - (4) (6)OF 2(2) 173(1) - definitionDC 3(5) (2)DC 3(1) (3) (relettered)DC 3(2) (4), (5)DC 3(3), (4) (6)OF 2(2) 174(1) - (3)omitted 175definitionsOB 1- 176(1) - (5)EI 1(1) - (5) 177(1) - (3)EI 2(1) - (3) 178-EI 3- 179(1), (2), (2A)EI 4(1) - (3) (2B)(a)omitted (2B)(b) - (d)EI 4(4)(a) - (c) (3)EI 4(5) 180(1) - (3)EI 5(1) - (3) 181(1) - (3)EI 6(1) - (3) 182(1), (2)EI 7(1), (2) 183(1), (2)EI 8(1), (2) 184-EI 9- 185(1) - (5)EI 10(1) - (5) (6)TAA 185 (a) 185A (1) - definitions OB 1- (2) - (6)EI 11(1) - (5) 185B (1) - (4)EI 12(1) - (4) 185C -EI 13- 185D (1) - (4)EI 14(1) - (4) 185E -EI 15- 185F (1), (2)EI 16(1), (2) (3)TAA 185 (a) 186(1) - definitions EI 17(4) (1) - definitionomitted (2) - (4)EI 17(1) - (3) 188(1) - (6)IE 1(1) - (6) (7) - (10)IF 1(1) - (4) (11)GC 2- (12), (13)IF 1(5), (6) (14)OF 2(2) 188A (1) - definitions IE 2(9) (1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitionFF 18(1) (2)(a) - definition OB 1- (2)(b) - definition IE 2(9) (3), (4)IE 2(1), (2) (4A)FF 18(2) (5)IE 2(3) (5A)omitted (6), (6A), (7)IE 2(4) - (6) 14 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 188A (7A), (8)IE 2(7), (8) (9)OF 2(2) 188AA(1)IF 2- (2)OF 2(2) 188C (1)(a) - (c)IH 1(1)(a) - (c) (1)(d)(i) - (iii)omitted (1)(d)(iv)IH 1(1)(d) (2)(a) - (e)IH 1(2)(a) - (e) (2)(f)(i), (ii)omitted (2)(f)(iii), (iv)IH 1(2)(f)(i), (ii) (3)OF 2(2) 189(1), (2)KZ 2(1), (2) 190-GD 5- 191(1)IG 1(1) (2)IG 1(5) (3) - (5)IG 1(2) - (4) (6)CK 1- (8)OF 2(2) 191A (1) - (5)IG 2(1) - (5) (6) - definitionIG 2(11) (7)GC 4- (7A)IG 2(6) (8) - (11)IG 2(7) - (10) (12)OF 2(3) 191B (1), (2)IG 3(1), (2) 191C -FD 1- 191D (1) definitionsOB 1- (2)(a)omitted (2)(b) (relettered) FD 2(1) (3)FD 2(2) (4) (relettered)FD 2(3) (5)(a), (b)omitted (5)(c)(i), (ii)FD 2(4) (5)(c)(iii), (iv)omitted (6)OF 2(2) 191E (relettered)FD 3- 191F (1) - (8)FD 4(1) - (8) 191G (1), (2)FD 5(1), (2) 191H (1) - (3)FD 6(1) - (3) 191I (1) - (8)FD 7(1) - (8) 191J (1) - (9)FD 8(1) - (9) 191K (1), (2)FD 9(1), (2) 191L (1) - (5)HB 1(1) - (5) 191M (1), (2)HB 2(1), (2) 191N (1) (relettered)FD 10(1) (2) - (9)FD 10(2) - (9) 191O (1),(1A),(2) - (7) IG 6(1) - (8) 191P (1)CG 2- (2)(a)LC 16(1) (2)(b), (c)IG 7(1)(a), (b) (3)(a)IG 7(2)(a) (3)(a)LC 16(2)(a) (3)(b)(i)LC 16(2)(b) (3)(b)(ii), (iii)IG 7(2)(b)(i), (ii) (3)(c)LC 16(2)(b) (3)(d), (e)IG 7(2)(c), (d) (3)(f) - (h)IG 7(2)(e) - (g) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 191P(3)(f) - (h)LC 16(2)(c) - (e) (4), (5)IG 7(3), (4) (4), (5)LC 16(3), (4) (6)(a), (b)IG 7(5)(a), (b) (6)(a), (b)LC 16(5)(a), (b) (6)(c)(i)(A)LC 16(5)(c)(i) (6)(c)(i)(B)IG 7(5)(c)(i) (6)(c)(ii)IG 7(5)(c)(ii) (6)(c)(ii)LC 16(5)(c)(ii) (6)(d)IG 7(5)(d) (6)(d)LC 16(5)(d) 191Q(1), (2)MB 7(1), (2) 191R-NB 1- 191S(1), (2)ME 10(1), (2) 191SA (1), (2)ME 11(1), (2) 191SB (1), (2)ME 12(1), (2) 191SC (1) - (5)ME 13(1) - (5) (6), (7)omitted (8)ME 13(6) 191SD (1), (2)ME 14(1), (2) (3)TAA 74 - (4)ME 14(3) (5)ME 14(5) (6), (7)GC 24(1), (2) (7)ME 14(4) (7)ME 40(9) 191T(1), (1A), (2) - NH 5(1) - (9) (8) 191U(1) - (5)MG 13(1) - (5) 191UA (1), (2)MG 14(1), (2) 191UB (1), (2)MG 15(1), (2) 191UC (1) - (6)MG 16(1) - (6) 191UD (1) - (5)NH 6(1) - (5) (6)TAA 73 - (7), (8)NH 6(6), (7) 191V(1) - (4)MF 7(1) - (4) 191VA (1) - (6)MF 8(1) - (6) 191VB (1) - (5)MF 9(1) - (5) 191VC (1) - (3)MF 10(1) - (3) (4)omitted 191W-ME 25- 191WA (1) - (5)ME 26(1) - (5) 191WB (1) - (3)ME 27(1) - (3) 191WC (1) - (4)ME 28(1) - (4) 191WD (1)FE 1- (2) - definitions OB 1- (3)TAA 75 - (4)CF 4- (5)CF 5- (6)FE 2- (7)TAA 76 - (7) (a)FE 8- (8)FE 3- (9)DD 3- (10)FE 4- (11)FE 5- (12)FE 6(1) 15 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 191WD (13)FE 6(2) (14)FE 6(3) (15)FE 6(4) (16)DL 7- (16)DO 8- (17)FE 6(5) (18)FE 7- (19)IF 4- (19)LC 8- (20)IF 5- (20)LC 9- (21)IF 6- (21)LC 10- (22)IG 8- (22)LC 11- (23)IG 9- (23)LC 12- (24)(a) - (c)CI 7 (24)(d)NC 15(7) (24)(d)ND 3(7) (24)(d)ND 4(7) (25)MB 11- (26)(a), (b)ME 29(1) (26)(a), (b)MF 16(1) (26)(a), (b)MG 17(1) (26)(c)MD 2(8) (26)(c)NH 4(8) (27)(a), (b)ME 29(2) (27)(a), (b)MF 16(2) (27)(a), (b)MG 17(2) (27)(c)MD 2(9) (27)(c)NH 4(9) 192(1) - (3)FC 1(1) - (3) 193-NZ 1- 194(1) - definition FZ 1(5) (2) - (5)FZ 1(1) - (4) (6)OF 2(2) 194A(1) - definition DI 1(2) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2)DI 1(1) (3)OF 2(2) 195(1) - definitions FC 2(5) (2) - (5)FC 2(1) - (4) 196(1) - definitions OB 1- (2), (3)FZ 2(1), (2) (4)omitted (5) - (8)FZ 2(3) - (6) 197(1) - definition OB 1- (2) - (5)GD 2(1) - (4) 197A(1)OC 1(1) (2) - definitions OB 1- (2) - definitions OC 1(6) (3), (4)OC 1(2), (3) (5)omitted (6)OC 1(4) (7)DK 4- (8)HD 1(2) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 197A (8)TAA 42 (2) (9)OC 1(5) 197C (1)OC 2(1) (2) - definitions OB 1- (2) - definitionOC 2(14) (3), (3A), (3B)OC 2(2) - (4) (4) - (6)OC 2(5) - (7) (7)CK 2- (8) - (12)OC 2(8) - (12) (13)omitted (14)OC 2(13) (15)omitted 197D (1) - (7)omitted 197E (1) - definitionOB 1- (2)OC 3- (3) - (8)omitted (9)OF 2(2) 197F (1) - (7)omitted 197G (1)CK 3(3) (2), (3)omitted (4), (5)CK 3(1), (2) (6)OF 2(2) 197H (1) - definitionOC 4(3) (2) - (6)omitted (7)(a) - (c)OC 4(1)(a) - (c) (7)(d), (e)TAA 225 (2)(c), (d) (8)OC 4(2) (8)TAA 225 (3) (9)OF 2(2) 197I (1) - (4)omitted 197J (1) - definitionOB 1- (2), (3)CK 4(1), (2) 198(1), (2)FC 3(1), (2) 199(1) - definitions HF 1(9) (2), (3), (3A)HF 1(1) - (3) (4)(a)HF 1(4) (5)omitted (6), (8) - (10)HF 1(5) - (8) (11)OF 2(2) 204(1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitions TAA 3(1) (2)CM 2- (3)OF 2(2) 204A -CM 1- 204B -CM 3- 204C (1) - (4)CM 10(1) - (4) 204D -GD 7- 204E (1), (2)CM 4(1), (2) 204F (1) - (5)CM 5(1) - (5) 204G (1) - (6)CM 6(1) - (6) 204H (1), (2)CM 7(1), (2) 204I (1)CM 8(1) (2)(a)CM 8(2)(a) (2)(b)omitted (2)(c), (d)CM 8(2)(b), (c) (3)CM 8(3) 204J -CM 9- 16 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 204K -CM 11- 204L (1), (2)CN 3(1), (2) 204M (1) - (3)OE 3(1) - (3) 204N -CM 12- 204O (1), (2)CM 13(1), (2) 204P -CM 14- 204Q (1) - (4), (4A)GD 8(1) - (5) (5) - (7)GD 8(6) - (8) 205(1), (2)CM 15(1), (2) 205A -CM 16- 205B (1), (2)CM 17(1), (2) 205C (1), (2)II 2(1), (2) 205D -II 1- 205E (1) - (3)TAA 112 (1) - (3) 205F -DK 3- 206(1) - (10)YB 4(1) 207(1) - definitions CZ 5(2) (2)CZ 5(1) 208(2)CZ 6- 209(1) - definitionCN 4(6) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2) - (6)CN 4(1) - (5) 210A (1) - definitions CN 5(2) (2)CN 5(1) 211(1) - definitions OB 1- (2) (relettered)HE 1(a) (2)(a) (part)omitted 211A (1) - definitions HE 2(3) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2)HE 2(2) (3)HE 2(1) (4)OF 2(2) 211B (1) - definitions HC 1(12) (2) - (12)HC 1(1) - (11) (13)OF 2(2) 212A (1) - (7)EM 2(1) - (7) (8)OF 2(2) 212B (1) - definitions EM 3(3) (2), (3)EM 3(1), (2) (4)OF 2(2) 213(1) - definitionDL 4(2) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2)omitted (3)DL 4(1) (4)omitted 214(1) - definitions DL 5(2) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2)DL 5(1) 214A (1) - definitionDZ 6(14) (1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - def., (2), (3) omitted (4)DZ 5- 214B (1), (2)DZ 6(1), (2) (3)omitted (4)DZ 6(3) (5)omitted (6)DZ 6(4) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 214B(7)IH 2(1) (8)omitted (9), (10)DZ 6(5), (6) (11) - (15)omitted (16) - (18)DZ 6(7) - (9) (19)omitted (20)DZ 6(10) (21)(a)OB 1- (21)(b)DZ 6(11) (22)(a) - (e)DZ 6(12)(a) - (e) (22)(f)omitted (22)(g), (h)DZ 6(12)(f), (g) (23)DZ 6(13) (24)omitted (25) (part)IH 2(2) (25) (part)omitted (26)OF 2(2) 214C(1)omitted (2) - definitions OB 1- (2) - (5)omitted 214D(1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitionsTAA 3(1) (1) - definitionsomitted (2)(a), (b)OB 1- (2)(c)DM 9- (2)(d)DM 10- (3)OF 2(2) 214E(1), (2)OD 8(1), (2) 214F(1) - (9)DM 1(1) - (9) 214G(1)DM 2- (2)IH 3- 214H(1)CJ 3- (2), (3)DM 3(1), (2) 214I(1)DM 4(1) (2)CJ 4(1) (3)(a)CJ 4(2) (3)(b), (c)DM 4(2)(a), (b) (4)DM 4(3) 214J(1)CJ 5- (2)DM 5- 214K(1)CJ 6(1) (2)DM 6(1) (3)CJ 6(2) (3)DM 6(2) (4)TAA 65 - (5)CJ 6(3) (5)DM 6(3) 214K(1) - (7)TAA 91 (1) - (7) 214M(1), (2)DM 7(1), (2) 214MA (1), (2)GC 12(1), (2) 214N(1)(a)DM 8- (1)(b), (c)CJ 7(1)(a), (b) (2)omitted (3)CJ 7(2) 214OdefinitionsOB 1- 214P(1) - (3)DM 11(1) - (3) 215(1),defs.,(2)OB 1- 17 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 215(3)omitted (3)(a) (new)DN 4(5) (3)(b) (new)DN 5(3) 216(1), (2)DN 1(1), (2) (3)omitted (4) - (15)DN 1(3) - (14) (15A) (relettered) DN 1(15) (15B)DN 1(16) (16)IH 4(1) (17)DN 1(17) (18)OF 2(2) (19), (20)IH 4(2), (3) (21)DN 1(18) (22)(a)OB 1- (22)(b)DN 1(19) 218(1) - definitionOB 1- (1) - definitions DN 2(10) (1A)omitted (2) - (10)DN 2(1) - (9) 219(1) - definitionOB 1- (1) - definitions DN 3(12) (2) - (12)DN 3(1) - (11) 220(1)DN 4(1) (2) - definitions OB 1- (3) - (5)DN 4(2) - (4) (6)IH 5- (7)DN 4(6) (7A)FF 19- (8), (9)DN 4(7), (8) 221(1)DN 5(1) (2) - definitions OB 1- (3)DN 5(2) (4)IB 2- (5)DN 5(4) 222-IB 3- 222A(1),(2),definitions OB 1- (3)OF 2(2) 222B (1) - (8)FC 6(1) - (8) 222C (1) - (3)FC 7(1) - (3) 222D -FC 8- 222E (1) - (3)EO 2(1) - (3) 222F (1)FC 9- (2) - definitionFC 10(8) (2) - definitions OB 1- (3)OF 2(2) 222G (1) - (3)FC 10(1) - (3) (3A), (3B), (4)FC 10(4) - (6) (5) - definitions FC 10(7) 223(1)(a)CN 1(3) (1)(b) - definition OB 6(1)(b) (2), (3)CN 1(1), (2) 224(1) - definitionCN 2(5) (2) - (5)CN 2(1) - (4) (6)OF 2(2) 224A (1) - definitions EO 3(9) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2) - (7)EO 3(1) - (6) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 224A (8), (9)GC 11(1), (2) (10)EO 3(8) (11)GC 11(3) (12)FB 6- (13)GC 11(4) (14)EO 3(7) (15)OF 2(2) 224B (1) - definitionCJ 2(2) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2)CJ 2(1) 224D (1) - definitionEO 4(13) (1), (2),definitions OB 1- (3) - (14)EO 4(1) - (12) (15), (16)GD 12(1), (2) (17)OF 2(2) 225(1) - (8)omitted 225A (1) - (4)YB 4(1) 226(1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitions TAA 3(1) (2) - definitionOB 1- (2) - definitionTAA 3(1) (3) - (5)HH 1(1) - (3) (6) - definitionOB 1- (6) - definitionTAA 3(1) (7) - (9)HH 1(4) - (6) (9A), (10), (10A) HH 1(7) - (9) (11)OB 1- (12)HH 1(10) 226A (1) - (4)HH 2(1) - (4) 227(1) - (4)HH 3(1) - (4) (5)GC 14- (6)HH 3(5) (7)OF 2(2) 227A -HZ 2- 228(1), (2)HH 4(1), (2) (2A)DI 3(1) (2B)CL 2- (2C)DI 3(2) (3) (relettered)HH 4(3) (4)HH 4(4) (5) (relettered)HH 4(5) (6), (7)HH 4(6), (7) 228A (1), (2)HH 5(1), (2) 229-HK 14- 230(1) - (4)HH 6(1) - (4) 231(1)omitted (2), (3)TAA 59 (1), (2) (4)HH 7- (5) - (7)TAA 59 (3) - (5) 232-HH 8- 232A (1) - (3)GD 6(1) - (3) (4), (5)OF 2(2) 232B (1) - (3)YB 4(1) 232CYB 4(1) 232E -HJ 1- 232F (1) - (3)omitted 233-DJ 2- 18 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 234(1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitions TAA 3(1) (2) - (4)HI 1(1) - (3) 235-HI 2- 236(1) - (4)HI 3(1) - (4) 237(1), (2)HI 4(1), (2) 238-HI 5- 239(1)TAA 57 - (2)TAA 31 - 240-DI 2- 241(1) - (5)OE 1(1) - (5) (6)OE 2(1) 242-BB 3- 243(1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitionOE 4(2) (2) (relettered)OE 4(1) 244(1) - definitions OE 5(2) (2)OE 5(1) 245(1), (2)FB 2(1), (2) Part IVA - Attributed Foreign Income and Losses and Foreign Investment Fund Income and Losses 245A (1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitionOB 6(c) (2)(a) - (e)CG 3(a) - (e) (2)(f)OF 2(2) (3)CG 5(7) (4)GC 10- 245B -OD 8(3) 245C (1), (3), (3A)CG 4(1) - (3) (4)(a)CG 4(4)(a) (4)(c) - (e)CG 4(4)(b) - (d) (5) - (8)CG 4(5) - (8) (9)GC 7- 245D (1)CG 5(1) (2)(a)CG 5(2)(a) (2)(c) - (e)CG 5(2)(b) - (d) (3) - (6)CG 5(3) - (6) 245E (1) - definitions GC 9(7) (2) - (7)GC 9(1) - (6) 245F (1)CG 6(1) (2)CG 6(2) 245G (1), (2)CG 7(1), (2) (3)OF 2(2) (4) - (7)CG 7(3) - (6) 245GA(1) - definitionsCG 8(14) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2) - (9)CG 8(1) - (8) (10)GC 8- (11), (12)CG 8(9), (10) (13) (relettered) CG 8(11) (14), (15)CG 8(12), (13) 245H (1)CG 9- 245I (1), (2)CG 10(1), (2) 245J (1) - (5)CG 11(1) - (5) (6)(a) - (d)CG 11(6)(c) (6)(e)omitted Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 245J(6)(f) - (i)CG 11(6)(c) (6)(ia)CG 11(6)(a) (6)(j)CG 11(6)(b) (7) (relettered)CG 11(7) (8) - (11)CG 11(8) - (11) (13), (14)CG 11(12), (13) (15)omitted (16) - (20)CG 11(14) - (18) (20A), (21A)CG 11(19), (20) (22), (22A)CG 11(21), (22) (23) - (25)CG 11(23) - (25) 245K (1), (1A)(2)-(10) LC 4(1) - (11) 245L(1), (2)LC 5(1), (2) 245M (1) - (3)IE 3(1) - (3) (4)IF 3- (5) - (7)IE 3(4) - (6) 245N (1), (2)IG 4(1), (2) 245O (1) - (3)CG 12(1) - (3) 245P(1), (2)CG 13(1), (2) 245Q (1) - (5)OE 2(2) - (6) 245R (1) - definitionCG 23(9) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2) - (5)CG 14(1) - (4) (6)OB 1- 245RA (1), (2)CG 15(1), (2) 245RB (1) - (12)CG 16(1) - (12) 245RC (1) - (10)CG 17(1) - (10) 245RD -CG 18- 245RE (1) - (7)CG 19(1) - (7) 245RF (1) - (3)CG 20(1) - (3) 245RG (1) - (4)CG 21(1) - (4) 245RH -MF 15- 245RI (1), (2)CG 22(1), (2) 245RJ (1) - (10)IE 4(1) - (10) 245RK (1) - (3)IG 5(1) - (3) 245RL (1) - (8)CG 23(1) - (8) 245RM(1), (2)CG 24(1), (2) 245RN (1), (2)TAA 183 (1), (2) 245V (1), (2)CG 25(1), (2) 245W (1) - (3)TAA 61 (1) - (3) 245X -OZ 1(3) 245Y (1) - (10)omitted Part VII - Agents and Non-residents 265definitionOB 1- 266-HK 1- 267-HK 2- 268(1) - (3)HK 3(1) - (3) 269-HK 4- 270-HK 5- 271-HK 6- 272(1), (2)HK 7(1), (2) 273-HK 8- 274-HK 9- 275-HK 10- 276(1) - definitions HK 11(10) (2) - (10)HK 11(1) - (9) 19 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 277-HK 12- 278(1) - (4)HK 13(1) - (4) 279(1) - (3)HK 15(1) - (3) 280-HK 16- 281-HK 17- 282(1), (2)HK 18(1), (2) 283(1), (2)HK 19(1), (2) 284-HK 20- 285-HK 21- 285A -HK 22- 286-HK 23- 287(1) - definitionHK 24(4) (2) - (4)HK 24(1) - (3) 288-HK 25- 289(1) - definitionOB 6(1)(b) (2) - (4)HK 26(1) - (3) Part VIII - Relief from Double Taxation 292(1) - definitionLC 7(2) (1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitionTAA 3(1) (2)BB 11(5) (1) - definitions LC 1(5) 293(1) - definitionOB 6(1)(c) (2)LC 1(1) (2A)omitted (2B), (2C), (3)LC 1(2) - (4) 294(1) - (4)BB 11(1) - (4) (5)TAA 88 - 295(1) - (3)TAA 115 (1) - (3) 296(1), (2)TAA 116 (1), (2) 297-TAA 117 - 298-TAA 118 - 299(1), (2)TAA 131 (1), (2) 300-TAA 132 - 301-LC 13- 302(1)LC 6- (2) - (4)CF 6(3) - (5) 303-LC 7(1) 304-LC 2- 305-LC 3- 306(1), (2)LC 14(1), (2) (3)omitted 307-OE 6- 308-LC 15- 308A (1) - definitions LE 1(7) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2), (3)LE 1(1), (2) (4)GC 13- (5) - (8)LE 1(3) - (6) Part IX - Non-Resident Withholding Tax 309(1) - definitions OB 1- (2) - definitionTAA 49 (3) (2)(a), (b)(i)OB 1- (2)(b)(ii)omitted (3)NG 1(3) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 310(1)NG 1(1) (2) (relettered)NG 1(2) 311(1) (relettered)NG(1) 311(2)NG 2(2) 311A -NG 5- 311B (1), (2)NG 6(1), (2) 311C (1) - (3)NG 7(1) - (3) 312(1) - (3)NG 8(1) - (3) 313(1), (2)NG 9(1), (2) 314(1), (2)NG 10(1), (2) 315(1), (2)NG 11(1), (2) 316(1), (2)TAA 49 (1), (2) 317-NG 3- 318(1)NG 4- (2)LD 2- 319-NG 12- 320(1)NG 13(1) (2)(a)omitted (2)(b)NG 13(2) (3), (4)NG 13(3), (4) 321(1) - (4)TAA 100 (1) - (4) 322(1) - (4)TAA 146 (1) - (4) 323(1) - (4)TAA 197 (1) - (4) 324(1), (2)TAA 209 (1), (2) 325-NG 14- 326-NG 15- 326A (1) - (5)NG 16(1) - (5) (6)TAA 185 (f) 327(1), (2)NG 17(1), (2) Part IXA - Resident Withholding Tax Deductions 327A (1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitions TAA 3(1) (2)NF 1(5) (2A)NF 1(4) (3)OB 1- (3)TAA 3(1) 327B (1)NF 1(1) (2)(a)NF 1(2)(a) (2)(b)(ii)NF 1(2)(b)(i) (2)(b)(iia)omitted (2)(b)(iii), (iiia) NF 1(2)(b)(ii), (iii) (2)(b)(iv) - (vi)NF 1(2)(b)(iv) - (vi) (2)(b)(via), (vii) NF 1(2)(b)(vii), (viii) (3)NF 1(3) 327C (1)NF 2(1) (2) - (8)NF 2(2) - (8) 327D (1) - (5)NF 3(1) - (5) 327E (1) - (4)NF 4(1) - (4) (5)TAA 50 - (6), (7)NF 4(5), (6) 327F (1) - (4)NF 6(1) - (4) 327G (1), (1A),(2) - (5) NF 7(1) - (6) (6)TAA 185 (f) 327H (1), (2)TAA 25 (1), (2) (3) - excl proviso TAA 25 (3) (3) - provisoomitted 20 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 327K (4) - (10)TAA 25 (4) - (10) (11)omitted 327I(1) - (6)TAA 51 (1) - (6) 327J(1)TAA 52 - (2)TAA 28 - 327K (1) - (7)LD 3(1) - (7) 327L(1) - definitions NF 8(4) (1) - definitions OB 1- (2) (relettered)NF 8(1) (3), (4)NF 8(2), (3) 327M (1) (relettered) NF 9(1) (2) - (11)NF 9(2) - (11) (12) (relettered) NF 9(12) (13), (14)NF 9(13), (14) 327N (1) - definitions NF 10(6) (2) - (6)NF 10(1) - (5) 327O (1) - (7)NF 11(1) - (7) 327P(1) - definitionTAA 22 (7) (2) - (8)TAA 26 (1) - (7) 327Q (1) - (3)TAA 170 (1) - (3) 327R (1) - (3)TAA 172 (1) - (3) 327S(1) - (3)TAA 171 (1) - (3) 327T (1)TAA 99 (1) (2) (relettered)TAA 99 (2) (3)TAA 99 (3) 327U (1) - (5)TAA 145 (1) - (5) 327V (1) - (3)TAA 208 (1) - (3) 327W (1) - (4)TAA 196 (1) - (4) 327X -GC 20- 327Y -TAA 55 - 327Z(1), (2)NF 5(1), (2) 327ZA -NF 12- 327ZB (1), (1A)TAA 53 (1), (2) (2)TAA 27 (2) (3)TAA 53 (3) 327ZC (part)GC 19- (part)NF 13- 327ZD (1)TAA 54 (1) (2)TAA 27 (1) (3)TAA 54 (2) Part X - Withdrawal Tax 328definitionsOB 1- 329-ID 1- 330-ID 2- 331(1) - (4)ID 3(1) - (4) 332(1) - (6)ID 4(1) - (6) 333-ID 5- 334(1) - (3)TAA 95 (1) - (3) 335-ID 6- 336- (relettered)ID 7- -OZ 1(3) Part XA - National Superannuitant Surcharge 336A definitionJB 2(3) definitionsOB 1- Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 336A definitionsomitted 336B (1)JB 1- (2)omitted 336C (1), (2)JB 2(1), (2) 336D (1) - definitionTAA 3(1) (1) - (3)JB 3(1) - (3) 336E (1) (relettered)JB 4(1) (2)JB 4(2) 336F(1) - (3)TAA 96 (1) - (3) 336G (1) - (3)JB 5(1) - (3) 336H (1), (2)NI 1(1), (2) 336I(1), (2)TAA 45 (1), (2) (3)NI 2- 336J(1), (2)NI 3(1), (2) 336K (1) - (3)NI 4(1) - (3) 336L(1) - (3)NI 5(1) - (3) 336LA -NI 6- 336M -JB 6- -OZ 1(3) Part XB - Fringe Benefit Tax 336M (1), definition (relettered)CI 1- 336N (1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitions TAA 3(1) (2)CI 2(1) (3)GC 15(1) (3A)(a)omitted (3A)(b) - (d)GC 15(2)(a) - (c) (3B), (3C)CI 2(2), (3) (4)-(7),(8A),(8B) CI 2(4) - (9) (9), (10)OF 2(2) 336O (1)CI 3(1) (1A)GC 16- (2), (2A) - (2C) CI 3(2) - (5) (3), (3A), (3B)CI 3(6) - (8) (3C), (3D)omitted (4) - (6)CI 3(9) - (11) 336P(1),(1A),(1B),(2) CI 4(1) - (4) 336Q -CI 10- 336R -CI 9- 336S(2)ND 1- (3) - (5)CI 5(1) - (3) 336T (1), (1A), (2), (3) ND 2(1) - (4) 336TA (1) - (6)ND 3(1) - (6) 336TB (1) - (6)ND 4(1) - (6) (7) - definitionND 4(8) 336TC (1) - (4)TAA 123 (1) - (4) 336U (1), (2)TAA 141 (1), (2) (3) - definitionTAA 3(1) 336V (1) - (3)TAA 93 (1) - (3) (4)omitted 336VA (1) - (5)ND 5(1) - (5) 336W (1) - (3)CI 6(1) - (3) 336X -GC 17- 336Y -CI 8- -OZ 1(3) 21 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) Part XC - Specified Superannuation Contribution Withholding Tax 336Z-NE 1- 336ZA (1), (2)NE 2(1), (2) 336ZB -NE 3- 336ZC -NE 4- 336ZD (1), (2)TAA 47 (1), (2) 336ZE -CL 1- 336ZF -NE 5- 336ZG (1) - (3)TAA 98 (1) - (3) 336ZH (1) - (4)TAA 142 (1) - (4) 336ZI (1) - (4)TAA 195 (1) - (4) 336ZJ (1), (2)TAA 207 (1), (2) 336ZK (1), (2)NE 7(1), (2) 336ZL -NE 6- Part XI - Tax Deductions by Employers from Salary, Wages, and Other Source Deduction Payments 337(1)NC 1(1) (2)omitted (3)NC 1(2) (4)TAA 133 - 338(1) - (4)NC 2(1) - (4) 339-NC 3- 340(1), (2)NC 4(1), (2) 342(1), (2)NC 5(1), (2) 343(1) - (3)NC 6(1) - (3) 343A (1) - (3)NC 7(1) - (3) 344(1)-(3), (6)-(14) NC 8(1) - (12) 346-NC 9- 347-NC 10- 348(1), (2)NC 11(1), (2) 349(1) - (4)NC 12(1) - (4) 350(1), (2)NC 13(1), (2) 350A (1) - (5)NC 18(1) - (5) 351(1), (2), (2A)NC 14(1) - (3) (3) - (6)NC 14(4) - (7) 352(1), (2)TAA 24 (1), (2) 353(1)(a)(i), (ii)NC 15(1)(a)(i), (ii) (1)(a)(iii)omitted (1)(ab)(i), (ii)NC 15(1)(b)(i), (ii) (1)(ab)(iii)omitted (1)(ac)(i) - (iv)NC 15(1)(c)(i) - (iv) (1)(ac)(v)omitted (1)(b) - (f)NC 15(1)(d) - (h) (2)NC 15(2) (4), (5), (5A),NC 15(3) - (6) (5B) (6) - definitionNC 15(8) (6) - definitions OB 1- (6) - definitions TAA 3(1) 354(1) - (3)TAA 48 (1) - (3) 355-NC 16- 356(1) - definitionOB 1- (2) - (4)OB 4(1) - (3) 357(1), (2)IC 1(1), (2) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 358-IC 2- 359(1)IC 3(1) (2)(a)(ii)IC 3(2)(a) (2)(a)(iii)omitted (2)(b)IC 3(2)(b) 361(1)(c)NC 17(1) (2)NC 17(2) 362(1) - (5)LD 1(1) - (5) 363-LD 4- 364-LD 5- 365(1) - definitions TAA 167 (4) (1A)TAA 167 (1) (2)(a) - (c)TAA 167 (2)(a) - (c) (3)TAA 167 (3) 366(1) - (3)TAA 168 (1) - (3) 367(1) - definitionTAA 169 (11) (2) - (11)TAA 169 (1) - (10) 368(1), (3)TAA 206 (1), (2) 369(1) - (4)TAA 194 (1) - (4) 370(1) - (4)TAA 140 (1) - (4) 371-GC 18- 372-NC 19- 373(1), (2)NC 20(1), (2) (3) (+ new)NC 20(3) 374(relettered)NC 21- Part XIA - Family Support Credit of Tax 374A definitionsOB 1- 374B (1)(a), (b)KD 1(1)(a), (b) (1)(c)(i), (ii)KD 1(1)(c)(i), (ii) (1)(c)(iii)omitted (1)(c)(iv)KD 1(1)(c)(iii) (1)(d)(i)KD 1(1)(d) (1)(e) - (g)KD 1(1)(e) - (g) (1)(h)omitted (1)(i)KD 1(1)(h) (2) - (6)KD 1(2) - (6) (7)OF 2(2) 374C definitionOB 1- 374D (1)KD 2(6) (2) - (4), (4A),KD 2(1) - (5) (5) (1) - definitions KD 3(5) 374E (1) - definitionOB 1- (2) - (5)KD 3(1) - (4) 374F (1)KD 4(1) (2)(a)KD 4(2)(a) (2)(b)omitted (2)(c) - (g)KD 4(2)(b) - (f) (3) - (5)KD 4(3) - (5) 374G (1), (2), (2A)KD 5(1) - (3) (3), (3A)KD 5(4), (5) (4)(a) - (c)KD 5(6) (4) provisoomitted (5),(8),(12),(13) KD 5(7) - (10) (14)(c) - (e)KD 5(11)(a) - (c) (15)KD 5(12) 22 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 374H (1A), (1B)TAA 173 (1), (2) (5)YB 4(1) + new (7)YB 4(1) + new 374I (2),(3A),(3B),(4) KD 6(1) - (4) 374IA (1) - (4)KD 7(1) - (4) 374K -TAA 185 (e) 374L -GC 28- 374M -KD 9- 374N (a) - (e)omitted (f) to (k)TAA 212 (a) - (f) 374O (1) - (7)YB 4(1) + new 374P -KD 8- Part XII - Provisional Tax 375- definitionsOB 1- - definitionsTAA 3(1) 376(1)MB 1- (2)omitted 377(1) - (5)MB 2(1) - (5) 378(1) - (4)MB 3(1) - (4) 379(1) - (5)TAA 119 (1) - (5) 380(1) - (3)MB 4(1) - (3) 381(1) - (3)MB 5(1) - (3) 382-MB 6- 383(1) - (3)MB 8(1) - (3) 384(1) - (3)TAA 143 (1) - (3) (3) (former 384) TAA 179 385(1) - (6)TAA 144 (1) - (6) 386(1) - (6)TAA 178 (1) - (6) 387(1) - (6)MB 9(1) - (6) 388(1), (2)MB 10(1), (2) 389-LD 6- 390(1) - (3)MC 1(1) - (3) 391-LD 7- 392-MB 12- Part XIIAA - Qualifying Company Regime for Closely-held Companies 393-HG 1- 393A (1) - definitions OB 1- (1) - definitionOB 3- (2)HG 2- (3)OF 2(2) 393B (1) - (4)OB 3(1) - (4) (5)GC 5- 393C (1) - (5)HG 3(1) - (5) 393D (1) - (5)HG 4(1) - (5) 393E (1), (2)HG 5(1), (2) 393F (1) - (3)HG 6(1) - (3) 393G (1), (2)HG 7(1), (2) 393H (1), (2)HG 8(1), (2) 393I (1) - (3),(3A),(4) HG 9(1) - (5) 393J (a)(i)HG 10(a) (a)(ii)omitted (b)HG 10(b) (c)omitted 393K (1) - (4)HG 11(1) - (4) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 393L (1)HG 12(1) (2)TAA 147 - (3) - (5)TAA 94 (1) - (3) (6)DB 1(2) (7) (relettered)HG 12(2) (7)OZ 1(3) 393M (1)(a)HG 13(1)(a) (1)(b)omitted (1)(c)HG 13(1)(b) (1)(d)omitted (1)(e)HG 13(1)(c) (2) - (6)HG 13(2) - (6) 393N -HG 14- 393O (1), (1A), (2), (3) HG 15(1) - (4) 393P (1) - (4)HG 16(1) - (4) 393Q (1) - (4)HG 17(1) - (4) 393R -HG 18- 393S -omitted 393T -omitted 393U -omitted Part XIIA - Full Imputation 394A (1) - definitionsOB 1- (1) - definitionsOB 6(d) (1) - definitionsTAA 3(1) (2)OF 2(2) (3)ME 2- (4)FC 12- (5)OB 6(1)(f) 394B (1)ME 1(1) (2) (relettered)ME 1(2) (3)ME 1(3) 394C (1), (2)ME 3(1), (2) 394D (1)(a) (relettered) ME 4(1)(a) (1)(aa), (b)ME 4(1)(b), (c) (1)(c)omitted (1)(d) - (g)ME 4(1)(d) - (g) (1)(j) - (l)ME 4(1)(h) - (j) (2) (relettered)ME 4(2) (3)ME 4(3) 394E (1)(a), (aa) - (ac) ME 5(1)(a) - (d) (1)(b) (relettered) ME 5(1)(e) (1)(c)omitted (1)(d), (e), (ea)ME 5(1)(f) - (h) (1)(g) - (i)ME 5(1)(i) - (k) (1)(j)omitted (1A)ME 5(5) (2)(a), (aa) - (ac) ME 5(2)(a) - (d) (2)(b)-(d), (f)-(h) ME 5(2)(e) - (j) (2)(i)omitted (3)ME 5(3) (4)(a) - (e)ME 5(4)(a) - (e) (4)(f) (relettered) GC 21- 394F (1)ME 6- (2)omitted 394FA(1) - (4)ME 7(1) - (4) 394G (1) - (5)ME 8(1) - (5) 23 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 394H (1), (2)TAA 67 (1), (2) 394I(1) (relettered)AA 29(1) (2)TAA 29 (2) 394J(1) (relettered)TAA 69 (1) (2), (3)TAA 69 (2), (3) 394K (1), (2), (2A), (3) TAA 70 (1) - (4) 394L(1) - (4)ME 9(1) - (4) (4A)omitted (5)ME 9(5) (6)TAA 148 - (7) - (9)TAA 101 (1) - (3) (10)ME 9(6) 394M (1) - (3), (3A)MD 2(1) - (4) (4), (5), (5A)MD 2(5) - (7) (6)MD 2(10) 394N (1) - (3)TAA 153 (1) - (3) (4)TAA 149 - (5) - (8)TAA 97 (1) - (4) 394O (1) - (3)TAA 180 (1) - (3) 394P(1)TAA 155 (1) (2)TAA 155 (2)(a) - (d) (2)OZ 1(3) 394Q definitionsOB 1- 394R (1) - (3)ME 30(1) - (3) 394S(1), (2)ME 31(1), (2) 394T (1) - (5)ME 32(1) - (5) 394U (1) - (3)ME 33(1) - (3) 394V (1), (2)ME 34(1), (2) 394W definitionsOB 1- definitionsTAA 3(1) 394X (1) - (3)ME 35(1) - (3) 394Y (1), (2)ME 36(1), (2) 394Z-ME 37- 394ZA (1), (2)ME 38(1), (2) (3)TAA 64 - 394ZB (1), (2)ME 39(1), (2) 394ZC (1) - (4)omitted 394ZD (1) - (5)LB 1(1) - (5) 394ZE (1)(a)LB 2(1) (1)(b)omitted (2) - (8)LB 2(2) - (8) 394ZF (1), (2)GC 23(1), (2) (1) - definitions GC 22(9) 394ZG (1) - definitionOB 1- (2) - (9)GC 22(1) - (8) 394ZH (1) - (8)ME 40(1) - (8) 394ZI -omitted 394ZJ -omitted Part XIIB - Dividend Withholding Payments and Dividend Withholding Payment Accounts 394ZK(1),(2),defs.OB 1- (3)OF 2(2) (4)MG 1- 394ZL(1), (2)NH 1(1), (2) 394ZM (1) - (5)NH 2(1) - (5) 394ZMA (1)LF 1(1) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 394ZMA(2), definitions LF 5(5) (2), definitions OB 1- (2), definition OB 6(e) (2), definition omitted (3)LF 1(2) 394ZMB (1), (2)LF 2(1), (2) 394ZMC (1), (2)LF 3(1), (2) 394ZMD (1), (3)LF 4(1) - (3) 394ZME (1) - (4)LF 5(1) - (4) 394ZMF (1) - (6)LF 6(1) - (6) 394ZMG (1) - (3)TAA 124 (1) - (3) (4)(a), (b)TAA 124 (4)(a), (b) (4)(c)TAA 185 (d) (4)(d)TAA 124 (4)(c) (5), (6)TAA 124 (5), (6) 394ZMH -LF 7- 394ZN(1),(2),(2A),(3) NH 3(1) - (4) (4)TAA 150 - (5), (6)NH 3(5), (6) (7) - (9)TAA 102 (1) - (3) (10)NH 3(7) 394ZO(1)-(3),(3A),NH 4(1) - (7) (4)-(6) 394ZP(1)(a)LD 8(1) (1)(b)omitted (1)(c) - (e)LD 8(1)(a) - (c) (2) - (9)LD 8(2) - (9) 394ZQ(1) - (5)LD 9(1) - (5) 394ZR-TAA 185 (b) 394ZS(1) - (3)TAA 210 (1) - (3) 394ZSA -GC 25- 394ZT(1) - (5)MG 2(1) - (5) 394ZU(1), (2)MG 3(1), (2) 394ZV(1) - (3)MG 4(1) - (3) 394ZW (1) (relettered) MG 5(1)(a) - (j) (2)(a), (aa),MG 5(2)(a) - (e) (b) - (d) (2)(da)omitted (2)(e) - (g)MG 5(2)(f) - (h) (3)MG 5(3) (4)(a) - (e)MG 5(4)(a) - (e) (4)(f)(relettered)GC 27- 394ZX(1)MG 6- (2)omitted 394ZXA (1) - (4)MG 7(1) - (4) 394ZY(1) - (4)MG 8(1) - (4) (4A) - (4C),(5) MG 8(5) - (8) 394ZZ(1), (2)MG 10(1), (2) 394ZZA -TAA 68 - 394ZZB -TAA 30 - 394ZZC -TAA 71 - 394ZZD (1) - (3)TAA 72 (1) - (3) 394ZZE (1), (2)MG 11(1), (2) 394ZZF (1) - (5)MG 9(1) - (5) (6)TAA 151 - (7)TAA 103 (1) (8)TAA 103 (3) 24 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 394ZZF (9)TAA 103 (2) (10)MG 9(6) 394ZZG (1) - (3)TAA 154 (1) - (3) (5) - (8)TAA 104 (1) - (4) 394ZZH (1) - (3)TAA 181 (1) - (3) 394ZZI (1)TAA 155 (1) (2)TAA 155 (3)(a) - (d) (2)OZ 1(3) 394ZZJ (1) - (8)MG 12(1) - (8) 394ZZK (1) - (4)omitted 394ZZL (1), (2)omitted Part XIIC - Branch Equivalent Tax Accounts 394ZZM(1) - definitionsOB 1- (2)OF 2(2) (3)MF 2- 394ZZN (1) - (5)MF 1(1) - (5) (6)TAA 77 - 394ZZO (1), (2)MF 3(1), (2) 394ZZP (1)MF 4(1) (2) - (5)MF 4(2) - (5) (6)(a) - (f)MF 4(6)(a) - (f) (6)(g)(relettered)GC 26- 394ZZQ(3),(3A),(4)-(8) MF 5(1) - (7) 394ZZR (1) - (8)MF 6(1) - (8) 394ZZS (1) - (5)MF 11(1) - (5) 394ZZT (1), (2)MF 12(1), (2) 394ZZU (1), (2)MF 13(1), (2) (3)(a)MF 13(3)(a) (3)(b) in part MF 13(3)(b) (3)(b) in part omitted (3)(d)MF 13(3)(c) (4) (relettered) MF 13(4) 394ZZV (1) - (3)MF 14(1) - (3) 394ZZW (1) - (6)TAA 78 (1) - (6) Part XIID - Policyholder Credit Accounts 394ZZY(1), definitions OB 1- (2)OF 2(2) (3)ME 16- 394ZZZ -ME 15- 394ZZZA (1), (2)ME 17(1), (2) 394ZZZB (1) - (4)ME 18(1) - (4) 394ZZZC (1) - (6)ME 19(1) - (6) 394ZZZD (1) - (4)ME 20(1) - (4) 394ZZZE (1) - (4)ME 21(1) - (4) 394ZZZF (1), (2)ME 22(1), (2) 394ZZZG (1) - (6)ME 23(1) - (6) 394ZZZH (1), (2)ME 24(1), (2) 394ZZZI (1) - (6)TAA 66 (1) - (6) 394ZZZJ (1) - (5)MD 3(1) - (5) Part XIII - Payment and Recovery of Tax 395(1), (2)MC 2(1), (2) 396-MH 1- 397-MC 3- 398(1) - definitions TAA 3(1) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 398(1) - definitionsTAA 139 (8) (2), (3)TAA 139 (1), (2) (4)(a)(i), (ii)TAA 139 (3)(a)(i), (ii) (4)(a)(iii)omitted (4)(a)(iv), (v)TAA 139 (3)(a)(iii), (iv) (4)(b)(i), (ii)TAA 139 (3)(b)(i), (ii) (4)(b)(iii)omitted (4)(b)(iv), (v)TAA 139 (3)(b)(iii), (iv) (4)(c) - (e)TAA 139 (3)(c) - (e) (5) - (8)TAA 139 (4) - (7) 398A (1) - definitionsOB 1- (1) - definitionsTAA 121 (12) (2) - (12)TAA 121 (1) - (11) 399-TAA 156 (1), (2) (1) - definitionsTAA 157 (10) 400(1) - definitionsTAA 157 (10) (2) - (7)TAA 157 (1) - (6) (7A), (8), (8A)TAA 157 (7) - (9) (9)TAA 211 - 401-TAA 158 - 402-TAA 159 - 403-TAA 160 - 404-TAA 161 - 405-TAA 162 - 406-TAA 163 - 407-TAA 164 - 408-TAA 165 - Part XIV - Refunds and Relief from Tax 409(1) - (3)MD 1(1) - (3) (4)(a)omitted (4)(b)MD 1(4)(c) (4)(c)MD 1(4)(b) (4)(d)MD 1(4)(a) 410(1), (2)TAA 166 (1), (2) 411-TAA 174 - 411A (1), (2)TAA 175 (1), (2) 412-TAA 184 - 413(1) - definitionTAA 182 (5) (2), (2A), (3), (4) TAA 182 (1) - (4) 413A (1) - definitionsOB 1- (1) - definitionsTAA 122 (10) (2) - (10)TAA 122 (1) - (9) (11)TAA 185 (d) 414(1) - definitionTAA 3(1) (2)TAA 176 (1) (2A)(a)TAA 176 (2) (2A)(b)omitted (2A)(c) - (e)TAA 176 (2)(a) - (c) (2B), (3) - (5)TAA 176 (3) - (6) 414A (1) - (5)TAA 177 (1) - (5) 415-TAA 185 (a) Part XV - Penalties 416(1) (relettered)TAA 199 (1) 416A (1) - definitionTAA 3(1) (2)TAA 201 (1) 25 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 416A (3)(a)(i), (ii)TAA 201 (2)(a) (3)(b)(i), (ii)TAA 201 (2)(b) 416B (1), (2), (2A)TAA 222 (1) - (3) (2B)TAA 222 (5) (3)TAA 222 (4) 417-TAA 215 - 418(1) - (3)TAA 216 (1) - (3) 419-TAA 217 - 420-TAA 186 - 421-TAA 187 - 422(1) - (3)TAA 188 (1) - (3) 422A -TAA 189 - 423(1), (2)TAA 190 (1), (2) 424(1), (2)TAA 191 (1), (2) 425(1), (2)TAA 192 (1), (2) 426-TAA 193 - 427(1)(a), (b)TAA 223 (1)(a), (b) (1)(ba)(relettered) TAA 223(1)(c) (1)(ba)(iv)omitted (1)(c)TAA 223 (1)(d) (2) - (4)TAA 223 (2) - (4) Part XVI - General Provisions 428(1) - definitions TAA 22 (7) (2)TAA 22 (1) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1994 Act 1976(or Tax Administration Act 1994) 428(3) (relettered)TAA 22 (2) (3A), (4)TAA 22 (3), (4) (5)OF 2(2) (7), (8)TAA 22 (5), (6) 428A (1), (2)TAA 23 (1), (2) (3)OF 2(2) 430(1) - definitions TAA 3(1) (2)TAA 56 - 431-TAA 62 - 432(1) - (7)TAA 46 (1) - (7) 432A (1) - definitionTAA 3(1) (2)TAA 32 - (3)TAA 58 - (4)TAA 89 - 433(a)omitted (b), (ba)TAA 225 (a), (b) (c), (d)TAA 225 (1)(e), (f) 434(1), (2)TAA 226 (1), (2) 435-omitted 436(1)YB 1- (2)YB 3(2) (3), (4)YB 5- (5), (6)omitted 26 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Part B - Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 Provisions of Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 corresponding to provisions of 1994 Acts Inland RevenueTax Administration Act 1994 Department Act 1974(or TRA Act 1994) 1(1), (2)TAA 1 2definitionsTAA 3(1) definitionsTAA 81 (6) definitionsomitted definitionsTRA 3(1) Part I- Inland Revenue Department 3(1)TAA 5- (2)TAA 229 (1) 4(1)TAA 6- (2)TAA 229 (2) (3)TAA 228 (1) 6(1)-(3),(3A),(3B) TAA 8(1) - (5) (5)TAA 229 (3) (6)TAA 228 (2) (7)omitted (8)TAA 229 (4) 7(1) - (3)TAA 9(1) - (3) (4)TAA 228 (3) 8(1)TAA 10 - (2)TAA 229 (5) (3)TAA 228 (4) 9(1), (2)omitted 10(1)TAA 11 - (2)TAA 228 (5) 11(1) - (6)TAA 7(1) - (6) 12(1), (2)TAA 12 (1), (2) 13(1)TAA 81 (1) (2)TAA 81 (2) (2A), (3)TAA 81 (2), (3) (4) (relettered)TAA 81 (4) (5)TAA 203 - (6)TAA 81 (5) (6)TAA 86 (6) 13A(1) - definitions TAA 3(1) (1) - definitions TAA 82 (9) (1) - definitionomitted (2) - (9)TAA 82 (1) - (8) 13B(1) - definitions TAA 83 (7) (1) - definitionomitted (2)TAA 83 (1) (3) (relettered)TAA 83 (2) (4) - (7)TAA 83 (3) - (6) 13C(1) - definitionTAA 3(1) (1) - definitions TAA 84 (6) (1) - definitionomitted (2) - (6)TAA 84 (1) - (5) 13D(1) - definitionTAA 3(1) (1) - definitions TAA 85 (6) (1) - definitionomitted (2) - (6)TAA 85 (1) - (5) 14(1) - definitionTAA 86 (5) (2) - (5)TAA 86 (1) - (4) (6), (7)TAA 204 (1), (2) Inland RevenueTax Administration Act 1994 Department Act 1974(or TRA Act 1994) 15(1) - definitionTAA 87 (5) (2) - (5)TAA 87 (1) - (4) (6)TAA 205 - 16(1) - (7)TAA 16 (1) - (7) 17(1) - (6)TAA 17 (1) - (6) (8)TAA 200 (1) 17A-TAA 40 - 17B-TAA 219 - 18(1) - (8)TAA 18 (1) - (8) (9)TAA 213 - (10)TAA 18 (9) 19(1),(2),(2A),(2B) TAA 19 (1), (2) - (4) (3)TAA 214 - (4), (5)TAA 19 (3), (4) 20(1) - (5)TAA 20 (1) - (5) (6)TAA 20 (7) (7)TAA 20 (6) 21(1) - (15)TAA 220 (1) - (15) (16) - definitions TAA 220 (18) (16A)TAA 220 (17) (17)TAA 220 (16) 21A(1) - (3)TAA 13 (1) - (3) 21B-TAA 218 - 21C(1), (2)TAA 14 (1), (2) 21D-TAA 105 - 22(1), (2)TAA 15 (1), (2) 22A(1) - (3)TAA 35 (1) - (3) Part II - Taxation Review Authorities 23(1) - (4)TRA 5(1) - (4) (5)omitted (6)TRA 5(5) 24(1) - (4)TRA 6(1) - (4) 25-TRA 7- 26-TRA 8- 27-TRA 9- 28-TRA 10 - 29(1), (2)TRA 11 (1), (2) 30-TRA 12 - 31-TRA 13 - 32-TRA 14 - 33(1), (2)TRA 15 (1), (2) 34(1) - (4)TRA 16 (1) - (4) 35(1) - (3)TRA 17 (1) - (3) (4) - definitionsTRA 17 (4) 36-TRA 18 - 37(1) - (3)TRA 19 (1) - (3) 38(1), (2)TRA 20 (1), (2) 39-TRA 21 - 39A(1) - (3)TRA 22 (1) - (3) 40-TRA 23 - 41(1), (1A), (1B)TRA 24 (1) - (3) (2), (3)TRA 24 (4), (5) 42(1), (2)TRA 25 (1), (2) 27 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Inland RevenueTax Administration Act 1994 Department Act 1974(or TRA Act 1994) 43(1) (relettered)TRA 26 (1) (2) - (7)TRA 26 (2) - (7) 44-TRA 27 - 45-TRA 28 - 46(1) - (3)TRA 29 (1) - (3) Part III - Miscellaneous Provisions 47(1)TAA 198 (1) 47A(1) - definitionTAA 3(1) (2)TAA 202 (1) Inland RevenueTax Administration Act 1994 Department Act 1974(or TRA Act 1994) 47B(1) - (3)TAA 221 (1) - (3) (4)omitted 48(1)TAA 224 (1) (1) - (3)TRA 30 (1) - (3) (3)TAA 224 (2) 49(1), (2)omitted (3)TAA 229 (2) 50(1)omitted (2)TRA 31 (4) (3) - (5)omitted 28 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Part C - Definitions Source and new location of definitions used in Income Tax Act 1994, Tax Administration Act 1994 and Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994 DefinitionSourceNew Location absentee37OB 1 para (a) absentee265OB 1 para (b) accident compensation levy140AED 1(4) account advantage394ZGGC 22(9) accounting period245AOB 1 accounting period245ATAA 3 accounting profits method245ROB 1 accounting year42KF 2(5) accounting year175OB 1 para (a) accounting year185AOB 1 para (a) accounting year186OB 1 para (a) accounting year213OB 1 para (a) accounting year327AOB 1 para (a) accounting year394ZMA OB 1 para (b) accrual expenditure104AEF 1(7) accruals rulesnewOZ 1 acquisition of control or income interests245EGC 9(7) acquisition price64BA(2) OB 1 para (a) acquisition price64BA(3) OB 1 para (b) active miner220OB 1 activities of an airport operator197AOC 1 (6) activities of an airport operator197ATAA 3 actuarial reserves204OB 1 actuary204OB 1 additional capital211BHC 1(12) additional tax2OB 1 para (a) additional tax2TAA 3 additional tax185EI 10(4)(a) additional transport costs73CB 12(7) adequate rent98GD 10(4) adjusted tax value107AOB 1 para (a) adjusted tax value 117(11)(b)OB 1 para (b) adverse event64FBOB 1 Adverse Event Family Income Support Scheme60omitted adverse event income equalisation account185AOB 1 after-income tax earnings394ZMA OB 1 after-income tax loss (see394ZMA OB 1 “after-income tax earnings”) agent2OB 1 agreement (now “double tax agreement’’)292OB 1 agreement for sale and purchase of property64BOB 1 aircraft operator64ACB 14(2) air transport64ACB 14(2) air transport from New Zealand 64ACB 14(2) airport197AOC 1(6) airport asset197AOC 1(6) airport authority197AOB 1 airport operator197AOB 1 allocation debit394AOB 1 DefinitionSourceNew Location allocation deficit debit394ZKOB 1 allowable deduction211BHC 1(12) allowance211BHC 1(12) allowance in respect of or in relation to the employment or service of any person73CB 12(7) amalgamated company 191WD(2)OB 1 amalgamation provisionsnewFE1 (2) amalgamating company191WD(2)OB 1 amalgamation191WD(2)OB 1 amount4AOB 1 para (a) amount207CZ 5(2) amount of all consideration64BOB 1 amount of the debenture (the) 195FC 2(5) amount payable400TAA 157(10) annual depreciation rate107AOB 1 annual imputation return394AOB 1 annual rate (see “annual depreciation rate’’)107AOB 1 annual rates2OB 1 annual taxing Act2OB 1 appraisal well214Domitted (redundant) approved arrangement206omitted (redundant) approved issuer309OB 1 approved plan167omitted (redundant) aquaculture128OB 1 arrangement2OB 1 arrangement64BOB 1 arrangement99OB 1 arrangement245AOB 1 arrangement336NOB 1 arrangement394AOB 1 arrangement for assistance entered into by the Govern- ment of New Zealand60CB 2(4) assessable excess94omitted (redundant) assessable excess95omitted (redundant) assessable gain212BEM 3(3) assessable income2OB 1 assessable income from forestry 175OB 1 assessable income from mining188COB 1 assessable income from mining 215OB 1 assessable income from petroleum mining188Comitted assessable income from petroleum mining214Aomitted assessment21ATAA 21(8) assigned percentage86IOB 1 assigned percentage156Aomitted 29 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location associated mining operations 215OB 1 associated person(s)8OD 7 associated person(s)67OD 8(4) associated person(s)166DF 7(4) associated person(s)214EOD 8(1) associated person(s)214OOD 7 associated person(s)245GAOB 1 para (d) associated person(s)276OB 1 para (d) associated person(s)308AOB 1 para (d) associated person(s)394ZMA OB 1 para (d) associated petroleum mining operations214AOB 1 associated petroleum mining operations214OOB 1 associated with (see “assoc- iated persons’’)276OB 1 para (d) association199HF 1(9) attributed foreign income2OB 1 attributed foreign income245AOB 1 attributed foreign loss245AOB 1 attributed repatriation2OB 1 author84EN 3(6) authorised officerIRD 13A TAA 82(9) authorised officerIRD 13B TAA 83(7) authorised officerIRD 13C TAA 84(6) authorised officerIRD 13D TAA 85(6) authorised savings institution 328OB 1 authorised savings institution 430TAA 3 Authority (now “Taxation Review Authority’’)2OB 1 Authority (now “Taxation Review Authority’’)IRD 2TAA 3 Authority (now “Taxation Review Authority’’)IRD 2TRA 3 available subscribed capital4AOB 1 available subscribed capital per share2OB 1 available subscribed capital per share cancelled4AOB 1 average market value140BOB 1 award73CB 12(7) award73TAA 130(6) balance date8th SchSchedule 13 balloted loan right194ADI 1(2) bank400TAA 157(10) banking company2OB 1 basic economic depreciation rate/economic rate107AOB 1 basic rates2OB 1 basic tax deductions2OB 1 basis of exemption327MNF 9(2) basis of exemption327MTAA 3 benchmark dividend394AOB 1 beneficiary148DD 2(2) beneficiaryIRD 13A TAA 82(9) beneficiaryIRD 13C TAA 84(6) beneficiary income226OB 1 beneficiary informationIRD 13A TAA 82(9) DefinitionSourceNew Location beneficiary informationIRD 13C TAA 84(6) benefit59omitted benefit336NOB 1 benefit336N TAA 3 para (a) benefitIRD 13ATAA 3 para (b) benefitIRD 13CTAA 3 para (b) benefitIRD 13DTAA 3 para (b) benefit from money advanced 65CE 1(2) bill (see “commercial bill”)65OB 1 bloodstock2OB 1 bloodstock86OB 1 body327NNF 10(6) bonus issue3OB 1 bonus issue4OB 1 bonus issue in lieu3OB 1 book and documentIRD 2TAA 3 book or document (see “book and document’’)IRD 2TAA 3 book value245ROB 1 branch42KF 2(5) branch equivalent company394ZMA OB 1 branch equivalent income or loss245AOB 1 branch equivalent method245AOB 1 branch equivalent method245ROB 1 branch equivalent tax account 394AOB 1 branch equivalent tax account 394ZZM OB 1 branch equivalent tax account company394AOB 1 branch equivalent tax account company394ZZM OB 1 branch equivalent tax account person394ZZM OB 1 breeding stock212BEM 3(3) broadcaster224AEO 3(9) building society194AOB 1 business2OB 1 businessIRD 21TAA 220(18) business of farming130omitted business of farming64FBEZ 9(5) business purposes/business use 106BOB 1 calculation method245ROB 1 capital gain amount4AOB 1 capital improvement/improve- ment108NOB 1 cardholderIRD 13B TAA 83(7) cardholder informationIRD 13B TAA 83(7) category A income211AOB 1 category A income394AOB 1 category B income211AOB 1 certificate130omitted certificate of entitlement2OB 1 certificate of entitlement (now “family support certificate of entitlement’’)2TAA 3 certificate of exemption327AOB 1 certificate of exemption327ATAA 3 charitable organisation336NOB 1 charitable purpose2OB 1 30 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location charitable trust226OB 1 child54KC 4(2) child59omitted child374AOB 1 claim204OB 1 class86OB 1 close company2OB 1 para (a) close company6OB 2 (4) close of trading spot exchange rate245AOB 1 close of trading spot exchange rate327AOB 1 close of trading spot exchange rate394ZKOB 1 close company2OB 1 para (a) close company6OB 2(4) closely-held company8BOB 1 closing value86OB 1 collective agreement73CB 12(7) collective agreement73TAA 130(6) combined imputation and dividend withholding payment ratio394ZKOB 1 combined tax and earner premium deduction2OB 1 combined tax and earner premium deduction2TAA 3 para (a) combined tax and earner premium deduction365TAA 167(4) commencement date394ZMA OB 1 commercial bill/bill65OB 1 commercial production214DOB 1 Commission374Aomitted commission agency contract244OE 3(2) commission agent244OE 3(2) Commissioner2OB 1 Commissioner (see “Commiss- ioner of Inland Revenue’’) IRD 2TAA 3 Commissioner2OB 1 Commissioner of Inland RevenueIRD 2TAA 3 common market value interest 191IG 1(5) common voting interest191IG 1(5) Commonwealth2OB 1 communal home54KC 4(2) company2OB 1 para (a) company2OB 1 para (c) company211OB 1 para (b) company327AOB 1 para (b) company327A TAA 3 para (a) company394AOB 1 para (c) company394ATAA 3 para (b) company dividend statement394AOB 1 comparative value method245ROB 1 competent objection34TAA 3 completed224AOB 1 conduct188AOB 1 conducts188Asee “conduct” conducted188Asee “conduct” consideration214DOB 1 para (b) DefinitionSourceNew Location consideration214DTAA 3 consideration140BED 4(8)(b) consideration receivable156Aomitted consolidated group191DOB 1 consolidation rulesnewOZ 1 consumer contribution197COC 2(13) continental shelf214DOB 1 continuity provisions8BOB 1 contract of insurance210ACN 5(2) contract of service167BDF 8(3) contribution336NOB 1 control interest245AOB 1 control interest245GOB 1 controlled foreign company226OB 1 controlled foreign company245COB 1 controlled foreign company394ZKOB 1 controlled foreign company394ZMA OB 1 controlled foreign company tax191WDOB 1 controlled petroleum mining company214DOB 1 controlled petroleum mining entity214DOB 1 controlled petroleum mining holding company214DOB 1 controlled petroleum mining holding trust214DOB 1 controlled petroleum mining trust214DOB 1 controlling shareholder276HK 11(10) convertible note196OB 1 co-operative company394WOB 1 co-operative company394WTAA 3 co-operative companyIRD 35TRA 17(4) co-operative marketing company197HOC 4(3) copyright224AOB 1 copyright224DOB 1 core acquisition price64BAOB 1 Corporation49AKE 1(3) Corporation130omitted Corporation156Aomitted CorporationIRD 13A TAA 82(9) corpus226OB 1 cost74OB 1 cost of acquiring224Asee “cost of acquisition’’ cost of acquisition224AOB 1 cost of producing224Asee “cost of production’’ cost of production224AOB 1 cost of (the) timber74OB 1 cost price140BOB 1 para (a) cost price222AOB 1 para (b) cost price option86OB 1 credit account continuity provisions8BOB 1 credit of tax (now “family support credit of tax’’)IRD 13C TAA 3 Crown Research Institute197JOB 1 current value211AOB 1 31 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location date of first commercial production214DOB 1 date of transfernewOB 1 day of determination of final liability34TAA 3 debentures2OB 1 debenture holder2OB 1 debtor64FAomitted debtorIRD 13D TAA 85(6) debtor informationIRD 13D TAA 85(6) deductible excess86HOB 1 deduction for interest129omitted deemed rate of return method 245ROB 1 deferrable tax34TAA 3 deficient tax420TAA 186 DepartmentIRD 2TAA 3 Deputy Commissioner of Inland RevenueIRD 2TAA 3 Deputy Commissioner (see “Deputy Commissioner of Inland Revenue’’)IRD 2TAA 3 dependent child374AOB 1 depreciable property107AOB 1 depreciation loss224AOB 1 para (a) depreciation loss224DOB 1 para (b) depreciation portion168DL 3(7) derived from New Zealand243OE 4 designated group investment fund211AOB 1 designated sources211AHE 2(3) designated superannuation scheme59omitted determination292LC 7(2) determination292TAA 3 determination of loss19(2)TAA 92(3) determination of loss carried forward19(3)TAA 92(4) development expenditure214AOB 1 para (a) development expenditure214DOB 1 para (b) development expenditure214OOB 1 para (c) development expenditure215OB 1 para (d) development investments5OB 1 development operations214DOB 1 diminished value128AOB 1 diminished value128BOB 1 diminished value128COB 1 diminishing value equivalent 86IOB 1 diminishing value method107AOB 1 direct market value circumstance8BOB 1 direct market value interest8BOB 1 direct voting interest8BOB 1 director2OB 1 director276HK 11(10) director election393AOB 1 Director-General (see “Director- General of Social Welfare’’)374AOB 1 Director-General of Social Welfare374AOB 1 disposal117EG 19(9) DefinitionSourceNew Location disposal, disposed, disposition 129omitted disposal (see “disposition”)214DOB 1 para (b) disposal of control or income interests245EGC 9(7) dispose (see “disposition”)214DOB 1 disposition67CD 1(13) disposition214DOB 1 para (b) disposition214DTAA 3 disposition of property226OB 1 distinctive work clothing336NOB 1 distribution226OB 1 District Commissioner of Inland Revenue2OB 1 District Commissioner of Inland RevenueIRD 2TAA 3 District Commissioner (see “District Commissioner of Inland Revenue’’)2OB 1 District Commissioner (see “District Commissioner of Inland Revenue’’)IRD 2TAA 3 District Officer of Inland RevenueIRD 2omitted District Officer (see “District Officer of Inland Revenue’’)IRD 2omitted dividend(s)4CF 2 dividend(s)4ACF 3 dividend(s)4BOB 1 para (e) dividend(s)4BCF 6 dividend(s)40KF 1(4) dividend(s)309OB 1 para (b) dividend(s)309TAA 49(3) dividend(s)394AOB 1 para (c) dividend(s)394ZKOB 1 para (d) dividend(s)394ZKTAA 3 dividend withholding payment 394AOB 1 dividend withholding payment 394ZKOB 1 dividend withholding payment account394AOB 1 dividend withholding payment account394ZKOB 1 dividend withholding payment account company394AOB 1 dividend withholding payment account company394ZKOB 1 dividend withholding payment account return327LNF 8(4) dividend withholding payment credit309OB 1 dividend withholding payment credit327AOB 1 dividend withholding payment credit394AOB 1 dividend withholding payment credit394ZKOB 1 dividend withholding payment deduction394ZKOB 1 32 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location dividend withholding payment penalty tax394ZZG OB 1 dividend withholding payment portion308ALE 1(7) dividend withholding payment ratio394ZKOB 1 dividend withholding payment rulesnewOZ 1 dividends - see “dividend(s)” domestic value added156Aomitted double head finecut stage of production224AOB 1 double tax agreement292OB 1 dual resident company191AIG 2(11) early balance date2AOF 1(2) early accounting year2AOF 1(2) early income year2AOF 1(2) earnings-related compensation IRD 13A TAA 82(9) economic farm property129omitted economic rate (see “basic economic rate’’)107AOB 1 effective interest393AOB 1 effective rate of domestic tax42KF 2(5) elected period374GKD 5(1) eligible accounting year394ZMA OB 1 eligible company191DOB 1 eligible conference106GDG 1(4) emergency call336NOB 1 employee2OB 1 para (a) employee104AOB 1 para (b) employee/employer/employment150omitted employee166DF 7(3) employee336NOB 1 para (d) employee432TAA 46(7) employee share purchase scheme166OB 1 employer2OB 1 para (a) employer150omitted employer153OB 1 para (c) employer336NOB 1 para (b) employer336NTAA 3 employer of an employee/ (several derivatives)336N(1) OB 1 employer superannuation contribution2OB 1 employing company166DF 7(3) employment150omitted employment336NOB 1 para (a) employment374AOB 1 para (b) employment374EKD 3(5) employment related loan336NOB 1 encumbrance2OB 1 encumbrance2TAA 3 energy197COB 1 energy supply authority197COB 1 energy trading operator197COB 1 entertainment106GOB 1 entertainment facility106GDG 1(4) entitlement cardIRD 13B TAA 83(7) DefinitionSourceNew Location entitlement of the person to benefit245ROB 1 established activity188AIE 2(9) estate2OB 1 estimated residual market value107AOB 1 estimated useful life107AOB 1 European2OB 1 excepted financial arrangement 64BOB 1 excess credit amount394ZKOB 1 excess return amount4ACF 3(14) excess tax413ATAA 122(10) excess retention taxnewOB 1 exchange variation71CZ 1(5) excluded depreciable property 107AOB 1 excluded option8BOB 1 excluded security8BOB 1 exempt interest327AOB 1 exempt person327ZBTAA 53(1) existing farmer188AOB 1 expenditure110EZ 3(5) expenditure on account of an employee2OB 1 expenditure portion168OB 1 exploration expenditure214AOB 1 para (a) exploration expenditure214DOB 1 para (b) exploration expenditure215OB 1 para (c) exploration permit214DOB 1 exploratory material214DOB 1 exploratory well214DOB 1 exploratory well214DTAA 3 exploratory well expenditure214DOB 1 exploratory well expenditure214DTAA 3 export-market development grant2omitted export goods156Aomitted export merchant156Aomitted extra emolument2OB 1 family support certificate of entitlement (was “certificate of entitlement’’)2TAA 3 family support credit of tax (was “credit of tax”)IRD 13C TAA 3 farm ownership requirements 328OB 1 farm vendor finance bond60CB 1(2) farm vendor mortgage60CB 1(2) farm-in expenditure214DOB 1 farm-out arrangement214DOB 1 FBT rulesnewOZ 1 feature film224AOB 1 fees56Aomitted FIF rulesnewOZ 1 fifteen percent capital reduction 4ACF 3(14) fifteen percent interest reduction 4ACF 3(14) film224BOB 1 para (a) film224CN 2(5) film224AOB 1 para (b) film expenditure224AOB 1 film owner224AOB 1 para (a) film owner224BOB 1 para (b) 33 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location film owner224DOB 1 para (c) film production expenditure224DOB 1 final certificate224DOB 1 financial arrangement64BOB 1 para (a) financial arrangement204OB 1 para (b) financially independent374AOB 1 first business day375OB 1 first instalment date375OB 1 first instalment date375TAA 3 first period (now “first PAYE period’’)353OB 1 first period (now “first PAYE period’’)353TAA 3 first PAYE period (was “first period’’)353OB 1 first PAYE period (was “first period’’)353TAA 3 first period353OB 1 first period353TAA 3 first publication84EN 3(6) first specified period (the)42KF 2(5) first year of commercial production214DOB 1 fish109DO 2(2) fishing109DO 2(2) fishing175OB 1 para (b) fishing boat109DO 2(2) fishing vessel ownership requirements328OB 1 fixed establishment2OB 1 fixed life intangible property107AOB 1 fixed principal financial arrangement64BOB 1 fixed rate share8BOB 1 fixed rate share63DLF 2(3) floating charge365TAA 167(4) foreign company63OB 1 para (b) foreign company245AOB 1 para (a) foreign company aggregates245EGC 9(7) foreign dividend (see “foreign with- holding payment dividend’’)394ZKOB 1 foreign entity245ROB 1 foreign investment fund245AOB 1 foreign investment fund245ROB 1 foreign investment fund income245AOB1 foreign investment fund income245RBCG 16 foreign investment fund loss245AOB 1 foreign investment fund loss245RBCG 16 foreign non-dividend income 393AOB 1 foreign owned fishing vessel156Aomitted foreign pension fund60omitted foreign pension fund60OB 1 foreign superannuation scheme 245ROB 1 foreign tax292OB 1 foreign tax292TAA 3 foreign trust226OB 1 foreign withholding payment dividend394ZKOB 1 DefinitionSourceNew Location foreign withholding tax327AOB 1 para (a) foreign withholding tax394ZKOB 1 para (b) forestry company213DL 4(2) forestry company214DL 5(2) former86omitted former herd scheme86omitted forward contract64BOB 1 friendly society2OB 1 fringe benefit336NCI 1 fringe benefit tax2OB 1 fringe benefit tax336UTAA 3 para (a) fringe benefit tax336VTAA 93(4) full employment374AOB 1 full retail profit76AEZ 7(7) full-time earner374EOB 1 para (a) full-time earner50CKC 3(3) fully credited4ACF 3(14) fully employed person374AOB 1 fund245ROB 1 further dividend withholding payment394ZKOB 1 further income tax394AOB 1 further processing214DOB 1 gain245ROB 1 game of chance64BOB 1 definition of “excepted financial arrangement’’ gaming machine64BOB 1 definition of “excepted financial arrangement’’ general assessmentnewOZ 1(2) general income tax assessment newOZ 1(2) general power of appointment 226OB 1 geophysical prospecting214DOB 1 gift56AKC 5(4) gift-exempt body (was “specified body’’)432ATAA 3 goods104AEF 1(7) goods140BED 4(7) good and services tax140BED 4(7) goods and services tax charged 140BED 4(7) goods and services tax payable 140BED 4(7) goods and services tax payable 165DJ 5(4) Government Superannuation Fund2OB 1 grant-related suspensory loan 173DC 3(5) grey list company394ZMA OB 1 gross2OB 1 gross receipts from carrying out thinning operations186EI 17(4) gross tax deductions353OB 1 group investment fund211AOB 1 group investment fund394AOB 1 group of companies2OB 1 group of persons245AOB 1 guaranteed residual value222AOB 1 harbour board197Domitted 34 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location herd livestock86DOB 1 herd scheme86OB 1 herd value86DOB 1 herd value ratio86DOB 1 high-priced livestock86OB 1 high-priced livestock86IOB 1 hire purchase agreement64BOB 1 hire purchase agreement222FOB 1 hire purchase asset64BOB 1 hire purchase asset222FOB 1 hire purchase payment64BOB 1 hire purchase payment222FOB 1 hire purchase term222FOB 1 hold (see “holder”)64BOB 1 para (a) holder64BOB 1 para (a) holder64BTAA 3 holder64FEH 4(9) holder327AOB 1 para (a) holder204OB 1 para (b) holder336NOB 1 para (c) holding company213OB 1 para (a) holding company214OB 1 para (a) holding company219OB 1 para (b) home54KC 4(2) home ownership requirements 328OB 1 home vendor mortgage49AKE 1(3) housekeeper54KC 4(2) identical goods336NOB 1 implementation date64BOB 1 implementation date64BTAA 3 improvement108NOB 1 imputation credit327AOB 1 imputation credit309OB 1 imputation credit394AOB 1 imputation credit account394AOB 1 imputation credit account company394AOB 1 imputation penalty tax394AOB 1 imputation ratio394AOB 1 imputation return327LNF 8(4) imputation rulesnewOZ 1 imputation year394AOB 1 income96FC 11(6) income211BHC 1(12) income derived from NZ243OE 4 income from a film224BCJ 2(2) income from employment2OB 1 para (a) income from employment105OB 1 para (b) income from personal exertion 188AIE 2(9) income interest245AOB 1 para (a) income interest394ZKOB 1 para (b) income interest of 10% or greater245AOB 1 income tax2OB 6(1)(a) income tax40OB 6(1)(j) income tax42OB 6(1)(k) income tax63OB 6(1)(b) income tax64BOB 6(1)(b) income tax100OB 6(1)(g) DefinitionSourceNew Location income tax106OB 6(1)(i) income tax207OB 6(1)(h) income tax223OB 6(1)(b) income tax245AOB 6(1)(c) income tax289OB 6(1)(b) income tax293OB 6(1)(c) income tax394A(1) OB 6(1)(d) income tax394A(1) TAA 157(10) income tax394A(5) OB 6(1)(f) income tax394LOB 6(1)(i) income tax394ZMA OB 6(1)(e) income tax payable398ATAA 121(12) income-tested benefit2OB 1 income year2OB 1 income yearIRD 13B TAA 83(7) income year of transfernewOB 1 increase in savings49KG 1(3) incremental tax413TAA 182(5) ineligible capital amount4ACF 3(14) information requisition21ATAA 21(8) initial period222AOB 1 initial treatment215OB 1 Inland Revenue ActsIRD 2OB 1 Inland Revenue ActsIRD 2TAA 3 Inland Revenue ActsIRD 2TRA 3 input tax140BOB 1 instalment222AOB 1 instalment date375OB 1 instalment date375TAA 3 instalment period222AOB 1 instalment portion34ATAA 120(5) institution54KC 4(2) instrument73CB 12(7) instrument73TAA 130(6) insurance209OB 1 para (a) insurance243OB 1 para (a) insurance210ACN 5(2) insurer209CN 4(6) integrated school56Aomitted interest2OB 1 para (a) interest (see “estate”)2OB 1 para (b) interest60omitted interest65CE 1(2) interest309OB 1 para (d) interest327AOB 1 para (e) interest in a foreign investment fund245ACG 15 interest in an employment-related foreign superannuation scheme245ROB 1 interest liability period398ATAA 121(12) international aircraft107AOB 1 international organisation60CB 2(4) international tax rulesnewOZ 1 investment society dividends2OB 1 investor211AOB 1 IR5 taxpayer17TAA 37(6) issue64BOB 1 issue327AOB 1 35 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location issued (see “issue”)64BOB 1 issued (see “issue”)327AOB 1 issuer64BOB 1 para (a) issuer64FEH 4(9) issuer64BTAA 3 judicial officerIRD 16TAA 16(7) joint venture agreement197AOB 1 labour portion168CC 3(2) land67OB 1 para (a) land129omitted land167BDF 8(3) land188AOB 1 para (c) land214DOB 1 para (d) land owned2OB 1 land tax2OB 1 late accounting year2AOF 1(2) late balance date2AOF 1(2) late income year2AOF 1(2) lease2OB 1 para (a) lease64BOB 1 para (b) lease137EZ 6(2) lease222AOB 1 para (d) lease98GD 10(4) lease asset222AOB 1 lease improvement188AOB 1 lease improvements129omitted lease payment222AOB 1 lease term222AOB 1 leasehold estate2OB 1 legal life107AOB 1 legal personal representativeIRD 2TAA 81(6) legal personal representativeIRD 2TRA 3 legal practitionerIRD 20TAA 20(7) lessee137EZ 6(2) lessee222AOB 1 para (b) lessee222FOB 1 para (c) lessee98GD 10(4) lessee’s acquisition cost222FFC 10(8) lessee’s outstanding balance222FOB 1 lessor98GD 10(4) lessor222AOB 1 para (a) lessor222FOB 1 para (b) lessor222FTAA 3 lessor’s disposition value222FOB 1 lessor’s outstanding balance222FOB 1 levy394QOB 1 liability99OB 1 life insurance2OB 1 life insurance fund204OB 1 life insurance rulesnewOZ 1 life insured204OB 1 life insurer204OB 1 para (a) life insurer204TAA 3 life insurer336NOB 1 para (b) limited attribution company8BOD 5(10) limited attribution foreign company8BOD 5(10) limited recourse loan106ADK 1(8) DefinitionSourceNew Location liquidation2OB 1 liquor licence holder87AEZ 2(5) liquor revaluation income87AEZ 2(5) listed company8BOD 5(10) livestock farming64FAomitted livestock incentive scheme174omitted livestock on the Chatham Islands86DOB 1 livestock revaluation income86LEZ 1(10) living alone payment2OB 1 loan71CZ 1(5) loan219DN 3(12) loan336NOB 1 para (b) local authority2OB 1 local authority trading enterprise 2OB 1 loss245ROB 1 para (a) loss attributing qualifying company393AOB 1 lottery (see “excepted financial arrangement’’)64BOB 1 definition of “excepted financial arrangement’’ low tax jurisdiction company 394ZMA OB 1 low value property108OOB 1 lump sum payment84EN 3(6) main income equalisation account175OB 1 major shareholder2OB 1 Maori2OB 1 para (a) Maori234OB 1 para (b) Maori234TAA 3 Maori authority2OB 1 Maori authority234OB 1 Maori corporation (now “Maori incorporation’’)214OB 1 Maori incorporation (was “Maori corporation’’)newOB 1 Maori investment company214DL 5(2) Maori land2OB 1 Maori owners214DL 5(2) market selling value140BOB 1 market value8BOB 1 para (b) market value140BOB 1 para (a) market value245RCG 25(9) market value circumstance2OB 1 market value circumstance8BOB 1 market value interest2OB 1 para (a) market value interest393AHG 2 market value option86OB 1 matrimonial agreement2OB 1 maturity, matures64FOB 1 Maui field214OOB 1 maximum deposit175OB 1 para (a) maximum deposit185AOB 1 para (b) maximum pooling value107AOB 1 measurement day245AOB 1 member (see “proprietor, member, or shareholder’’) 60CB 4(2) member199HF 1(9) 36 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location member293LC 1(5) member327NNF 10(6) member394QOB 1 para (a) milk treatment station197Fomitted mineral42KF 2(5) mineral2OB 1 para (a) minibus336NOB 1 mining company2OB 1 mining holding company2OB 1 mining licence188CIH 1(2) mining licence214DOB 1 mining licence64ETAA 3 mining operations215OB 1 mining or prospecting information215OB 1 mining or prospecting right215OB 1 mining purposes218DN 2(10) mining share218DN 2(10) mining venture221OB 1 Minister2OB 1 MinisterIRD 2TAA 3 monetary remuneration2OB 1 para (a) monetary remuneration69OB 1 para (a) monetary remuneration72OB 1 para (a) monetary remuneration104AOB 1 para (b) money64BOB 1 money advanced65CE 1(2) money lent2OB 1 monthly remittance certificate 2OB 1 mortgage2OB 1 mortgagee2OB 1 motor vehicle106BOB 1 para (a) motor vehicle336NOB 1 para (b) motorcar108NOB 1 para (a) motorcar110EZ 3(5) motorcar336NOB 1 para (b) national293LC 1(5) national average market value 86OB 1 national standard cost scheme 86OB 1 national superannuation2omitted national superannuitant2omitted national superannuitant surcharge2omitted natural gas214DOB 1 net income211BHC 1(12) net New Zealand superannuation336AJB 2(3) net specified income374COB 1 new111AFF 16(3) new asset108NOB 1 new or expanded production86HEL 9(4) new provisional taxpayer375OB 1 new provisional taxpayer375TAA 3 new return date (the)16TAA 39(5) new start grant64FBOB 1 New Zealand2OB 1 New Zealand instant game (see “excepted financial arrangement”)64BOB 1 definition of “excepted financial arrangement’’ DefinitionSourceNew Location New Zealand lottery (see64BOB 1 definition “excepted financialof “excepted arrangement’’)financial arrangement’’ New Zealand prize competition 64BOB 1 definition (see “excepted financialof “excepted arrangement”)financial arrangement’’ New Zealand company2OB 1 New Zealand film224DOB 1 New Zealand-new asset108NOB 1 New Zealand superannuation 2OB 1 New Zealand superannuitant2OB 1 New Zealand superannuitant surcharge2OB 1 New Zealand tax292OB 1 New Zealand tax292TAA 3 New Zealand-new asset108NOB 1 nominated company191DOB 1 nominee8BOB 1 para (b) nominee245AOB 1 para (a) non-cash dividend4OB 1 non-concessionary rate of interest336NOB 1 non-exempt person327BTAA 53(1) non-exempt superannuation scheme225omitted non-participating redeemable share4ACF 3(14) non-qualifying objection34TAA 3 non-qualifying trust226OB 1 non-qualifying trust226TAA 3 non-recourse loan106ADK 1(8) non-resident agent2OB 1 non-resident company245AOB 1 non-resident company245AOE 2 non-resident investment company5OB 5 non-resident mining operator 188COB 1 non-resident mining operator 221OB 1 non-resident petroleum mining operator2OB 1 non-resident petroleum mining operator214COB 1 non-resident portfolio investor 308AOB 1 non-resident taxpayer287HK 24(4) non-resident trader2OB 1 non-resident withholding income2OB 1 non-resident withholding tax 2OB 1 non-specified livestock86OB 1 non-taxable bonus issue3OB 1 normal retiring age166DF 7(3) notice2OB 1 notice of disqualification130omitted NRWT rulesnewOZ 1 officer416ATAA 3 officerIRD 47A TAA 3 Officer of the DepartmentIRD 2TAA 3 offshore development214DOB 1 offshore payment21ATAA 21(8) 37 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location on-market acquisition4AOB 1 onshore development214DOB 1 opening value86OB 1 operative date225Aomitted option8BOB 1 original return date (the)16TAA 39(5) other income336DOB 1 other income336DTAA 3 outgoing211BHC 1(12) output tax140BED 4(7) outstanding balance222AOB 1 overseas company2OB 1 owing/owed336NOB 1 owner of land2OB 1 paid2OB 1 para (a) paid2OB 1 para (a) paid40KF 1(4) paid104AOB 1 para (c) paid243OE 4(2) paid309OB 1 para (e) paid327AOB 1 para (f) paid394AOB 1 para (g) paid394ATAA 3 paragraph (e) benefit (now “unclassified benefit”)336S(3)OB 1 partner214BDZ 4(11) partner327NNF 10(6) partnership214BDZ 4(11) partnership327NNF 10(6) partnership loss211BHC 1(12) patent rights2OB 1 pay2OB 1 para (a) pay243OB 1 para (e) pay309OB 1 para (b) pay327AOB 1 para (c) pay394AOB 1 para (d) pay and allowances64CB 11(6) pay period2OB 1 pay period taxpayer356OB 4 payable2OB 1 payer327AOB 1 PAYE period (was “period”)353NC 15(8) PAYE period (was “period”)353TAA 3 PAYE rulesnewOZ 1 payment394ATAA 3 penal tax2OB 1 penal tax2TAA 3 penalty400TAA 157(10) pensions65CH 1(2) period (now “PAYE period”) 353NC 15(8) period (now “PAYE period”) 353TAA 3 period of deferral398TAA 139(8) permit214DOB 1 permit area214DOB 1 permit area214DTAA 3 permit specific asset214DOB 1 person2OB 1 para (a) person7archived DefinitionSourceNew Location person245EGC 9(7) person416BTAA 3 personIRD 2OB 1 para (a) person incorrectly assumed to be a taxpayer413ATAA 122(10) person to whom this section appliesIRD 14TAA 86(5) person with access to restricted informationIRD 15TAA 87(5) persons associated with each other (see “associated person(s)”) petroleum214DOB 1 petroleum exploration operations214AOB 1 petroleum licence214DOB 1 petroleum miner214DOB 1 petroleum mining asset214DOB 1 petroleum mining company2OB 1 petroleum mining operations214AOB 1 para (a) petroleum mining operations214DOB 1 para (b) petroleum mining operations214DTAA 3 petroleum mining operations214OOB 1 para (c) petroleum mining or prospecting information214AOB 1 petroleum mining or prospecting right214AOB 1 petroleum mining venture214COB 1 petroleum permit214DOB 1 petroleum permit214DTAA 3 policy204OB 1 policy of life insurance59OB 1 policy of pension insurance59OB 1 policy of personal accident or sickness insurance59OB 1 policyholder336NOB 1 policyholder credit account394AOB 1 policyholder credit account394ZZY OB 1 policyholder credit account company394AOB 1 policyholder credit account company394ZZY OB 1 policyholder credit account person394ZZY OB 1 policyholder income204OB 1 policyholder loss204OB 1 policyholder loss204TAA 3 pool107AOB 1 pool depreciation method107AOB 1 poolable property107AOB 1 portable national superannuation2omitted portable New Zealand superannuation2OB 1 portable veteran’s pension2OB 1 possession2OB 1 pre-budget security8BOB 1 pre-1993 depreciation rate108DEG 5(3) preceding year336TBND 4(8) premium59omitted premium137EZ 6(2) 38 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location premium204OB 1 para (a) premium209OB 1 para (b) premium243OB 1 para (b) premium from employers140AED 1(4) premium from other earners140AED 1(4) prescribed2OB 1 prescribed2TAA 3 prescribed activities214Comitted prescribed activities221OB 1 prescribed amount220OB 1 prescribed interest336NOB 1 prescribed period (the)96FC 11(6) prescribed period218DN 2(10) prescribed proportion219DN 3(12) prescribed rate of interest336NOB 1 price140BOB 1 primary employment earnings 2OB 1 primary metal42KF 2(5) primary producer co-operative company197GCK 3(3) principal caregiver374AOB 1 private domestic worker2OB 1 private dwellingnewTAA 16(7) private or domestic agreement for the sale and purchase of property64BOB 1 private use or enjoyment336NOB 1 prize competition64BOB 1 definition of “excepted financial arrangement’’ pro rata cancellation4A(3)CF 3(14) pro rata offer4ACF 3(14) produce transactions394QOB 1 para (a) produce transactions394WOB 1 para (b) producer board394Qomitted profit-sharing arrangement86FOB 1 programme130omitted property64BOB 1 para (b) property204OB 1 para (a) proprietor, member, or shareholder60CB 4(2) pro rata offer4ACF 3(14) prospecting expenditure214DOB 1 prospecting licence214DOB 1 prospecting permit214DOB 1 protected amount211AHE 2(3) protected petroleum mining company214OOB 1 provisional certificate224DEO 4(13) provisional tax2OB 1 provisional taxpayer375OB 1 provisional tax rulesnewOZ 1 provisional taxpayer375OB 1 public authority2OB 1 public passenger transport system 73CB 12(7) qualified accruals rulesnewOZ 1 qualified control interests245CCG 4(6) qualified transitory property245GACG 8(14) DefinitionSourceNew Location qualifying asset108NOB 1 qualifying amalgamation191WDOB 1 qualifying capital value108NEG 15(5) qualifying company393BOB 3(1) qualifying debenture214DL 5(2) qualifying expenditure94omitted qualifying improvement108NOB 1 qualifying payments54KC 4(2) qualifying person50CKC 3(3) qualifying person374AOB 1 para (a) qualifying person374EKD 3(5) qualifying personIRD 13C TAA 84(6) qualifying refund185EI 10(5) qualifying share premium4AOB 1 qualifying superannuation scheme204QGD 8(4) qualifying tax in dispute34ATAA 120(6) qualifying trust226OB 1 qualifying trust226TAA 3 quarter336NOB 1 quarter394ZKOB 1 race (see “excepted financial64BOB 1 definition arrangement’’)of “excepted financial arrangement’’ rebate199HF 1(9) recognised exchange8BOB 1 reconciliation statement2OB 1 recordIRD 21TAA 220(18) record428TAA 22(7) record holderIRD 21TAA 3 recreation106GOB 1 redemption payment2OB 1 reduced deduction2OB 1 Regional Controller (see “Regional Controller of Inland Revenue’’)IRD 2TAA 3 Regional Controller of Inland RevenueIRD 2TAA 3 Registration Act to which the property is subject367TAA 169(11) registered211BHC 1(12) registered person140BOB 1 registered person165OB 1 registered security309OB 1 reinvestment profit218OB 1 related activity188AIE 2(9) related company98GD 10(4) relative2OB 1 para (a) relative245AOB 1 para (b) relevant associate394ZMA LF 5 (5) relevant time393KHG 11(2) relinquishment/relinquish/ relinquished214DOB 1 relinquishment214DTAA 3 remote petroleum mining property214ADZ 6(14) removal or restoration operations214DOB 1 remunerative work50CKC 3(3) rent98GD 10(4) 39 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location rental vehicle110EZ 3(5) renting (see “rents”)224CN 2(5) rents224CN 2(5) replacement permit214DOB 1 replacement price option86OB 1 resident374AOB 1 resident in New Zealand - individual241OE 1 resident in New Zealand - company241OE 2 resident mining operator188COB 1 resident mining operator220OB 1 resident withholding income327AOB 1 resident withholding tax327ANF 2 resident withholding tax deduction certificate327AOB 1 resident withholding tax deduc- tion reconciliation statement327AOB 1 residual expenditure214DOB 1 residual income tax375OB 1 residual income tax375TAA 3 para (b) residual income tax413ATAA 122(10) residual value224AEO 3(9) restricted informationIRD 15TAA 3 restrictive period166DF 7(3) retained earnings394ZMA LF 5(5) return date (the)16TAA 39(5) revenue account property191WDOB 1 right224AOB 1 right in the specified property 64BOB 1 right to take timber74OB 1 rolling average value86FEZ 4(5) royalty2OB 1 RWT rulesnewOZ 1 salary or wages2OB 1 sale or other disposition74OB 1 schedule depreciable property 107AOB 1 schedule of export goods156Aomitted same income year (the)75omitted seal and abandonment214DOB 1 second instalment date375OB 1 second instalment date375TAA 3 second PAYE period (was “second period’’)353OB 1 second PAYE period (was “second period’’)353TAA 3 second period (now “second PAYE period’’)353OB 1 second period (now “second PAYE period’’)353TAA 3 second specified period (the)42KF 2(5) secondary employment earnings 2OB 1 secured arrangement64BOB 1 security arrangement64BOB 1 security payment64BOB 1 self-assessed adverse event185AOB 1 separated person54KC 4(2) separated person374AOB 1 para (b) DefinitionSourceNew Location separated person54TAA 3 series of transactions245AOB 1 services104AEF 1(7) services140BED 4(7) serving employee/employer153OB 1 settlement96FC 11(6) settlement226OB 1 para (b) settlement226TAA 3 settlor96FC 11(6) settlor226OB 1 para (b) settlor226TAA 3 share2OB 1 para (a) share4ACF 3(13) share69CH 2(8) share166DF 7(3) share327AOB 1 para (e) sharenewOB 1 para (f) shareholder2OB 1 para (a) shareholder (see “proprietor, member or shareholder’’)60CB 4(2) shareholder195FC 2(5) shareholder394AOB 1 para (c) shareholder decision making rights8BOB 1 shareholder dividend statement394AOB 1 shareholder election393AOB 1 shareholder-employee65Aomitted shareholder-employee104AOB 1 para (a) shareholder-employee150omitted shareholder-employee336NOB 1 para (b) sharemilker95omitted shares of the same class4ACF 3(13) shearer2OB 1 shearing shed2OB 1 shearing shed hand2OB 1 short term agreement for the sale and purchase of property64BOB 1 short term option64BOB 1 short term trade credit64BOB 1 sick, accident, or death benefit fund60CB 5 (2) Social Security Commission/ Commission374AOB 1 software107AEG 19(9) source deduction payment2OB 2 source deduction payment336AOB 1 para (b) South Island drought relief package60omitted special account49OB 1 special account49TAA 3 special corporate entity8BOB 1 special farm ownership account 49OB 1 special fishing vessel ownership account49OB 1 special home ownership account49OB 1 special partnership211BHC 1(12) special surcharge code336AOB 1 special tax code certificate2OB 1 40 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location special tax code certificate2TAA 3 specified activity188AOB 1 specified adverse event133Aomitted specified area133Aomitted specified base cost for 1983 income year property49OB 1 specified body (now “gift- exempt body’’)432ATAA 3 specified company4ACF 3 specified cost110EZ 3(5) specified deduction224AEO 3(9) specified dividends327AOB 1 specified dividends327ATAA 3 specified exemption336EJB 4 specified foreign social security pension336AOB 1 specified fund59OB 1 specified income336AOB 1 para (b) specified income374AOB 1 para (a) specified income year133Aomitted specified industrial undertaking 42KF 2(5) specified insurance premium336NOB 1 specified lease222AOB 1 specified livestock2OB 1 specified livestock86OB 1 specified local authority197COB 1 specified medical fund59omitted specified mineral2OB 1 specified mineral215OB 1 specified mortgage repayment insurance policy204OB 1 specified option64BOB 1 specified payments4omitted specified percentage156Aomitted specified period175OB 1 para (a) specified period374AOB 1 para (b) specified person209omitted specified preference shares194FZ 1(5) specified premium209omitted specified principal64FAomitted specified rate of additional tax 398TAA 139(8) specified rate of interest34ATAA 120(6) specified rate of interest398ATAA 121(12) specified rate of interest413ATAA 122(10) specified repatriations245GACG 8(2) specified risk209omitted specified superannuation contribution2OB 1 specified superannuation contribution2OB 1 withholding tax specified suspensory loan172DC 2(5) specified trading stock87AEZ 2(5) specified value211AHE 2(3) specified writedown86IOB 1 para (a) specified writedown86JEM 1(4) spouse374AOB 1 SSCWT rulesnewOZ 1 DefinitionSourceNew Location standard accounting year2AOF 1(2) standard balance date2AOF 1(2) standard dividend394ZMA OB 1 standard income year2AOF 1(2) standard value86HOB 1 standing timber74OB 1 State-owned enterprise2OB 1 statutory producer board197EOC 3 statutory producer board/producer board394AOB 1 statutory producer board/producer board394QOB 1 straight-line method107AOB 1 subsequent dividend394AOB 1 subsidised employee super- annuation scheme150omitted subsidised superannuation scheme59omitted subsidised transport336NOB 1 substituted livestock94omitted sufficient interest394ZMA LF 1(2) superannuation category 1 scheme2OB 1 superannuation category 2 scheme2OB 1 superannuation category 3 scheme2OB 1 superannuation contribution2OB 1 superannuation fund2OB 1 superannuation policy204OB 1 superannuation policy225omitted superannuation scheme2OB 1 superannuitant336AOB 1 supplementary dividend308ALE 1(8) surcharge (see “New Zealand superannuitant surcharge’’) 2OB 1 surcharge code336AOB 1 surcharge deduction336AOB 1 suspensory loan174omitted tangible property245GACG 8(14) tax2OB 1 tax advantage394ZGOB 1 tax and duty (see “tax or duty”)IRD 2TAA 3 tax avoidance99OB 1 tax code2OB 1 tax code certificate2OB 1 tax code declaration2OB 1 tax credit advantage394ZGGC 22(9) tax deduction2OB 1 tax deduction365TAA 167(4) tax deduction400omitted tax deduction certificate2OB 1 tax file number2OB 1 tax file numberIRD 13A OB 1 tax file numberIRD 13B OB 1 tax file numberIRD 13C OB 1 tax file numberIRD 13D OB 1 tax or dutyIRD 2TAA 3 tax saving185EI 10(4)(b) taxable activity165DJ 5(4) taxable activity327AOB 1 para (a) taxable activity375OB 1 para (a) 41 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) DefinitionSourceNew Location taxable bonus issue3OB 1 taxable distribution226OB 1 taxable income2OB 1 para (a) taxable income42KF 2(5) taxable income1st SchSch 1 (cl.13) taxable period140BOB 1 taxable period165OB 1 taxable supply140BED 4(7) Taxation Review Authority2OB 1 Taxation Review AuthorityIRD 2TAA Taxation Review AuthorityIRD 2TRA 3 taxicab336NOB 1 taxpayer2OB 1 para (a) taxpayer394ZMA OB 1 para (b) taxpayer400TAA 157(10) temporary building2OB 1 ten percent capital reduction4AOB 1 term of the lease137EZ 6(2) terminal tax date2OB 1 terminating date2omitted terminating share194AOB 1 (the) amount of the debenture 195FC 2(5) (the) first specified period42KF 2(5) (the) prescribed period96FC 11(6) (the) second specified period42KF 2(5) thinning operations186EI 17(4) third instalment date375OB 1 third instalment date375TAA 3 three shift plant and machinery113AEG 18(6) timber74OB 1 time barnewOZ 1 total assessed value86EEL 6(2) total herd value86EEL 6(2) tracking account394ZMA OB 1 trade association197Iomitted trade credit64BOB 1 trade credit64BTAA 3 trading stock64BOB 1 para (a) trading stock85OB 1 para (b) trading stock90FB 4(5) trading stock91OB 1 para (d) trading stock197OB 1 para (d) transfereenewOB 1 transferor86OB 1 transferor96FC 11 (6) transitional capital amount4AOB 1 trust211OB 1 trust rulesnewOZ 1 trustee2OB 1 para (a) trustee166DF 7(3) DefinitionSourceNew Location trustee211OB 1 para (b) trustee225omitted trustee income226OB 1 trustee income226TAA 3 trustee of the scheme or trustee 166DF 7(3) trust rulesnewOZ 1 two shift plant and machinery 113AEG 18(6) type86OB 1 unclassified benefit (was “paragraph (e) benefit’’)336S(3)OB 1 underwriter210ACN 5(2) underwriting income204OB 1 unfulfilled programme130omitted unit holder211OB 1 unit increase130omitted unit trust2OB 1 unit trust211OB 1 unlisted widely-held trust4A(3)CF 3(14) unreturned retail profit76AEZ 7(7) variable principal debt instrument64BOB 1 variation in control or income interests245EGC 9(7) veteran’s pension2OB 1 voting interest2OB 1 para (a) voting interest393AHG 2 War Pensions Board/Board374AOB 1 war widows mother’s allowance374AOB 1 wholly-owned group2OB 1 para (a) wholly-owned group108NOB 1 para (b) wholly-owned group191IG 1(3) wholly-owned group of companies2OB 1 para (a) wholly-owned group of companies108NOB 1 para (b) wholly-owned group of companies191IG 1(3) widely-held company8BOB 1 widely-held company8BTRAA 17(4) widely-held trust4A(3)CF 3(14) withdrawable share194AOB 1 withdrawal certificate49OB 1 withdrawal income331ID 3(1) withdrawal tax328OB 1 withholding payment2OB 1 working day2OB 1 working partner167BDF 8(3) work related vehicle336NOB 1 year2OB 1 year (see “imputation year”)394AOB 1 year of adjustment76AEZ 7(7) year of assessment2OB 1 year of determination394QOB 1 year of determination394WOB 1 42 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Part D - Income Tax Act 1994 Provisions of Income Tax Act 1994 corresponding to former provisions Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) A 1(1), (2)1(1), (2) AA 1 (1), (2)new AA 2 (1), (2)new AA 3 -new AA 4 -new BB 1 (1), (2)38(1), (2) BB 2 (1) - (3)39(1) - (3) BB 3 -242- BB 4 (a)65(2)(a) excl proviso (b)65(2)(b) (c)65(2)(e) excl proviso (d)65(2)(l) BB 5 (1) - (3)78(1) - (3) BB 6 -101- BB 7 -104- BB 8 (a)106(1) (a) (b)106(1) (j) (c)106(1) (k) (d)106(1) (o) BB 9 -99(2) BB 10 -57(1) BB 11 (1) - (4)294(1) - (4) (5)292(2) CB 1 (1)(a)61(14) (1)(b)61(46) (1)(c), (d)61(51), (52) (2)60(1) - definitions CB 2 (1)(a)61(17) (relettered) (1)(b)61(18) (relettered) (1)(c)61(19) (relettered) (1)(d)61(38) (relettered) (1)(e)61(47) (2), (3)60(2), (3) (4)60(1) - definition (5)new CB 3 (a)61(2) (relettered) (b)61(2A) (relettered) (c), (d)61(3), (5) (e)61(63) CB 4 (1)(a) - (c)61(23) - (25) (1)(d)61(26) (relettered) (1)(e)61(27) (relettered) (1)(f) - (h)61(28) - (30) (1)(i)61(32) (relettered) (1)(j), (k)61(33), (34) (1)(l)61(44) (2)60(1) - definition CB 5 (1)(a) - (c)61(10), (11A), (12) (1)(d)61(22) (1)(e),(f)61(35), (36) (1)(g) - (k)61(39) - (43) (1)(l)61(49) (relettered) (1)(m)61(56) (relettered) (1)(n)61(62) (1)(o)61(64) (2)60(1) - definition Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) CB 6 (a)61(53) (relettered) (b)61(54) (c)61(55) (relettered) (d)61(65) (relettered) CB 7 (a), (b)61(1), (1A) (c)61(58) CB 8 (1)(a)61(9) (relettered) (1)(b)61(48) (relettered) (2), (3)62(1), (2) CB 9 (a)61(15) (relettered) (b)61(16) (relettered) (c)61(31) (d)61(37) (e)61(50) (f)61(59) (relettered) (g)61(60) CB 10 (1)63(2A) (2), (3)63(2K), (2L) CB 11 (1) - (5)64(2) - (6) (6)64(1) CB 12 (1) - (6)73(2) - (7) (7)73(1) CB 13 -73A- CB 14 (1)64A(2) (2)64A(1) - definitions CB 15 -61(66) CC 1 (a), (b)65(2)(c), (ca) (c) - (e)65(2)(d), (da), (db) CC 2 (1), (2)153(3), (4) CC 3 (1)168(3) (2)168(1) - definition CD 1 (1)65(2)(f) (2)67(4) (relettered) (3) - (7)67(5) - (9) (8)67(9A) (9), (10)67(10), (11) (11), (12)67(13), (14) (13)67(1) - definition CD 2 -65(2)(h) CE 1 (1)(a)65(2)(j) CE 1 (1)(b) - (d)65(2)(ja) - (jc) (1)(e)65(2)(g) (2)(a) - (c)65(1)(d) - (f) (2)(d)65(1A)(relettered) CE 2 -74(2)(a) CE 3 (1)(a), (b)65(2)(k), (ka) (2)(a)65(1)(b)(i) (2)(b)65(1)(c) CF 1 -65(2)(j) excl proviso CF 2 (1)(a) - (g)4(1)(a), (ba), (c) - (g) (1)(h) - (l)4(1)(i) - (m) (2) - (4)4(1A), (2), (2A) CF 2 (5)4(4) (relettered) (6) - (12)4(6), (7), (7A), (8) - (11) (13) - (20)4(13) - (20) 43 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) CF 3 (1)(a) - (f)4A(1)(a), (c), (ca) - (cd) (1)(g) - (j)4A(1)(i), (ia), (j), (k) (1)(k)4A(1)(m) (2) - (10)4A(4), (4A), (5) - (11) (11), (12)4A(11A), (12) (13)4A(2) - definitions (14)4A(3) - definitions CF 4 -191WD (4) CF 5 -191WD (5) CF 6 (1)4B(1) (+ omitted) (2)4B(2) (3) - (5)302(2) - (4) CF 7 (1)100(2) (2)100(1) - definition CF 8 -3(3) CG 1 (a), (b)65(2)(ea), (eb) CG 2 -191P(1) CG 3 (a) - (e)245A (2)(a) - (e) CG 4 (1) - (3)245C (1), (3), (3A) (4)(a)245C (4)(a) (4)(b) - (d)245C (4)(c) - (e) (5) - (8)245C (5) - (8) CG 5 (1)245D (1) (2)(a)245D (2)(a) (2)(b) - (d)245D (2)(c) - (e) (3) - (6)245D (3) - (6) (7)245A (3) (1)245F(1) CG 6 (2)245F(2) CG 7 (1), (2)245G (1), (2) (3) - (6)245G (4) - (7) CG 8 (1) - (8)245GA (2) - (9) (9), (10)245GA (11), (12) (11)245GA (13) (relettered) (12), (13)245GA (14), (15) (14)245GA (1) - definitions CG 9 -245H (1) CG 10 (1), (2)245I(1), (2) CG 11 (1) - (5)245J(1) - (5) (6)(a)245J(6)(ia) (6)(b)245J(6)(j) (6)(c)245J(6)(a) - (d) (6)(c)245J(6)(f) - (i) (7)245J(7) (relettered) (8) - (11)245J(8) - (11) (12), (13)245J(13), (14) (14) - (18)245J(16) - (20) (19), (20)245J(20A), (21A) (21), (22)245J(22), (22A) (23) - (25)245J(23) - (25) CG 12 (1) - (3)245O (1) - (3) CG 13 (1), (2)245P(1), (2) CG 14 (1) - (4)245R (2) - (5) CG 15 (1), (2)245RA (1), (2) CG 16 (1) - (12)245RB (1) - (12) CG 17 (1) - (10)245RC (1) - (10) CG 18 -245RD - CG 19 (1) - (7)245RE (1) - (7) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) CG 20 (1) - (3)245RF (1) - (3) CG 21 (1) - (4)245RG (1) - (4) CG 22 (1), (2)245RI (1), (2) CG 23 (1) - (8)245RL (1) - (8) (9)245R (1) - definition CG 24 (1), (2)245RM(1), (2) CG 25 (1), (2)245V (1), (2) CH 1 (1)65(2)(j) excl proviso (2)65(1B)(b) CH 2 (1) - (5)69(2) - (6) (6), (7)69(6A), (7) (8)69(1) - definition CI 1-336N (1) - def. (relettered) CI 2(1)336N (2) (2), (3)336N (3B), (3C) (4) - (9)336N (4) - (7), (8A),(8B) CI 3(1)336O (1) (2) - (5)336O (2), (2A) - (2C) (6) - (8)336O (3), (3A), (3B) (9) - (11)336O (4) - (6) CI 4(1) - (4)336P(1), (1A), (1B), (2) CI 5(1) - (3)336S(3) - (5) CI 6(1) - (3)336W (1) - (3) CI 7-191WD (24)(a) - (c) CI 8-336Y - CI 9-336R - CI 10 -336Q - CJ 1(1)74(2)(b) (2)74(5) (3)74(7) CJ 2(1)224B (2) (2)224B (1) - definition CJ 3-214H (1) CJ 4(1)214I(2) (2)214I(3)(a) CJ 5-214J(1) CJ 6(1)214K (1) (2)214K (3) (3)214K (5) CJ 7(1)(a), (b)214N (1)(b), (c) (2)214N (3) CK 1 -191(6) CK 2 -197C (7) CK 3 (1), (2)197G (4), (5) (3)197G (1) CK 4 (1), (2)197J(2), (3) CL 1 -336ZE - CL 2 -228(2B) CM 1 -204A - CM 2 -204(2) CM 3 -204B - CM 4 (1), (2)204E (1), (2) CM 5 (1) - (5)204F(1) - (5) CM 6 (1) - (6)204G (1) - (6) CM 7 (1), (2)204H (1), (2) CM 8 (1)204I(1) (2)(a)204I(2)(a) (2)(b), (c)204I(2)(c),(d) 44 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) CM 8 (3)204I(3) CM 9 -204J- CM 10 (1) - (4)204C (1) - (4) CM 11 -204K - CM 12 -204N - CM 13 (1), (2)204O (1), (2) CM 14 -204P- CM 15 (1), (2)205(1), (2) CM 16 -205A - CM 17 (1), (2)205B (1), (2) CN 1 (1), (2)223(2), (3) (3)223(1)(a) - definition CN 2 (1) - (4)224(2) - (5) (5)224(1) - definitions CN 3 (1), (2)204L(1), (2) CN 4 (1) - (5)209(2) - (6) (6)209(1) - definition CN 5 (1)210A (2) (2)210A (1) - definitions CZ 1(1) - (4)71(2) - (5) (5)71(1) - definitions CZ 2-Amdt 1983, No. 4, s. 2 CZ 3(1), (2)Amdt 1988, No. 225, s.51(6)(9) CZ 4(1), (2)63(2H), (2J) CZ 5(1)207(2) (2)207(1) - definitions CZ 6-208(2) DB 1 (1)(a) - (e)106(1) (f), (fa) - (fc), (g) DB 1 (2)(a) - (d)106(2) (a), (aa), (b), (c) (2)393L(6) DC 1 (1) - (5)169(1)-(3), (5), (6) DC 2 (1) - (4)172(2) - (5) (5)172(1) - definition DC 3 (1)173(2) (2)173(3) (relettered) (3), (4)173(4), (5) (5)173(1) - definition DD 1 (a)106(1)(e) (b)106(1)(h) (relettered) (c)106(1)(l) DD 2 (1)148(2) DD 3 -191WD (9) (2)148(1) - definition DE 1(1), (2)105(2), (3) DF 1(a), (b)106(1)(m), (ma) DF 2(1), (2)149(1), (2) DF 3(1), (2)150(2A), (2B) (3), (4)150(2D), (2E) DF 4 (1)151(1) excl proviso (2)151(2) DF 5 (1), (2)152(1), (2) DF 6 (1)153(2) (2)153(4) DF 7 (1), (2)166(4), (5) (3)166(1) - definitions DF 8 (1), (2)167B (2), (3) (3)167B (1) - definitions DF 9 -105A - Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) DG 1 (1) - (3)106G (4) - (6) (4)106G (1) - definitions DH 1 (1)106B (1)(a) (2)106B (2) (3)106B (3)(a) DH 2 (1), (2)106C (1), (2) DH 3 (1) - (7)106D (1) - (7) DH 4 -106E - DI 1(1)194A (2) (2)194A (1) - definition DI 2-240- DI 3(1)228(2A) (2)228(2C) DJ 1 (a) - (c)106(1)(b), (ba), (c) DJ 2 -233- DJ 3 (1), (2)141(1), (2) DJ 4 -147(2) DJ 5 (1) - (3)165(2) - (4) (4)165(1) - definitions DJ 6 (1), (2)143(1), (2) DJ 7 -163- DJ 8 (1), (2)164(1), (2) DJ 9 (1), (2)144(1), (2) DJ 10 (1), (2)124(1), (2) DJ 11 -136- DK 1 (1) - (3)106A (2) - (4) (4) - (7)106A (6) - (9) (8)106A (1) - definitions DK 2 -106F(2) DK 3 -205F- DK 4 -197A (7) DL 1 (1)74(2A) (2)74(15) (3) - (5)74(3), (3A), (4) (6) - (12)74(8) - (14) (13) - (15)74(16) - (18) DL 2 (1), (2)128B (2), (3) (3)128B (4) (relettered) DL 3 (1)168(2) (2) - (6)168(4), (5), (5A) - (5C) (7)168(1) - definition DL 4 (1)213(3) (2)213(1) - definition DL 5 (1)214(2) (2)214(1) - definitions DL 6 (1) - (3)135(1) - (3) DL 7 -191WD (16) DM 1 (1) - (9)214F(1) - (9) DM 2 -214G (1) DM 3 (1), (2)214H (2), (3) DM 4 (1)214I(1) (2)(a), (b)214I(3)(b), (c) (3)214I(4) DM 5 -214J(2) DM 6 (1)214K (2) (2)214K (3) (3)214K (5) DM 7 (1), (2)214M (1), (2) 45 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) DM 8 -214N (1)(a) DM 9 -214D (2)(c) DM 10 -214D (2)(d) DM 11 (1) - (3)214P(1) - (3) DN 1 (1), (2)216(1), (2) (3) - (14)216(4) - (15) (15)216(15A) (relettered) (16)216(15B) (17)216(17) (18)216(21) (19)216(22)(b) DN 2 (1) - (9)218(2) - (10) (10)218(1) - definitions DN 3 (1) - (11)219(2) - (12) (12)219(1) - definitions DN 4 (1)220(1) (2) - (4)220(3) - (5) (5)new (6)220(7) (7), (8)220(8), (9) DN 5 (1)221(1) (2)221(3) (3)new (4)221(5) DO 1 -106(1) (n) (relettered) DO 2 (1)109(2) (2)109(1) - definitions DO 3 -127(A1) DO 4 (1), (2)128A (2), (3) (3)128A (4) (relettered) (4), (5)128A (4A), (5) DO 5 (1), (2)128C (2), (3) (3)128C (4) (relettered) DO 6 -131(b) DO 7 (1) - (4)134(1) - (4) DO 8 -191WD (16) DZ 1(1), (2)139(1), (2) DZ 2(1) - (7)127A (1) DZ 3(1) - (6)127(1) - (6) DZ 4(1) - (6)128(2) - (7) DZ 5-214A (4) DZ 6(1), (2)214B (1), (2) (3)214B (4) (4)214B (6) (5), (6)214B (9), (10) (7) - (9)214B (16) - (18) (10)214B (20) (11)214B (21)(b) (12)(a) - (e)214B (22)(a) - (e) DZ 6 (12)(f), (g)214B (22)(g), (h) (13)214B (23) (14)214A (1) - definition EB 1 (1) - (3)75(1) - (3) (4)new EB 2 (1), (2)80(1), (2) EB 3 (1) - (3)77(1) - (3) EC 1 (1) - (3)76(1) - (3) ED 1 (1)140A (2) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) ED 1 (2), (3)140A (4), (5) (4) (combined)140A (1) - definition (4) (combined)140A(3) - definitions (unlettered) ED 2 -140AA (1) ED 3 -140AB - ED 4 (1)140B (2) (2), (3)140B (3), (4) (4) - (6)140B (6), (6A), (7) (7)(a)140B (1) - definitions (7)(b), (e)140B (1)(c) - (f) - definitions EE 1 (1) - (4)85(2) - (4), (4A) (5), (6)85(4E), (4F) (7) - (9)85(5) - (7) (10)85(9) EE 2 (1) - (3)79(1) - (3) EF 1 (1) - (4)104A (3) - (6) (5)104A (2) (relettered) (6)104A (2A) (7)104A (1) - definitions (8)104A (2B) (rearranged) EG 1 (1) - (3)108(1) - (3) EG 2 (1), (2)108A (1), (2) EG 3 (1) - (6)108B (1) - (6) EG 4 (1) - (7)108C (1) - (7) EG 5 (1) - (4)108D (1) - (4) EG 6 -108E - EG 7 -108F- EG 8 -108G - EG 9 (1) - (3)108H (1) - (3) EG 10 (1) - (3)108I(1), (2), (2A) (4) - (11)108I(3) - (10) EG 11 (1) - (8)108J(1) - (8) EG 12 (1) - (6)108K (1) - (6) EG 13 -108L- EG 14 (1), (2)108M (1), (2) EG 15 (1) - (3)108N (2) - (4) (4)108N (6) (5)108N (1) - definition EG 16 (1) - (4)108O (2), (3), (3A), (4) EG 17 (1), (2)111(1), (2) EG 18 (1) - (3)113A (1A), (2), (3) (4)113A (4) excl proviso (5)113A (5) (6)113A (1) - definitions EG 19 (1) - (7)117(1) - (7) (8), (9)117(9), (10) - definition (9)107A (1) - definition (9)117(11)(a) in part - definition EG 19 (10)(a), (b)117(11)(c), (d) EH 1 (1) - (4)64C(1),(2),(2A),(2B) (5) - (7)64C(3), (4), (4A) (8) - (10)64C(5) - (7) EH 2 -64CA - EH 3 (1) - (9)64D(1) - (7), (7A), (8) EH 4 (1) - (5)64F(2) - (6) (6) - (8)64F(7B), (7C), (8) (9)64F(1)(a) - (d) - definitions 46 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) EH 5 (1) - (5)64G(1) - (5) EH 6 (1) - (5)64I(1) - (5) EH 7 -64B(2) EH 8 (1), (2)64L(1), (2) EH 9 -64M- EI 1(1) - (5)176(1) - (5) EI 2(1) - (3)177(1) - (3) EI 3-178- EI 4(1) - (3)179(1), (2), (2A) (4)(a) - (c)179(2B)(b) - (d) (5)179(3) EI 5(1) - (3)180(1) - (3) EI 6(1) - (3)181(1) - (3) EI 7(1), (2)182(1), (2) EI 8(1), (2)183(1), (2) EI 9-184- EI 10 (1) - (5)185(1) - (5) EI 11 (1) - (5)185A (2) - (6) EI 12 (1) - (4)185B (1) - (4) EI 13 -185C - EI 14 (1) - (4)185D (1) - (4) EI 15 -185E - EI 16 (1), (2)185F(1), (2) EI 17 (1) - (3)186(2) - (4) (4)186(1) - definitions EJ 1-81A(1) EJ 2(a)92(a) excl 2nd prov (b)92(b) EK 1 (1) - (3)133(1) - (3) EL 1 (1)86(1) (2) - (4)85(4B) - (4D) EL 2 (1), (2)86A(1), (2) (3)(a), (b)86A(3)(a), (b) (4)(a) - (e)86A(4)(a) - (e) (5) - (8)86A(5) - (8) EL 3 (1) - (4)86B(1) - (4) EL 4 (1) - (8)86C(1) - (8) EL 5 (1) - (6)86D(2) - (7) EL 6 (1) - (7)86E(1) - (7) EL 7 (1) - (4)86F(1) - (4) EL 8 -86G- EL 9 (1) - (3)86H(2) - (4) (4)86H(1) - definition EL 10 (1) - (6)86I(2) - (7) (7)86I(9) EM 1 (1) - (4)86J(1) - (4) - definition (5)(a)86J(5)(a) EM 1 (5)(b)86J(5)(b)(ii) (5)(c),(d)86J(5)(c), (d) EM 2 (1) - (7)212A (1) - (7) EM 3 (1), (2)212B (2), (3) (3)212B (1) - definitions EN 1 (1) - (8)70(1) - (8) EN 2 (1) - (4)83(1) - (4) (5)83(5) EN 3 (1) - (5)84(2) - (6) (6)84(1) - definitions EN 4 (1), (2)82(1), (2) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) EO 1 -150(2F) EO 2 (1) - (3)222E (1) - (3) EO 3 (1) - (6)224A (2) - (7) (7)224A (14) (8)224A (10) (9)224A (1) - definitions EO 4 (1) - (12)224D (3) - (14) (13)224D (1) - definition EO 5 (1) - (3)138(1) - (3) EZ 1 (1) - (9)86L(2) - (10) (10)86L(1) - definition EZ 2 (1) - (4)87A(2) - (5) (5)87A(1) - definitions EZ 3 (1) - (4)110(1A), (2), (3A), (7) (5)110(1) - definitions EZ 4 (1) - (3)86F(5) - (7) (4)Amdt 1993, No. 130, s.21(8)(b) (5)86F(8) - definition EZ 5 (1) - (4)142(1) - (4) EZ 6 (1)137(2) (2)137(1) - definitions EZ 7 (1) - (5)76A(2) - (4), (4A), (5) (6)76A(7) (7)76A(1) - definitions EZ 8 -Amdt 1993, No. 130, s. 38 EZ 9 (1)64FB (2) (2)78(4) (3), (4)64FB (3), (4); 78(5), (6) (5)64FB (1) - definition FB 1 (1), (2)102(3), (4) FB 2 (1), (2)245(1), (2) FB 3 -85(8) FB 4 (1), (2)90(2), (3) (3)90(4) (4)90(3A) (5)90(1) - definition FB 5 -106G (7) FB 6 -224A (12) FC 1 (1) - (3)192(1) - (3) FC 2 (1) - (4)195(2) - (5) (5)195(1) - definitions FC 3 (1), (2)198(1), (2) FC 4 -85A- FC 5 (1)107(1) (2)107(2) (3)107(3)(a), (b) FC 6 (1) - (8)222B (1) - (8) FC 7 (1) - (3)222C (1) - (3) FC 8 -222D - FC 9 -222F(1) FC 10 (1) - (3)222G (1) - (3) (4) - (6)222G (3A), (3B), (4) (7)222G (5) - definitions (8)222F(2) - definition FC 11 (1) - (5)96(2) - (6) (6)96(1) - definitions FC 12 -394A (4) FD 1 -191C - 47 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) FD 2 (1)191D (2)(b) (relettered) (2)191D (3) (3)191D (4) (relettered) (4)191D (5)(c)(i), (ii) FD 3 -191E (relettered) FD 4 (1) - (8)191F(1) - (8) FD 5 (1), (2)191G (1), (2) FD 6 (1) - (3)191H (1) - (3) FD 7 (1) - (8)191I(1) - (8) FD 8 (1) - (9)191J(1) - (9) FD 9 (1), (2)191K (1), (2) FD 10 (1)191N (1) (relettered) (2) - (9)191N (2) - (9) FE 1 (1)191WD (1) FE 1 (2)new FE 2 -191WD (6) FE 3 -191WD (8) FE 4 -191WD (10) FE 5 -191WD (11) FE 6 (1)191WD (12) FE 6 (2)191WD (13) FE 6 (3)191WD (14) FE 6 (4)191WD (15) FE 6 (5)191WD (17) FE 7 -191WD (18) FE 8 -191WD (7)(a) FF 1 (1), (2)8E(1), (2) FF 2 -64M(c) FF 3 -65(2)(a) (proviso) FF 4 -65(2)(e) (proviso) FF 5 -65(1)(b)(ii) FF 6 (1)(a), (b)67(9B), (9C) (2)67(14) FF 7 -74(6) FF 8 -83(4A) FF 9 -86D(8) FF 10 (1), (2)86H(5), (6) FF 11 -86I(8) FF 12 -86J(5)(b)(i) FF 13 (1), (2)91A(2), (3) (3)91(4) FF 14 -107(1A) FF 15 -108N (5) FF 16 (1)111A - (2)117(8) FF 16 (3)new FF 17 -151(1) (proviso) FF 18 (1)188A (1) - definition (2)188A (4A) FF 19 -220(7A) FZ 1 (1) - (4)194(2) - (5) (5)194(1) - definition FZ 2 (1), (2)196(2), (3) (3) - (6)196(5) - (8) GB 1 (1) - (3)99(3) - (5) GC 1 (1) - (4)22(1) - (4) GC 2 -188(11) GC 3 (1)8E(1) (2)8E(4) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) GC 4 -191A (7) GC 5 -393B (5) GC 6 -108N (7) GC 7 -245C (9) GC 8 -245GA (10) GC 9 (1) - (6)245E (2) - (7) (7)245E (1) - definitions GC 10 -245A (4) GC 11 (1), (2)224A (8), (9) (3)224A (11) (4)224A (13) GC 12 (1), (2)214MA (1), (2) GC 13 -308A (4) GC 14 -227(5) GC 15 (1)336N (3) (2)(a) - (c)336N (3A)(b) - (d) GC 16 -336O (1A) GC 17 -336X - GC 18 -371- GC 19 -327ZC - GC 20 -327X - GC 21 -394E (4)(f) (relettered) GC 22 (1) - (8)394ZG (2) - (9) (9)394ZG (1) - definitions GC 23 (1), (2)394ZF (1), (2) GC 24 (1), (2)191SD (6), (7) GC 25 -394ZSA - GC 26 -394ZZP (6)(g) (relettered) GC 27 -394ZW(4)(f) (relettered) GC 28 -374L- GD 1 (1) - (4)91(2), (2A), (3), (4) GD 2 (1) - (4)197(2) - (5) GD 3 (1) - (3)97(1) - (3) (4)97(4) (5)97(4) GD 4 -106(1)(d) GD 5 -190- GD 6 (1) - (3)232A (1) - (3) GD 7 -204D - GD 8 (1) - (5)204Q (1) - (4), (4A) (6) - (8)204Q (5) - (7) GD 9 (1)67(12) (2)67(14) GD 10 (1) - (3)98(2) - (4) (4)98(1) - definitions GD 11 (1) - (3)64J(1) - (3) GD 12 (1), (2)224D (15), (16) GZ 1 -99(6) HB 1 (1) - (5)191L(1) - (5) HB 2 (1), (2)191M (1), (2) HC 1 (1) - (11)211B (2) - (12) (12)211B (1) - definitions HD 1 (1)10(1) (2)197A (8) HE 1 -211(2) (relettered) HE 2 (1)211A (3) (2)211A (2) (3)211A (1) - definitions HF 1 (1) - (3)199(2), (3), (3A) 48 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) HF 1 (4)199(4)(a) (5) - (8)199(6), (8) - (10) (9)199(1) - definitions HG 1 -393- HG 2 -393A (2) HG 3 (1) - (5)393C (1) - (5) HG 4 (1) - (5)393D (1) - (5) HG 5 (1), (2)393E (1), (2) HG 6 (1) - (3)393F(1) - (3) HG 7 (1), (2)393G (1), (2) HG 8 (1), (2)393H (1), (2) HG 9 (1) - (5)393I(1) - (3), (3A), (4) HG 10 (a)393J(a)(i) (b)393J(b) HG 11 (1) - (4)393K (1) - (4) HG 12 (1)393L(1) (2)393L(7) (relettered) HG 13 (1)(a)393M (1)(a) (1)(b)393M (1)(c) (1)(c)393M (1)(e) (2) - (6)393M (2) - (6) HG 14 -393N - HG 15 (1) - (4)393O (1),(1A),(2),(3) HG 16 (1) - (4)393P(1) - (4) HG 17 (1) - (4)393Q (1) - (4) HG 18 -393R - HH 1 (1) - (3)226(3) - (5) (4) - (6)226(7) - (9) (7) - (9)226(9A),(10),(10A) (10)226(12) HH 2 (1) - (4)226A (1) - (4) HH 3 (1) - (4)227(1) - (4) (5)227(6) HH 4 (1), (2)228(1), (2) (3)228(3) (relettered) (4)228(4) (5)228(5) (relettered) (6), (7)228(6), (7) HH 5 (1), (2)228A (1), (2) HH 6 (1) - (4)230(1) - (4) HH 7 -231(4) HH 8 -232- HI 1(1) - (3)234(2) - (4) HI 2-235- HI 3(1) - (4)236(1) - (4) HI 4(1), (2)237(1), (2) HI 5-238- HJ 1 -232E - HK 1 -266- HK 2 -267- HK 3 (1) - (3)268(1) - (3) HK 4 -269- HK 5 -270- HK 6 -271- HK 7 (1), (2)272(1), (2) HK 8 -273- HK 9 -274- HK 10 -275- HK 11 (1) - (9)276(2) - (10) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) HK 11 (10)276(1) - definitions HK 12 -277- HK 13 (1) - (4)278(1) - (4) HK 14 -229- HK 15 (1) - (3)279(1) - (3) HK 16 -280- HK 17 -281- HK 18 (1), (2)282(1), (2) HK 19 (1), (2)283(1), (2) HK 20 -284- HK 21 -285- HK 22 -285A - HK 23 -286- HK 24 (1) - (3)287(2) - (4) (4)287(1) - definition HK 25 -288- HK 26 (1) - (3)289(2) - (4) HZ 1 -Amdts 1988, No. 225, s.9; 1990, No. 24, s. 13 HZ 2 -227A - IB 1(1), (2)20(1), (2) IB 2-221(4) IB 3-222- IB 4-16(6) IC 1(1), (2)357(1), (2) IC 2-358- IC 3(1)359(1) (2)(a)359(2)(a)(ii) (2)(b)359(2)(b) ID 1-329- ID 2-330- ID 3(1) - (4)331(1) - (4) ID 4(1) - (6)332(1) - (6) ID 5-333- ID 6-335- ID 7-336- (relettered) IE 1(1) - (6)188(1) - (6) IE 2(1), (2)188A (3), (4) (3)188A (5) IE 2(4) - (6)188A (6), (6A), (7) (7), (8)188A (7A), (8) (9)188A (1) - definitions (9)188A (2)(b) - definition IE 3(1) - (3)245M (1) - (3) (4) - (6)245M (5) - (7) IE 4(1) - (10)245RJ (1) - (10) IF 1(1) - (4)188(7) - (10) (5), (6)188(12), (13) IF 2-188AA (1) IF 3-245M (4) IF 4-191WD (19) IF 5-191WD (20) IF 6-191WD (21) IG 1(1)191(1) (2) - (4)191(3) - (5) (5)191(2) IG 2(1) - (5)191A (1) - (5) (6)191A (7A) (7) - (10)191A (8) - (11) 49 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) IG 2(11)191A (6) - definition IG 3(1), (2)191B (1), (2) IG 4(1), (2)245N (1), (2) IG 5(1) - (3)245RK (1) - (3) IG 6(1) - (8)191O (1), (1A), (2) - (7) IG 7(1)(a), (b)191P(2)(b), (c) (2)(a)191P(3)(a) (2)(b)(i), (ii)191P(3)(b)(ii), (iii) (2)(c), (d)191P(3)(d), (e) (2)(e) - (g)191P(3)(f) - (h) (3), (4)191P(4), (5) (5)(a), (b)191P(6)(a), (b) (5)(c)(i)191P(6)(c)(i)(B) (5)(c)(ii)191P(6)(c)(ii) (5)(d)191P(6)(d) IG 8-191WD (22) IG 9-191WD (23) IH 1(1)(a) - (c)188C (1)(a) - (c) (1)(d)188C (1)(d)(iv) (2)(a) - (e)188C (2)(a) - (e) (2)(f)(i), (ii)188C (2)(f)(iii), (iv) IH 2(1)214B (7) (2)214B (25) (in part) IH 3-214G (2) IH 4(1)216(16) (2), (3)216(19), (20) IH 5-220(6) II 1-205D - II 2(1), (2)205C (1), (2) JB 1-336B (1) JB 2(1), (2)336C (1), (2) (3)336A definition JB 3(1) - (3)336D (1) - (3) JB 4(1)336E (1) (relettered) (2)336E (2) JB 5(1) - (3)336G (1) - (3) JB 6-336M - KB 1 -57(2) (relettered) KB 2 -16(5) KC 1 (1) - (3)50D(1) - (3) KC 2 -50A- (relettered) KC 3 (1), (2)50C(2), (3) (3)50C(1) - definitions KC 4 (1)54(2) (2)54(1) - definitions (1)56A(2) (relettered) (2), (3)56A(4), (5) (4)56A(1) - definition KD 1 (1)(a), (b)374B (1)(a), (b) (1)(c)(i), (ii)374B (1)(c)(i), (ii) (1)(c)(iii)374B (1)(c)(iv) (1)(d)374B (1)(d)(i) (1)(e) - (g)374B (1)(e) - (g) (1)(h)374B (1)(i) (2) - (6)374B (2) - (6) KD 2 (1) - (5)374D (2) - (4), (4A), (5) (6)374D (1) KD 3 (1) - (4)374E (2) - (5) (5)374E (1) - definitions Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) KD 4 (1)374F(1) (2)(a)374F(2)(a) (2)(b) - (f)374F(2)(c) - (g) (3) - (5)374F(3) - (5) KD 5 (1) - (3)374G (1), (2), (2A) (4), (5)374G (3), (3A) (6)374G (4) (a) - (c) (7) - (10)374G (5),(8),(12),(13) (11)(a)-(c)374G (14)(c) - (e) (12)374G (15) KD 6 (1) - (4)374I(2),(3A),(3B),(4) KD 7 (1) - (4)374IA (1) - (4) KD 8 -374P- KD 9 -374M - KE 1 (1), (2)49A(2), (3) (3)49A(1) - definitions KF 1 (1) - (3)40(2) - (4) (4)40(1) - definitions KF 2 (1) - (4)42(2) - (5) (5)42(1) - definitions KF 3 -56(1) KG 1 (1), (2)49(3), (4) (3)49(1) - definition (4)49(2) KZ 1 (1), (2)47(1), (2) KZ 2 (1), (2)189(1), (2) LB 1 (1) - (5)394ZD (1) - (5) LB 2 (1)394ZE (1)(a) (2) - (8)394ZE (2) - (8) LC 1 (1)293(2) (2) - (4)293(2B), (2C), (3) (5)293(1) - definitions LC 2 -304- LC 3 -305- LC 4 (1) - (11)245K (1), (1A), (2) - (10) LC 5 (1), (2)245L(1), (2) LC 6 -302(1) LC 7 (1)303- (2)292(1) - definition LC 8 -191WD (19) LC 9 -191WD (20) LC 10 -191WD (21) LC 11 -191WD (22) LC 12 -191WD (23) LC 13 -301- LC 14 (1), (2)306(1), (2) LC 15 -308- LC 16 (1)191P(2)(a) (2)(a)191P(3)(a) (2)(b)191P(3)(b)(i) (2)(b)191P(3)(c) (2)(c) - (e)191P(3)(f) - (h) (3), (4)191P(4), (5) (5)(a), (b)191P(6)(a), (b) (5)(c)(i)191P(6)(c)(i)(A) (5)(c)(ii)191P(6)(c)(ii) (5)(d)191P(6)(d) LD 1 (1) - (5)362(1) - (5) LD 2 -318(2) 50 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) LD 3 (1) - (7)327K (1) - (7) LD 4 -363- LD 5 -364- LD 6 -389- LD 7 -391- LD 8 (1)(a) - (c)394ZP (1)(c) - (e) (1)394ZP (1)(a) (2) - (9)394ZP (2) - (9) LD 9 (1) - (5)394ZQ (1) - (5) LE 1 (1), (2)308A (2), (3) (3) - (6)308A (5) - (8) (7)308A (1) - definitions LF 1 (1)394ZMA (1) (2)394ZMA (3) LF 2 (1), (2)394ZMB (1), (2) (3)63 (2D) - definition LF 3 (1), (2)394ZMC (1), (2) LF 4 (1) - (3)394ZMD (1) - (3) LF 5 (1) - (4)394ZME (1) - (4) (5)394ZMA (2) - definitions LF 6 (1) - (6)394ZMF (1) - (6) LF 7 -394ZMH - MB 1 -376(1) MB 2 (1) - (5)377(1) - (5) MB 3 (1) - (4)378(1) - (4) MB 4 (1) - (3)380(1) - (3) MB 5 (1) - (3)381(1) - (3) MB 6 -382- MB 7 (1), (2)191Q (1), (2) MB 8 (1) - (3)383(1) - (3) MB 9 (1) - (6)387(1) - (6) MB 10(1), (2)388(1), (2) MB 11-191WD (25) MB 12-392- MC 1 (1) - (3)390(1) - (3) MC 2 (1), (2)395(1), (2) MC 3 -397- MD 1 (1) - (3)409(1) - (3) (4)(a)409(4)(d) (4)(b)409(4)(c) (4)(c)409(4)(b) MD 2 (1) - (4)394M (1) - (3), (3A) (5) - (7)394M (4), (5), (5A) (8)191WD (26)(c) (9)191WD (27)(c) (10)394M (6) MD 3 (1) - (5)394ZZZJ(1) - (5) ME 1 (1)394B (1) (2)394B (2) (relettered) (3)394B (3) ME 2 -394A (3) ME 3 (1), (2)394C (1), (2) (1)(a)394D (1)(a) (relettered) (1)(b),(c)394D (1)(aa), (b) (1)(d) - (g)394D (1)(d) - (g) (1)(h) - (j)394D (1)(j) - (l) (2)394D (2) (relettered) (3)394D (3) ME 5 (1) - (d)394E (1)(a), (aa) - (ac) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) ME 5 (1)(e)394E (1)(b) (relettered) (1)(f) - (h)394E (1)(d), (e), (ea) (1)(i) - (k)394E (1)(g) - (i) (2)(a) - (d)394E (2)(a), (aa) - (ac) (2)(e) - (j)394E (2)(b) - (d), (f) - (h) (3)394E (3) (4)(a) - (e)394E (4)(a) - (e) (5)394E (1A) ME 6 -394F(1) ME 7 (1) - (4)394FA (1) - (4) ME 8 (1) - (5)394G (1) - (5) ME 9 (1) - (4)394L(1) - (4) (5)394L(5) (6)394L(10) ME 10(1), (2)191S(1), (2) ME 11(1), (2)191SA (1), (2) ME 12(1), (2)191SB (1), (2) ME 13(1) - (5)191SC (1) - (5) (6)191SC (8) ME 14(1), (2)191SD (1), (2) (3)191SD (4) (4)191SD (7) (5)191SD (5) ME 15-394ZZZ - ME 16-394ZZY (3) ME 17(1), (2)394ZZZA(1), (2) ME 18(1) - (4)394ZZZB(1) - (4) ME 19(1) - (6)394ZZZC(1) - (6) ME 20(1) - (4)394ZZZD(1) - (4) ME 21(1) - (4)394ZZZE(1) - (4) ME 22(1), (2)394ZZZF (1), (2) ME 23(1) - (6)394ZZZG (1) - (6) ME 24(1), (2)394ZZZH (1), (2) ME 25-191W - ME 26(1) - (5)191WA (1) - (5) ME 27(1) - (3)191WB (1) - (3) ME 28(1) - (4)191WC (1) - (4) ME 29(1)191WD (26)(a), (b) (2)191WD (27)(a), (b) ME 30(1) - (3)394R (1) - (3) ME 31(1), (2)394S(1), (2) ME 32(1) - (5)394T (1) - (5) ME 33(1) - (3)394U (1) - (3) ME 34(1), (2)394V (1), (2) ME 35(1) - (3)394X (1) - (3) ME 36(1), (2)394Y (1), (2) ME 37-394Z- ME 38(1), (2)394ZA (1), (2) ME 39(1), (2)394ZB (1), (2) ME 40(1) - (8)394ZH (1) - (8) (9)191SD (7) MF 1 (1) - (5)394ZZN (1) - (5) MF 2 -394ZZM (3) MF 3 (1), (2)394ZZO (1), (2) MF 4 (1)394ZZP (1) (2) - (5)394ZZP (2) - (5) (6)(a) - (f)394ZZP (6)(a) - (f) MF 5 (1) - (7)394ZZQ (3), (3A), (4) - (8) MF 6 (1) - (8)394ZZR (1) - (8) 51 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) MF 7 (1) - (4)191V (1) - (4) MF 8 (1) - (6)191VA (1) - (6) MF 9 (1) - (5)191VB (1) - (5) MF 10 (1) - (3)191VC (1) - (3) MF 11 (1) - (5)394ZZS (1) - (5) MF 12 (1), (2)394ZZT (1), (2) MF 13 (1), (2)394ZZU (1), (2) (3)(a)394ZZU(3)(a) (3)(b)394ZZU (3)(b) (part) (3)(c)394ZZU(3)(d) (4)394ZZU (4) (relettered) MF 14 (1) - (3)394ZZV (1) - (3) MF 15 -245RH - MF 16 (1)191WD (26)(a), (b) (2)191WD (27)(a), (b) MG 1 -394ZK (4) MG 2 (1) - (5)394ZT (1) - (5) MG 3 (1), (2)394ZU (1), (2) MG 4 (1) - (3)394ZV (1) - (3) MG 5 (1)394ZW(1) (relettered) (2)(a) - (e)394ZW(2)(a),(aa),(b)-(d) (2)(f) - (h)394ZW(2)(e) - (g) (3)394ZW(3) (4)(a) - (e)394ZW(4)(a) - (e) MG 6 -394ZX (1) MG 7 (1) - (4)394ZXA (1) - (4) MG 8 (1) - (4)394ZY (1) - (4) (5) - (8)394ZY (4A), (4B), (4C), (5) MG 9 (1) - (5)394ZZF (1) - (5) MG 9 (6)394ZZF (10) MG 10 (1), (2)394ZZ (1), (2) MG 11 (1), (2)394ZZE (1), (2) MG 12 (1) - (8)394ZZJ(1) - (8) MG 13 (1) - (5)191U (1) - (5) MG 14 (1), (2)191UA (1), (2) MG 15 (1), (2)191UB (1), (2) MG 16 (1) - (6)191UC (1) - (6) MG 17 (1)191WD (26)(a), (b) (2)191WD (27)(a), (b) MH 1 -396- NB 1 -191R - NC 1 (1)337(1) (2)337(3) NC 2 (1) - (4)338(1) - (4) NC 3 -339- NC 4 (1), (2)340(1), (2) NC 5 (1), (2)342(1), (2) NC 6 (1) - (3)343(1) - (3) NC 7 (1) - (3)343A (1) - (3) NC 8 (1) - (12)344(1) - (3), (6) - (14) NC 9 -346- NC 10 -347- NC 11 (1), (2)348(1), (2) NC 12 (1) - (4)349(1) - (4) NC 13 (1), (2)350(1), (2) NC 14 (1) - (3)351(1), (2), (2A) (4) - (7)351(3) - (6) NC 15 (1)(a)(i), (ii)353(1)(a)(i), (ii) (1)(b)(i), (ii)353(1)(ab)(i), (ii) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) NC 15 (1)(c)(i)-(iv)353(1)(ac)(i) - (iv) (1)(d) - (h)353(1)(b) - (f) (2)353(2) (3) - (6)353(4),(5),(5A),(5B) (7)191WD (24)(d) (8)353(6) - definition NC 16 -355- NC 17 (1)361(1)(c) (2)361(2) NC 18 (1) - (5)350A (1) - (5) NC 19 -372- NC 20 (1), (2)373(1), (2) (3)373(3) (+ new) NC 21 -374(relettered) ND 1 -336S(2) ND 2 (1) - (4)336T (1), (1A), (2), (3) ND 3 (1) - (6)336TA (1) - (6) (7)191WD (24)(d) ND 4 (1) - (6)336TB (1) - (6) (7)191WD (24)(d) (8)336TB (7) - definition ND 5 (1) - (5)336VA (1) - (5) NE 1-336Z- NE 2 (1), (2)336ZA (1), (2) NE 3 -336ZB - NE 4 -336ZC - NE 5 -336ZF - NE 6 -336ZL - NE 7 (1), (2)336ZK(1), (2) NF 1 (1)327B(1) (2)(a)327B(2)(a) (2)(b)(i)327B(2)(b)(ii) (2)(b)(ii), (iii)327B(2)(b)(iii), (iiia) (2)(b)(iv) - (vi)327B(2)(b)(iv) - (vi) (2)(b)(vii), (viii) 327B(2)(b)(via), (vii) (3)327B(3) (4)327A(2A) (5)327A(2) NF 2 (1) - (6)327C(1) - (6) (7)327C(7) (relettered) (8)327C(8) NF 3 (1) - (5)327D(1) - (5) NF 4 (1) - (4)327E(1) - (4) (5), (6)327E(6), (7) NF 5 (1), (2)327Z(1), (2) NF 6 (1) - (4)327F(1) - (4) NF 7 (1) - (6)327G(1), (1A), (2) - (5) NF 8 (1)327L(2) (relettered) (2), (3)327L(3), (4) (4)327L(1) - definitions NF 9 (1)327M(1) (relettered) (2) - (11)327M(2) - (11) (12)327M(12) (relettered) (13), (14)327M(13), (14) NF 10 (1) - (5)327N(2) - (6) (6)327N(1) - definitions NF 11 (1) - (7)327O(1) - (7) NF 12 -327ZA- NF 13 -327ZC 52 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) NG 1 (1)310(1) (2)310(2) (relettered) (3)309(3) NG 2 (1)311(1) (relettered) (2)311(2) NG 3 -317- NG 4 -318(1) NG 5 -311A- NG 6 (1), (2)311B(1), (2) NG 7 (1) - (3)311C(1) - (3) NG 8 (1) - (3)312(1) - (3) NG 9 (1), (2)313(1), (2) NG 10 (1), (2)314(1), (2) NG 11 (1), (2)315(1), (2) NG 12 -319- NG 13 (1)320(1) (2)320(2)(b) (3), (4)320(3), (4) NG 14 -325- NG 15 -326- NG 16 (1) - (5)326A(1) - (5) NG 17 (1), (2)327(1), (2) NH 1 (1), (2)394ZL(1), (2) NH 2 (1) - (5)394ZM (1) - (5) NH 3 (1) - (4)394ZN(1),(2),(2A),(3) NH 3 (5), (6)394ZN(5), (6) (7)394ZN(10) NH 4 (1) - (7)394ZO(1)-(3), (3A), (4)-(6) (8)191WD (26)(c) (9)191WD (27)(c) NH 5 (1) - (9)191T(1), (1A), (2)-(8) NH 6 (1) - (5)191UD(1) - (5) (6), (7)191UD(7), (8) NI 1(1), (2)336H(1), (2) NI 2-336I(3) NI 3(1), (2)336J(1), (2) NI 4(1) - (3)336K(1) - (3) NI 5(1) - (3)336L(1) - (3) NI 6-336LA- NZ 1 -193- OB 1 -2definitions (see also Part C of this Schedule) OB 2 (1) - (3)6(1) - (3) OB 3 (1) - (4)393B(1) - (4) general393A(1) - “qualifying company” definition OB 4 (1) - (3)356(2) - (4) OB 5 (1)5(1) (2), (3)5(3), (4) (4)5(6) OB 6 (1)(a)2definition (1)(b)63(1) - definition (1)(b)64A(1) - definition (1)(b)223(1)(b) - definition (1)(b)289(1) (1)(c)245A(1) - definition (1)(c)293(1) - definition Income TaxIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) OB 6 (1)(d)394A(1) - definition (1)(e)394ZMA (2) - definition (1)(f)394A(5) (1)(g) - (k) -new (references) (2) -new OC 1 (1)197A(1) (2), (3)197A(3), (4) (4)197A(6) (5)197A(9) (6)197A(2) - definitions OC 2 (1)197C(1) (2) - (4)197C(3), (3A), (3B) (5) - (7)197C(4) - (6) (8) - (12)197C(8) - (12) (13)197C(14) (14)197C(2) - definition OC 3 -197E(2) OC 4 (1)(a) - (c)197H(7)(a) - (c) (2)197H(8) (3)197H(1) - definition OD 1 (1), (2)7(1), (2) OD 2 -8A- OD 3 (1) - (3)8C(1) - (3) OD 4 (1) - (4)8D(1) - (4) OD 5 (1)8E(1) OD 5 (2), (3)8E(2)(b), (3) (4) - (9)8E(5) - (10) (10)8Bdefinitions OD 6 -8F- OD 7 (1), (2)8(1), (2) OD 8 (1), (2)214E(1), (2) (3)245B- (4), (5)67(2), (3) OE 1 (1) - (5)241(1) - (5) OE 2 (1)241(6) (2) - (6)245Q(1) - (5) OE 3 (1) - (3)204M(1) - (3) OE 4 (1)243(2) (relettered) (2)243(1) - definition OE 5 (1)244(2) (2)244(1) - definitions OE 6 -307- OF 1 (1), (2)2A(1), (2) OF 2 (1) - (6) -new (and see 2nd column of Part A of this Schedule) OZ 1 (1), (2) -new (3)245X, 336, 336M, 336Y, 393L(7), 394P(2), 394ZZI(2) (4) -new YB 1 -436(1) YB 2 (1), (2) -new YB 3 (1) -new (2)436(2) YB 4 -new YB 5 436(3), (4) (+ new) YB 6 -new 53 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Part E - Tax Administration Act 1994 Provisions of Tax Administration Act 1994 corresponding to former provisions Tax AdministrationIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) 1(1), (2)-new 2(1) - (4)-new 3(1)-definitions (see Part C of this Schedule) 3(2)-new (3)2A(3) (4)-new 4--new 5-IRD 3 (1) 6-IRD 4 (1) 7(1) - (6)IRD 11 (1) - (6) 8(1) - (5)IRD 6 (1) - (3), (3A), (3B) 9(1) - (3)IRD 7 (1) - (3) 10-IRD 8 (1) 11-IRD 10 (1) 12(1), (2)IRD 12 (1), (2) 13(1) - (3)IRD 21A (1) - (3) 14(1), (2)IRD 21C (1), (2) 15(1), (2)IRD 22 (1), (2) 16(1) - (7)IRD 16 (1) - (7) 17(1) - (6)IRD 17 (1) - (6) 18(1) - (8)IRD 18 (1) - (8) (9)IRD 18 (10) 19(1), (2)IRD 19 (1), (2) (3), (4)(2A), (2B) (5), (6)IRD 19 (4), (5) 20(1) - (5)IRD 20 (1) - (5) (6)IRD 20 (7) 20(7)IRD 20 (6) 21(1) - (7)21A(2) - (8) (8)21A(1) definitions 22(1)428(2) (2)428(3) (relettered) (3), (4)428(3A), (4) (5), (6)428(7), (8) (7)327P(1) - definition (7)428(1) - definitions 23(1), (2)428A (1), (2) 24(1), (2)352(1), (2) 25(1), (2)327H (1), (2) (3)327H (3) - excl proviso (4) - (10)327H (4) - (10) 26(1) - (7)327P(2) - (8) 27(1)327ZD (2) (2)327ZB (2) 28-327J(2) 29(1)394I(1) (relettered) (2)394I(2) 30-394ZZB- 31-239(2) 32-432A (2) 33-9- 34-18- Tax AdministrationIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) 35(1) - (3)IRD 22A (1) - (3) 36(1) - (3)14A(1) - (3) 37(1) - (5)17(2) - (6) (6)17(1) - definition 38(1) - (3)15(1) - (3) 39(1), (2)16(2), (3) (3), (4)16(7), (8) 39(5)16(1) - definitions 40-IRD 17A - 41-9A- 42(1)10(1) (2)197A (8) 43(1), (2)11(1), (2) 44(1) - (6)12(1) - (6) 45(1), (2)336I(1), (2) 46(1) - (7)432(1) - (7) 47(1), (2)336ZD (1), (2) 48(1) - (3)354(1) - (3) 49(1), (2)316(1), (2) (3)309(2) - definition 50-327E (5) 51(1) - (6)327I(1) - (6) 52-327J(1) 53(1), (2)327ZB (1), (1A) (3)327ZB (3) 54(1)327ZD (1) (2)327ZD (3) 55-327Y - 56-430(2) 57-239(1) 58-432A (3) 59(1), (2)231(2), (3) (3) - (5)231(5) - (7) 60(1) - (4)64H(1), (1A), (2), (3) 61(1) - (3)245W (1) - (3) 62-431- 63-13A- 64-394ZA (3) 65-214K (4) 66(1) - (6)394ZZZI(1) - (6) 67(1), (2)394H (1), (2) 68-394ZZA- 69(1)394J(1) (relettered) (2), (3)394J(2), (3) 70(1) - (4)394K (1), (2), (2A), (3) 71-394ZZC- 72(1) - (3)394ZZD(1) - (3) 73-191UD (6) 74-191SD (3) 75-191WD (3) 76-191WD (7) 77-394ZZN(6) 78(1) - (6)394ZZW(1) - (6) 79-13 54 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Tax AdministrationIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) 80-14 81(1)IRD 13 (1) (2), (3)IRD 13 (2A), (3) (4)IRD 13 (4) (relettered) (5)IRD 13 (6) (6)IRD 2 definitions 82(1) - (8)IRD 13A (2) - (9) (9)IRD 13A (1) - definitions 83(1)IRD 13B (2) (2)IRD 13B (3) (relettered) (3) - (6)IRD 13B (4) - (7) (7)IRD 13B (1) - definitions 84(1) - (5)IRD 13C (2) - (6) (6)IRD 13C (1) - definitions 85(1) - (5)IRD 13D (2) - (6) (6)IRD 13D (1) - definitions 86(1) - (4)IRD 14 (2) - (5) (5)IRD 14 (1) - definition (6)IRD 13 (6) 87(1) - (4)IRD 15 (2) - (5) (5)IRD 15 (1) - definition 88-294(5) 89-432A (4) 90(1)64E(1) (relettered) (2) - (9)64E(2) - (9) 91(1) - (7)214L(1) - (7) 92(1) - (4)19(1), (1A), (2), (3) (5)19(5) 93(1) - (3)336V (1) - (3) 94(1) - (3)393L(3) - (5) 95(1) - (3)334(1) - (3) 96(1) - (3)336F(1) - (3) 97(1) - (4)394N (5) - (8) 98(1) - (3)336ZG (1) - (3) 99(1)327T (1) (2)327T (2) (relettered) (3)327T (3) 100(1) - (4)321(1) - (4) 101(1) - (3)394L(7) - (9) 102(1) - (3)394ZN (7) - (9) 103(1)394ZZF(7) (2)394ZZF(9) (3)394ZZF(8) 104(1) - (4)394ZZG(5) - (8) 105-IRD 21D - 106(1), (2)21(1), (2) 107-24- 108(1), (2)25(1), (2) 109-27- 110(1), (2)28(1), (2) 111(1) - (6)29(1) - (6) 112(1) - (3)205E (1) - (3) 113(1), (2)23(1), (2) 114-26- 115(1) - (3)295(1) - (3) 116(1), (2)296(1), (2) 117-297- Tax AdministrationIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) 118-298- 119(1) - (5)379(1) - (5) 120(1)34A(2) (2)34A(3) (relettered) (3), (4)34A(4), (5) (5)34A(8) (6)34A(1) - definitions 121(1) - (11)398A (2) - (12) (12)398A (1) - definitions 122(1) - (9)413A (2) - (10) (10)413A (1) - definitions 123(1) - (4)336TC (1) - (4) 124(1) - (3)394ZMG(1) - (3) (4)(a), (b)394ZMG(4)(a), (b) (4)(c)394ZMG(4)(d) (5), (6)394ZMG(5), (6) 125-36(relettered) 126(1), (2)30(1), (2) 127(1)31(1) (2)31(3) 128(1) - (3)34(2) - (4) 129-35- 130(1) - (4)73(8) - (11) (5)73(13) (6)73(1) - definition 131(1), (2)299(1), (2) 132-300- 133-337(4) 134-31(2) 135(1) - (3)32(1), (1A), (2) 136(1) - (9)33(1) - (9) (10) - (15)33(9A) - (9F) (16) - (18)33(10), (11), (11A) (19), (20)33(12), (13) 137(1) - (11)33A(1) - (11) 138(1)73(12) (2) - (4)73(14) - (16) 139(1), (2)398(2), (3) (3)(a)(i), (ii)398(4)(a)(i), (ii) (3)(a)(iii), (iv)398(4)(a)(iv), (v) (3)(b)(i), (ii)398(4)(b)(i), (ii) (3)(b)(iii), (iv)398(4)(b)(iv), (v) (3)(c) - (e)398(4)(c) - (e) (4) - (7)398(5) - (8) (8)398(1) - definitions 140(1) - (4)370(1) - (4) 141(1), (2)336U (1), (2) 142(1) - (4)336ZH (1) - (4) 143(1) - (3)384(1) - (3) 144(1) - (6)385(1) - (6) 145(1) - (5)327U (1) - (5) 146(1) - (4)322(1) - (4) 147-393L(2) 148-394L(6) 149(1)394N (4) 150-394ZN (4) 151-394ZZF(6) 55 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Tax AdministrationIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) 152-394ZZG(4) 153(1) - (3)394N (1) - (3) 154(1) - (3)394ZZG(1) - (3) 155(1)394P(1), 394ZZI (1) (2)(a) - (d)394P(2) (3)(a) - (d)394ZZI(2) 156(1), (2)399- 157(1) - (6)400(2) - (7) (7) - (9)400(7A), (8), (8A) (10)400(1) - definitions 158-401- 159-402- 160-403- 161-404- 162-405- 163-406- 164-407- 165-408- 166(1), (2)410(1), (2) 167(1)365(1A) (2)(a) - (c)365(2)(a) - (c) (3)365(3) (4)365(1) - definitions 168(1) - (3)366(1) - (3) 169(1) - (10)367(2) - (11) (11)367(1) - definition 170(1) - (3)327Q(1) - (3) 171(1) - (3)327S(1) - (3) 172(1) - (3)327R(1) - (3) 173(1), (2)374H(1A), (1B) 174-411- 175(1), (2)411A(1), (2) 176(1)414(2) (2)414(2A)(a) (2)(a) - (c)414(2A)(c) - (e) (3) - (6)414(2B), (3) - (5) 177(1) - (5)414A(1) - (5) 178(1) - (6)386(1) - (6) 179-384(3) (former 384) 180(1) - (3)394O(1) - (3) 181(1) - (3)394ZZH (1) - (3) 182(1) - (4)413(2),(2A),(3),(4) (5)413(1) - definition 183(1), (2)245RN(1), (2) 184-412- 185(a)415- (b)394ZR- (c)34A(6) (d)394ZMG(4)(c) (d)413A(11) (e)374K- (f)326A(6) (f)327G(6) 186-420- 187-421- 188(1) - (3)422(1) - (3) 189-422A- Tax AdministrationIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) 190(1), (2)423(1), (2) 191(1), (2)424(1), (2) 192(1), (2)425(1), (2) 193-426- 194(1) - (4)369(1) - (4) 195(1) - (4)336ZI(1) - (4) 196(1) - (4)327W(1) - (4) 197(1) - (4)323(1) - (4) 198(1)IRD 47 (1) (2) -new 199(1)416(1) (relettered) (2), (3) -new 200-IRD 17 (8) 201(1)416A(2) (2)(a)416A(3)(a)(i), (ii) (2)(b)416A(3)(b)(i), (ii) (3)new 202-IRD 47A (2) 203-IRD 13 (5) 204(1), (2)IRD 14 (6), (7) 205-IRD 15 (6) 206(1), (2)368(1), (3) 207(1), (2)336ZJ(1), (2) 208(1) - (3)327V(1) - (3) 209(1), (2)324(1), (2) 210(1) - (3)394ZS(1) - (3) 211-400(9) 212(a) - (f)374N(f) to (k) 213-IRD 18 (9) 214-IRD 19 (3) 215-417- 216(1) - (3)418(1) - (3) 217-419- 218-IRD 21B - 219-IRD 17B - 220(1) - (15)IRD 21 (1) - (15) (16)IRD 21 (17) (17)IRD 21 (16A) (18)IRD 21 (16) - definitions 221(1) - (3)IRD 47B (1) - (3) 222(1) - (3)416B(1), (2), (2A) (4)416B(3) (5)416B(2B) 223(1)(a), (b)427(1)(a), (b) (1)(c)427(1)(ba) (relettered) (1)(d)427(1)(c) (1)(e), (f) -new (2) - (4)427(2) - (4) 224(1)IRD 48 (1) (2)IRD 48 (3) 225(1)(a), (b)433(b), (ba) (1)(c), (d)197H(7)(d), (e) (1)(e), (f)433(c), (d) (2)197H(8) 226(1), (2)434(1), (2) 227(1) - (7)new 228(1)IRD 4(3) 56 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Six, No.9 - Appendix (February 1995) Tax AdministrationIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) 228(2)IRD 6(6) (3)IRD 7(4) (4)IRD 8(3) (5)IRD 10 (2) 229(1)IRD 3(2) (2)IRD 49 (3) (3)IRD 4(2) Part F - Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994 Former provisions of Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 corresponding to provisions of Taxation Review Authorities Act 1994 Taxation ReviewInland Revenue Authorities Act 1994Department Act 1974 17(1) - (4)IRD 35 (1) - (4) 18-IRD 36 - 19(1) - (3)IRD 37 (1) - (3) 20(1), (2)IRD 38 (1), (2) 21-IRD 39 - 22(1) - (3)IRD 39A (1) - (3) 23-IRD 40 - 24(1) - (3)IRD 41 (1), (1A), (1B) (4), (5)IRD 41 (2), (3) 25(1), (2)IRD 42 (1), (2) 26(1)IRD 43 (1) (relettered) (2) - (7)IRD 43 (2) - (7) 27-IRD 44 - 28-IRD 45 - 29(1) - (3)IRD 46 (1) - (3) 30(1) - (3)IRD 48 (1) - (3) 31(1) - (3)new (4)IRD 50 (2) Taxation ReviewInland Revenue Authorities Act 1994Department Act 1974 1(1), (2)new 2(1), (2)new 3(1)IRD 2 definitions (2)new 4-new 5(1) - (4)IRD 23 (1) - (4) (5)IRD 23 (6) 6(1) - (4)IRD 24 (1) - (4) 7-IRD 25 - 8-IRD 26 - 9-IRD 27 - 10-IRD 28 - 11(1), (2)IRD 29 (1), (2) 12-IRD 30 - 13-IRD 31 - 14-IRD 32 - 15(1), (2)IRD 33 (1), (2) 16(1) - (4)IRD 34 (1) - (4) Tax AdministrationIncome Tax Act 1976 Act 1994(or IRD Act 1974) 229(4)IRD 6(5) (5)IRD 6(8) (6)IRD 8(2) 230-new 231-new 232-new