1 THE T.I.B. READERSHIP SURVEY We asked, You told us, and Here’s the Result In Tax Information Bulletin No 5 of November 1989, we included a questionnaire to find out what our read- ers thought of the T.I.B., and more importantly, what you would like to see changed in it. Beginning with this issue, the format will change slight- ly, to take into account the opinions given in the replies to the survey. As well as the present technical items, future issues will contain articles of more general in- terest, where these come to light. Since the first T.I.B. issue was released twelve months ago in July 1989, we’ve started re-numbering from 1 again, and made this year’s issues Volume Two. The majority of respondents to the survey preferred the present two-column layout of the bulletin, and the sepa- ration of the extremely technical material into a sepa- rate appendix, so these features will not change. To all our readers who replied to the survey, a Big Thankyou; your input was appreciated. TARANAKI, WANGANUI AND HOROWHENUA FLOODS RELIEF FOR FARMERS AND GROWERS AFFECTED INTRODUCTION At a meeting on 7 May 1990 Cabinet agreed to spe- cial assistance for farmers and growers affected by flooding in January and March 1990 for bona fide farmers within the following geographic region: .the broader Taranaki and southern King Country regions bounded by the coast in the west from New Plymouth north to Awakino; .from Awakino inland and north along Highway 3 to Mahoenui, then east in a straight line from Man- gatupoto on Highway 4; .from Mangatupoto south on Highway 4 to Wan- ganui; .from Hawera northeast along Highway 3 to Strat- ford, west in a straight line through the Egmont National Park to the coast through Pungarehu and then north to New Plymouth. Amongst other things, Cabinet approved early with- drawal of money deposited into Income Equalisation accounts for farmers within the geographic areas de- fined above. COMMENT Farmers in the flood affected area will be able to take advantage of this decision by making use of the income spreading provisions of the Income Equalisation Scheme. Normally deposits made to the scheme can only be withdrawn after 12 months. Where an area has been declared an adverse event area the Commissioner of Inland Revenue has the authority to make refunds from the scheme at an earlier date. This will enable the income arising from the forced sale of capital stock to be deposited in the scheme and withdrawn when the stock is replaced. The scheme also provides for early refunds, from funds already deposited, where those funds are used to undertake development or repair work arising from the adverse event that was unfore- seen at the time the deposit was made. The Commis- sioner can also authorise early refunds “to avoid the suffering by the taxpayer of serious hardship”. Reference: H.O. 10.F.1.2. 2 PROBLEM RESOLUTION SERVICE — WHAT CAN IT DO FOR YOU? Inland Revenue’s Problem Resolution Service was set up in May 1989, to help people who are having trou- ble in their dealings with this Department. It is intended to be used where regular contact with Inland Revenue has failed to resolve a problem, rather than as a first point of contact. If you are experiencing long delays in getting results from Inland Revenue, or if you have been affected by a decision or an action which seems unfair or incom- plete, the first step is to see our staff at the counter, or to telephone or write to us. The majority of problems are solved in this way. However, if this action is not successful, then the Prob- lem Resolution Service can help. In each Inland Reve- nue office there is an experienced senior staff member who has been appointed Problem Resolution Officer. This person’s task is to sort out (usually within 5 work- ing days) situations where previous contact with the Department has not brought results. Reprinted below is a list of the Problem Resolution Officers in each office, whom you should not hesitate to contact should the need arise. OFFICEOFFICERSTDTELEPHONEFACSIMILE Auckland (N-R)Lyndsay Stowers (Mrs)(09)774-760392-565 BlenheimJeff Neal(057)86-07980-503 Chch (Cashel)(A-K)Murray Davis(03)796-060666-654 Chch (Square)(L-Z)Stephen Hayes(03)798-500656-459 DunedinGraeme McLean(024)771-340741-289 GisborneKeith Searle(06)868-6039867-8171 GreymouthTony Gibson(027)71294827 HamiltonKevin Bradfield(071)388-555394-336 HamiltonJim Parkinson(071)388-555394-336 Henderson (D-H)Reg Ratahi(09)837-1249837-1889 InvercargillPaul Ford(021)44-71944-831 Lower Hutt (H-R)Lee-Anne Oatham(04)691-277662-687 Manukau (I-M)Linda Webber (Mrs)(09)277-9580279-8483 MastertonTracy Towns(059)82-08989-578 NapierDebbie Moodie (Mrs)(070)353-019352-477 NelsonPeter Scoon(054)81-16469-476 New PlymouthBob Richards(067)80-53985-058 OamaruCharlie Fulton(0297)49-87047-333 Otahuhu (A-C)David Lampp(09)276-1834276-1327 Palmerston NorthRuth Hart(063)75-19969-065 Porirua (A-G)Joe Climo (Mrs)(04)374-249379-598 RotoruaChristine Groves(073)470-469462-000 Takapuna (S-Z)Ron Murdoch(09)461-511497-713 TaurangaPaul O’Connor(075)779-929785-540 Te ArohaPhil Robertson(0819)48-14547-626 TimaruPeter Hadlee(056)48-84886-791 WanganuiPeter Bailey(064)54-04556-534 Wellington (S-Z)Phil Steere(04)859-809852-306 WhangareiAnne Puttnam(089)482-539489-608 Head OfficeLaurence Gooding(04)721-032732-819 3 THE RIGHT PEOPLE IN THE RIGHT PLACES How to find the person you need to see at Inland Revenue If you need to sort something out with Inland Revenue, it helps if you know who it is that you need to see. To make this easier, we present the following list of more common situations, and the name of the Inland Revenue Programme whose staff will be best able to help you. Need help with filling in a Tax Return, or most other forms - Taxpayer Services. Need to get a tax form(s) for an employer/employee, or for some other purpose - Available from recep- tionist, or if you don’t have time to come in, it can be posted to you - phone and ask for Stationery. Chasing up a refund or assessment that has been de- layed - Taxpayer Services. Following up a letter that you need a reply to - Tax- payer Services in most cases; if your letter is being Soundings received by Inland Revenue indicate that there are a number of Accountants and other Tax Prac- titioners who would be interested in getting hold of a copy of the computer programme that we use to work out the following: Family Support Applications Family Suport Declarations National Superannuation Surcharge Special Tax Codes The disks that we use are compatible with computers with MS DOS 3.3 or greater. This is not a request for orders, but we want to find out if there is sufficient demand to justify the release of these progammes. If you would be interested in ob- taining any of these, please could you write to — Bernadette Sheridan Communications and Programme Delivery Taxpayer Services Directorate P O Box 2198 WELLINGTON and state whiuch of the programmes you are interested in. Responses may be faxed to Wellington (04) 733-250 If your situation doesn’t fall into any of these, contact us with all the relevant information, and we’ll find the right people to help you. dealt with by another programme, you will be referred on to the appropriate people. Have a tax bill that is or shortly will be overdue, that you are having trouble paying - Recoveries. Wanting to make a voluntary disclosure to set your tax records straight - Taxpayer Audit Contacted us previously, but still haven’t got satis- factory results - Problem Resolution Officer; BUT please read separate article in this issue about our Problem Resolution Service first. INLAND REVENUE COMPUTER PROGRAMMES Would you be interested in a copy? 4 PROVISIONAL TAX ESTIMATES AND USE OF MONEY INTEREST - Cases that should not have been treated as Estimates - BACKGROUND Individual taxpayers whose provisional income does not exceed $100,000 are able to base their provisional tax wn the past year’s terminal tax plus 10%. This option is re- ferred to as ‘safe harbour’. These taxpayers are able to make additional voluntary payments, above the statutory minimum, without being exposed to the use of money in- terest provisions. The Department has become aware of a number of cases where this voluntary payment has been incorrectly treated as an estimate. This has serious implications for taxpay- ers. Once a taxpayer makes a written election to pay pro- visional tax using the estimation option, it becomes bind- ing and cannot be reversed. Where the end of year residual tax exceeds the estimated provisional tax, the taxpayer is charged interest under the use of money provisions. The Department pays interest on any overpayment. WHICH OPTION TO USE It is therefore very important that ‘safe harbour’ taxpay- ers who wish to pay more than their statutory minimum do so by using Option 1, terminal tax plus 10%. This is the amount which will appear on their statements; any ad- ditional voluntary payments will be held as credits in their account. Any taxpayer who indicates Option 3, Estimation, or com- pletes the panels to show estimated income or estimated tax will be fully liable to the use of money interest provi- sions. This is so even when the taxpayer estimates an amount higher than the statutory minimum they are obliged to pay. POLICY The crucial point is whether or not an estimate has been made. The following policy has been determined for in- dividual taxpayers whose provisional income does not exceed $100,000: a)Provisional taxpayers who paid more than terminal tax plus 10%, but did not stipulate the ESTIMATE option as the method of calculating their payments, are to be treated as having made voluntary payments. These taxpayers are not subject to the interest provisions. b)Provisional taxpayers who paid more than terminal tax plus 10%, and clearly indicated that the payments were calculated on the ESTIMATE basis, are subject to the interest provisions. Where the payment exceeds residual tax, they will be entitled to receive interest on the overpayment. APPLICATION ‘Safe harbour’ taxpayers, who believe they did not stipu- late the ESTIMATE option but whose assessments include a charge for interest on use of money, should contact their local IRD district office. District office staff will review all the documentation held to ascertain whether or not a valid estimate was made. Only those taxpayers who clearly indicated that they wished to use the Estimate option will remain liable to the use of money interest charge. All other taxpayers will have the interest cancelled. JOINT ASSESSMENTS AND IMPUTATION CREDITS Inland Revenue has been asked for its view on the correct approach to crediting tax to imputation credit accounts (ICAs) where a joint assess- ment is issued under section 191(8) of the Income Tax Act 1976. Where the Commissioner issues a joint assessment under section 191(8) in respect of companies in a group, credits arise in the ICAs of each company in the group for the amount of income tax that would have been assessed to each company had separate assessments of income tax been made. Under section 191(8) the individual companies remain severally liable for income tax. It was never intended that a credit should arise to the imputa- tion credit account of a company for tax paid by that company to satisfy the liability of another company. The same principle applies to credits arising to the branch equivalent tax account. FRINGE BENEFIT TAX - PRESCRIBED RATE OF INTEREST The Minister of Revenue, Peter Neilson, has confirmed that the prescribed rate of interest used to calculate the fringe benefit of low interest employment related loans will continue at 14.8 percent for the quarter commencing 1 July 1990. Mr Neilson said that any change in interest rates will be reflected in the prescribed rate of interest for subsequent quarters. 5 PUBLIC SERVICE MILEAGE RATES WITH EFFECT FROM 1 JULY 1989 The following rates have been set for use by Public Service Employees who are required to use their own vehi- cles for Official Business. The rates are shown in kilometres only. Distances recorded in miles should be multiplied by 1.609 to convert to kilometres. To convert cubic inches to cubic centremetres, multiply by 16.387. Motor Cars Annual KilometresUp to 1000cc1001-1350cc1351-2000ccOver 2000cc Runcents per kmcents per kmcents per kmcents per km 1-160052587080 1601-320044495866 3201-480040445260 4801-640038414956 6401-800035384450 8001-960032354046 9601-1120031333843 11201-1280030323641 12801 on29303540 When more than two passengers are carried, the above rates are increased by 1 cent per kilometre. Motor Cycles, Motor Scooters, Mopeds and Power Cycles Annual Kilometres RunUp to 60cc61-349cc350cc and over 1 - 6400101924 6401 on 81620 6 SHEARERS’ AND SHEDHANDS’ ALLOWANCES This item sets out recently approved tax free allow- ances for shearers and shedhands. DETERMINATION In terms of section 73 of the Income Tax Act 1976 the following allowances paid to shearers and shedhands are exempt from income tax. Shearers Shearing $10.00 per 100 sheep shorn (Includes hand piece, clothing and cutters and combs allowances) DUE DATES REMINDER July 14Interest PAYE deducted during June 1990 due for monthly payers. Dividend PAYE deducted during June 1990 due. Non-Resident Withholding Tax deducted during June 1990 due. 20PAYE Tax Deductions for first 15 days of July 1990 due - “Large” employers. PAYE Tax Deductions for June 1990 due - “Small” employers. FBT Return and payment due for quarter ended 30 June 1990. August 1GST Return and Payment due for period ended 30 June 1990. 5PAYE Tax Deductions for last 16 days of July 1990 due - “Large” employers only. 7First Instalment of 1991 Provisional Tax due for taxpayers with April balance dates. Second Instalment of 1991 Provisional Tax due for taxpayers with December balance dates. Third Instalment of 1990 Provisional Tax due for taxpayers with August balance dates. 14Interest PAYE deducted during July 1990 due for monthly payers. Dividend PAYE deducted during July 1990 due. Non-Resident Withholding Tax deducted during July 1990 due. 20PAYE Tax Deductions for first 15 days of August 1990 due - “Large” employers. PAYE Tax Deductions for July 1990 due - “Small” employers. Crutching$5.00 per 100 sheep (Includes hand piece,cloth- ing and cutters and combs allowances) Shedhands Clothing 50 cents per hour. APPLICATION This determination will take effect as from 1 July 1990. 7 TAX INFORMATION BULLETIN VOLUME TWO, NO. 1 JULY 1990 CONTENTS T.I.B. Readership Survey Results1 Taranaki, Wanganui, and Horowhenua Floods — Relief for Farmers and Growers Affected1 Problem Resolution Service — What can it do for You?2 The Right People in the Right Places — How to find the Person you need to see at Inland Revenue3 Inland Revenue Computer Programmes — Would you be interested in a copy?3 Provisional Tax Estimates and Use of Money Interest — Cases that should not have been treated as Estimates4 Joint Assessments and Imputation Credits4 Fringe Benefit Tax Prescribed Rate of Interest — for Quarter starting 1 July 19904 Public Service Mileage Rates with Effect from 1 July 19895 Shearers’ and Shedhands’ Allowances from 1 July 19906 Due Dates Reminder6 ISSN 0114-7161 8 TAX INFORMATION BULLETIN THIS IS AN INLAND REVENUE DEPARTMENT SERVICE TO PEOPLE WITH AN INTEREST IN NEW ZEALAND TAXATION. VOLUME TWO No. 1J U L Y 1 9 9 0