CONTENTS Get your TIB sooner on the internet3 New legislation Tax effects of the Remuneration Authority (Members of Parliment) Amendment Act 20024 Student Loan Scheme ñ interest rates for 2003-044 Standard practice statements Clarification of standard practice statement ñ SPS RDC 620 ñ writing off tax debt reduction of net losses when writing off a debt5 Legislation and determinations Livestock values ñ 2003 national standard costs for specified livestock6 Compact disc player, digital versatile disc players, video game players, and related assets8 Legal decisions ñ case notes Taxpayer ìperson affectedî by tax avoidance arrangement; CIRís assessments10 upheld CIR v Peterson and Peterson v CIR Another case transferred from the TRA to the High Court12 CIR v McIlraith Documents not prepared with a dominant purpose of litigation13 Glenharrow Holdings v CIR Taxpayerís objection procedurally flawed; TRA lacks jurisdiction to determine14 objection TRA 026/01 Decision 002/2003 Fundamental variation15 TRA Decision 003/2003 Other items of interest Statement of policy withdrawal and revised interpretation16 Regular features18 Due dates reminder AX INFORMATION BULLETIN Vol 15, No 3 March 2003 This TIB has no appendix This is an Inland Revenue service to people with an interest in New Zealand taxation ISSN 0114ñ7161 2 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) 3 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) GET YOUR TIB SOONER ON THE INTERNET This Tax Information Bulletin is also available on the internet in PDF format. Our website is at: www.ird.govt.nz It has other Inland Revenue information that you may find useful, including any draft binding rulings and interpretation statements that are available. If you find that you prefer to get the TIB from our website and no longer need a paper copy, please let me know so we can take you off our mailing list. You can do this by completing the form at the back of this TIB, or by emailing us at IRDTIB@datamail.co.nz with your name and details. 4 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) NEW LEGISLATION TAX EFFECTS OF THE REMUNERATION AUTHORITY (MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT) AMENDMENT ACT 2002 Introduction The legislation governing the tax treatment of the remuneration of members of Parliament has been amended as a result of the Remuneration Authority (Members of Parliament) Amendment Act 2002, which was enacted on 18 December 2002. The Act itself arose from recommendations made in recent reviews of membersí remuneration and expenses, and sets out rules for their administration and clarifies their tax treatment. It has also made minor amendments to clarify membersí employment status for taxation purposes. Background The Remuneration Authority (Members of Parliament) Amendment Bill was introduced into Parliament on 11 June 2002. Certain benefits to be subject to fringe benefit tax During its passage through Parliament, the bill was amended to provide that the private use or enjoyment component of services provided to members in relation to travel, accommodation, attendance or communications would be made subject to fringe benefit tax. Remedial amendments In 1998 the Income Tax Act 1994 was amended to ensure that remuneration and expenses paid to members of Parliament would receive the same tax treatment as similar payments made to employees. The Remuneration Authority (Members of Parliament) Amendment Act 2002 has amended the changes introduced in 1998, in order to further clarify this intended policy. Key features Certain benefits to be subject to fringe benefit tax The Income Tax Act 1994 has been amended to provide that the private element of services provided to members for travel, accommodation, attendance or communications is subject to fringe benefit tax. This treatment will apply irrespective of whether the services are provided to the member direct, or by way of a cash payment to reimburse the member for expenditure incurred. The definition of ìfringe benefitî contained in section CI 1 has been extended to include these services, thereby rendering them subject to fringe benefit tax. They have also been included within the list of exempt public office income contained in section CB 7, to ensure that they are not also subject to income tax. Remedial amendments The Income Tax Act 1994 has been amended to clarify the policy intent that members are to receive the same tax treatment as employees in relation to income derived from their office. The changes amend the definitions of ìsalary or wagesî and ìemploymentî contained in section OB 1 of the Income Tax Act 1994. The definition of ìsalary or wagesî has been extended to include payments of salary or allowances made to members. The definition of ìemploymentî has been extended to include the activities of a Member of Parliament which give rise to an entitlement to the receipt of a source deduction payment. A consequential amendment removes members from the section OB 1 definition of ìspecified office holderî. Application dates The fringe benefit tax amendments to sections CB 7 and CI 1 of the Income Tax Act 1994 apply from 1 April 2003, the date of effect of the Remuneration Authority (Members of Parliament) Amendment Act 2002. The remedial amendments to section OB 1 of the Income Tax Act 1994 apply from 1 April 2002. STUDENT LOAN SCHEME ñ INTEREST RATES FOR 2003-04 The total Student Loan Scheme interest rate for the 2003-04 income year will remain at 7.0%. The total interest rate has two componentsóthe base interest rate and the interest adjustment rate. These are 5.1% and 1.9% respectively for the 2002-03 income year. From 1 April 2003 the base interest rate will decrease to 4.2% and the interest adjustment rate will increase to 2.8%. Student Loan Scheme (Interest Rates) Regulations 2003 5 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) STANDARD PRACTICE STATEMENTS These statements describe how the Commissioner will, in practice, exercise a statutory discretion or deal with practical issues arising out of the administration of the Inland Revenue Acts. CLARIFICATION OF STANDARD PRACTICE STATEMENT IR ñ SPS RDC 620 ñ WRITING OFF TAX DEBT REDUCTION OF NET LOSSES WHEN WRITING OFF A DEBT Standard Practice Statement IR-SPS RDC 620óWriting off tax debt, originally published in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 14, No. 11 (November 2002), states the Commissionerís practice in relation to writing off tax debts. Section 177C(5) of the Tax Administration Act 1994 provides that if the Commissioner writes off a debt for a taxpayer who has a net loss, all or part of the net loss must be extinguished by dividing the amount written off by 33% and reducing the net loss by that amount. IR-SPS RDC 620 states ìIf an amount is written off and the taxpayer has tax losses, all or part of the net loss will be reduced by the amount of the write-off grossed up by 33%î. It has been brought to our attention that the above wording may lead to an incorrect calculation of the amount of loss reduction. For example: If the amount written off was $100,000 and this was multiplied by 33% this would result in a loss reduction figure of $133,000. In this scenario, the correct calculation is $100,000 divided by 33% giving a correct loss reduction of $303,303.30. It is possible for this calculation to result in the amount of loss reduction being higher than the current net loss. In this situation, the net loss is to be extinguished in accordance with section 177C(5). Standard Practice Statement RDC 620 will continue to apply until such time as it is withdrawn. 6 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) LEGISLATION AND DETERMINATIONS This section of the TIB covers items such as recent tax legislation, accrual and depreciation determinations, livestock values and changes in FBT and GST interest rates. LIVESTOCK VALUES ñ 2003 NATIONAL STANDARD COSTS FOR SPECIFIED LIVESTOCK The Commissioner of Inland Revenue has released a determination, reproduced over the page, setting the national standard costs for specified livestock for the 2002/2003 income year. These costs are used by livestock owners as part of the calculation of the value of livestock on hand at the end of the income year, where they have adopted the national standard costs (NSC) scheme to value any class of livestock. Farmers using the scheme apply the one-year NSC to stock bred on the farm each year, and add the rising two-year NSC to the value of the opening young stock available to come through into the mature inventory group at year-end. Livestock purchases are also factored into the valuation of the immature and mature groupings at year-end, so as to arrive at a valuation reflecting the enterpriseís own balance of farm bred and externally purchased animals. NSCs are developed from the national average costs of production for each type of livestock farming based on independent survey data. Only direct costs of breeding rearing rising one- and two-year livestock are taken into account. These exclude all costs of owning (leasing) and operating the farm business, overhead costs of operating non-livestock enterprises (such as cropping) and costs associated with producing and harvesting dual products (wool, fibre, milk and velvet). For bobby calves, information from spring 2002 is used while other dairy NSCs are based on survey data for the year ended 30 June 2002. For sheep, beef cattle, deer and goats, NSCs are based on survey data for the year ended 30 June 2001 which is the most recent available for those livestock types at the time the NSCs are calculated. The NSCs calculated for the year ended 31 March 2003 have increased for most livestock classes, with the main exceptions to this being the NSC for rising two-year dairy cattle which fell marginally, and the NSC for purchased bobby calves which fell by 13% due to the significant reduction in the cost of milk-based feed in spring 2002. Total expenditure on most farm types increased in the survey year on which the NSCs are based. The increase in costs is mainly a result of improved incomes permitting additional expenditure. While much of this expenditure increase is aimed at producing more of the dual products (particularly milk), and is consequently excluded from the NSCs calculated, some of the increase in costs flow to the higher average cost of producing livestock. The new NSCs struck each year only apply to that yearís immature and maturing livestock. Mature livestock valued under this scheme effectively retain their historic NSCs until they die or are sold, albeit through a first in, first out (FIFO) or inventory averaging system as opposed to individual livestock tracing. One-off movements in expenditure items are effectively smoothed within the mature inventory grouping, by the averaging of that yearís intake value with the carried forward values of the surviving livestock in that grouping. For the farm-bred component of the immature inventory group, the NSC values will appropriately reflect changes in the costs of those livestock in that particular year. The NSC scheme is only one option under the current livestock valuation regime. The other options are market value, the herd scheme and the self-assessed cost (SAC) option. SAC is calculated on the same basis as the NSC but uses a farmerís own costs rather than the national average costs. 7 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) NATIONAL STANDARD COSTS FOR SPECIFIED LIVESTOCK DETERMINATION 2003 Kind of livestockCategory of livestockNational standard cost $ SheepRising 1 year 21.50 Rising 2 year13.90 Dairy cattlePurchased bobby calves143.00 Rising 1 year612.00 Rising 2 year 97.10 Beef cattleRising 1 year202.00 Rising 2 year117.00 Rising 3 year male non-breeding cattle (all breeds)117.00 DeerRising 1 year 64.40 Rising 2 year32.50 Goats (meat and fibre)Rising 1 year 16.30 Rising 2 year11.20 Goats (dairy)Rising 1 year 96.90 Rising 2 year 15.80 PigsWeaners to 10 weeks of age83.40 Growing pigs 10 to 17 weeks of age 65.70 This determination is signed by me on the 30th day of January 2003. Martin Smith General Manager (Adjudication & Rulings) This determination may be cited as ìThe National Standard Costs for Specified Livestock Determination, 2003î. This determination is made in terms of section EL 3A of the Income Tax Act 1994. It shall apply to any specified livestock on hand at the end of the 2002-2003 income year where the taxpayer has elected to value that livestock under the national standard cost scheme for that income year. For the purposes of section EL 3A of the Income Tax Act 1994 the national standard costs for specified livestock, for the 2002-2003 income year, are as set out in the following table. 8 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) COMPACT DISC PLAYERS, DIGITAL VERSATILE DISC PLAYERS, VIDEO GAME PLAYERS, AND RELATED ASSETS GENERAL DEPRECIATION DETERMINATION DEP49 In Tax Information Bulletin Volume 14, No 12 (December 2002) on page 50 we published a draft general determination proposing the setting of general depreciation rates for compact disc players, digital versatile disc players, and related assets. We received three submissions on the draft. No submission raised an issue on the proposed rates. However, one submission suggested that compact disc recorders and digital versatile disc recorders should also be included in the determination. After careful consideration, we have decided that due to the nature of these assets they should be the subject of a separate determination. The general depreciation determination inserts new asset classes into the ìAudio and Video Recording Studios and Professional Photographyî and ìLeisureî industry categories and the ìHire equipment (short-term hire of 1 month or less)î asset category. The determination also inserts new asset classes into the ìHotels, Motels, Restaurants, Cafes, Taverns and Takeaway Barsî and ìResidential Rental Property Chattelsî industry categories. The general determination is reproduced here. The new depreciation rates are based on the estimated useful lives set out in the determination and a residual value of 13.5%. GENERAL DEPRECIATION DETERMINATION DEP49 This determination may be cited as ìDetermination DEP49: Tax Depreciation Rates General Determination Number 49î. 1. Application This determination applies to taxpayers who own the asset classes listed here. This determination applies to ìdepreciable propertyî other than ìexcluded depreciable propertyî for the 2002/03 and subsequent income years. 2. Determination Pursuant to section EG 4 of the Income Tax Act 1994 I hereby amend Determination DEP1: Tax Depreciation Rates General Determination Number 1 (as previously amended) by: ïInserting into the ìAudio and Video Recording Studios and Professional Photographyî industry category the general asset classes, estimated useful lives, and diminishing value and straight-line depreciation rates listed below: Audio andEstimatedDV bandedSL Videouseful lifedepín rateequivalent Recording(years)(%)banded Studios anddepín rate Professional(%) Photography Digital53324 versatile disc players (DVD players) Digital263.563.5 versatile discs (DVDs) Video53324 cassette recorders and/or players (VCRs) Video game35040 players Video game263.563.5 discs 9 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) ïInserting into the ìLeisureî industry category the general asset classes, estimated useful lives, and diminishing value and straight-line depreciation rates listed below: LeisureEstimatedDV bandedSL useful lifedepín rateequivalent (years)(%)banded depín rate (%) Compact53324 disc players Digital versatile53324 disc players (DVD players) Digital versatile263.563.5 discs (DVDs) Video game35040 players Video game263.563.5 discs ïInserting in the ìHire equipment (Where on short- term hire of 1 month or less only)î asset category the general asset classes, estimated useful lives, and diminishing value and straight-line rates listed below: Hire equipmentEstimatedDV bandedSL (Where onuseful lifedepín rateequivalent short-term hire(years)(%)depín rate of 1 month or(%) less only) Compact263.563.5 disc players Compact discs1100100 Digital versatile263.563.5 disc players (DVD players) Digital versatile1100100 discs (DVDs) Video cassette263.563.5 recorders and/or players (VCR) Video game1100100 players Video game1100100 discs ïInserting into the ìHotels, Motels, Restaurants, Cafes, Taverns and Takeaway Barsî and ìResidential Rental Property Chattelsî industry categories the general asset classes, estimated useful lives, and diminishing value and straight-line rates listed below: ìHotels, Motels,EstimatedDV bandedSL Restaurants,useful lifedepín rateequivalent Cafes, Taverns(years)(%)banded and Takeawaydepín rate Barsî and(%) ìResidential Rental Property Chattelsî industry categories Compact disc53324 players Digital versatile53324 disc players (DVD players) Video game35040 players Digital versatile263.563.5 discs (DVDs) Video game1100100 discs Compact1100100 discs 3. Interpretation In this determination, unless the context otherwise requires, expressions have the same meaning as in the Income Tax Act 1994. This determination was signed by me on the 27 th day of February 2003. Martin Smith General Manager (Adjudication and Rulings) 10 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) LEGAL DECISIONS ñ CASE NOTES This section of the TIB sets out brief notes of recent tax decisions made by the Taxation Review Authority, the High Court, the Court of Appeal and the Privy Council. Weíve given full references to each case, including the citation details where it has already been reported. Details of the relevant Act and section will help you to quickly identify the legislation at issue. Short case summaries and keywords deliver the bare essentials for busy readers. The notes also outline the principal facts and grounds for the decision. Where possible, we have indicated if an appeal will be forthcoming. These case reviews do not set out Inland Revenue policy, nor do they represent our attitude to the decision. These are purely brief factual reviews of decisions for the general interest of our readers. TAXPAYER ìPERSON AFFECTEDî BY TAX AVOIDANCE ARRANGEMENT; CIRíS ASSESSMENTS UPHELD Case:CIR v Peterson and Peterson v CIR Decision date:19 February 2003 Act:Income Tax Act 1976 Keywords:ìperson affectedî Summary The taxpayer was a person affected by a tax avoidance arrangement and his tax affairs could be reconstituted under section 99. It was irrelevant that he did not know the extent of the tax avoidance arrangement and that he was not one of the persons in the required ìmeeting of mindsî necessary to constitute an arrangement. Facts These were cases taken by the taxpayer in relation to two film investments made in the 1980s. The films were ìLie of the Landî and ìUtuî. In both cases the Commissioner concluded that the expenses of the films were inflated by means of non-recourse loans and circular funding. This increased the depreciation deduction apparently available to the taxpayer but for which there was no actual liability as the circular funding had already repaid the loans. The Commissioner disallowed the depreciation deduction to the extent of the inflated expenses. The taxpayer objected and the cases were heard at the TRA. The taxpayer won one (Lie of the Land) and the Commissioner the other. Both TRA decisions were appealed to the High Court where the taxpayer won one again and the Commissioner the other (see (2002) 20 NZTC 17,583 and 17,761). Both decisions were appealed. The main issue was the proper application of section 99 ITA 1976 to the taxpayer. The taxpayer argued that as he was not part of the ìmeeting of mindsî necessary for an arrangement under section 99 (the test from BNZI \[2002\] 1 NZLR 450) then section 99 could not be applied to him. Further it was argued that the taxpayer entered a fixed price contract and this was the cost to him of the investment regardless of what consequently occurred outside his knowledge. The Commissioner argued that section 99 could be applied to the taxpayer as there was an arrangement meeting the BNZI test even though the taxpayer was not one of those involved in the necessary ìmeeting of mindsî and he was a ìperson affected by that arrangementî (per section 99(3)). The Commissioner also placed weight upon the phrase ìwhether or not any person affected by that arrangement is a party theretoî (section 99(2)). Decision The Court considered the Commissioner had acted correctly by adjusting the assessments. The bulk of the reasoning is in CIR v Peterson which is summarised below. The Court distinguished these cases from BNZI by noting the Commissionerís argument ìis that because of the inclusion at the end of subsection (2) of the phrase ìwhether or not any person affected by that arrangement is a party theretoî and subsection (3) empowers the Commissioner to adjust the assessable income of ìany person affectedî, the adjustment to the assessable income of the taxpayer Ö was not erroneousî whereas the Commissionerís argument in BNZI was that BNZI was a party with knowledge to the arrangement (paragraph 29-30). 11 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) The Court considered that as the loan had been repaid (via the circular funding) the TRA and the High Court had erred by not focussing on the repayment: ìPlainly the correct focus must be on whether the loan was repaid, not on what the taxpayer knewî (paragraph 33). The Court considered that as the loan had been repaid the deductions were not available regardless of section 99 (paragraph 34). The Court turned to consider section 99. It was satisfied there was an arrangement (pointing out the architect of the arrangement had the necessary mutuality in his differing capacities (paragraph 37), but went on to consider whether the section allowed the Commissioner to ìadjust the taxable income of the taxpayer who was not a party to the arrangement and had no knowledge of itî (paragraph 38). The Court referred to the following passage by Blanchard J in BNZI: ì\[175\] As the principal judgment records paragraph \[42\], there are three successive inquiries. The first is as to the extent of the arrangement; the second is as to whether it has the purpose or effect of tax avoidance and the third, which arises only where the second is answered affirmatively, is as to the adjustment to be made to counteract the tax advantage. The adjustment can be made against both a party to the arrangement and a person affected, who is not necessarily a party. But it can be made only where a tax advantage has been obtained ìunder that arrangementî. The Commissioner therefore cannot make an adjustment as against someone who is not a party merely because that person has received a payment subsequent to the operation of an arrangement but outside the arrangementÖ.î (Emphasis added) And commented on that paragraph: ìFirst, it clearly recognises that an adjustment can be made to the assessable income of a person affected though not a party to the arrangement. Secondly, it reflects the Judgeís view that BNZ Investments obtained any tax advantage not from or under the ìdownstreamî tax avoidance arrangement, but by another ìupstreamî arrangement. In our case, however the tax advantage obtained by the taxpayer was derived directly from the very arrangement in which the loan funds were included in the cost to the partnership of the film.î (paragraph 42) It was recognised that deciding whether a tax advantage was derived from a tax avoidance arrangement was a matter of fact and degree: ìThere will be circumstances in which questions will be raised as to the degree of proximity necessary to qualify as a person affected for the purposes of section 99(3). This will be another aspect of line drawingÖ so as to distinguish between a tax advantage that may legitimately retained and one that is vulnerable to adjustment. But we do not seeÖthis caseÖas even approaching the line.î (paragraph 44) The argument advanced by the taxpayer that he had a fixed price contract and had paid that price so he was entitled to a deduction was dismissed. In support of this the taxpayer relied upon Cecil Bros (1964) 111CLR 430 and Europa Oil \[1976\] 1 NZLR 546, 556. The Court considered the argument was essentially that the Commissioner could not ìsecond guessî the value of services provided and said that the Commissioner was not precluded from declining to recognise costs not truly incurred. As such the cases referred did not apply (paragraph 46). Peterson v CIR largely followed the reasons in the companion case. However in this case the non-recourse loans were entirely fictitious (paragraph 4, and did not occur at all, as opposed to the circular funding in the other case). The Court again said the costs not truly incurred should not be deduced (notwithstanding section 99) but regardless of that view section 99 applied again. (paragraph 13). Even if the loans had been incurred, section 99 would apply as the loans were repaid so liability (if any) was extinguished (paragraphs 13, 15). 12 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) ANOTHER CASE TRANSFERRED FROM THE TRA TO THE HIGH COURT The Court found that the respondent would not be prejudiced by the transfer and granted the application. The transfer was made conditional on preserving the respondentís strike out application of the TRA proceeding, although it was not accepted that the application had any merit. It was decided that the two proceedings should be heard together rather than consolidated. Case:CIR v D H McIlraith Decision date:19 February 2002 Act:Tax Administration Act 1994 Keywords:Transfer of proceedings, section 138N of the Tax Administration Act 1994 Summary High Court grants Commissionerís application to have proceeding transferred from the TRA to the High Court. Facts In 2001 the respondent brought proceedings in the High Court against the Commissioner challenging an assessment for the 1996 year, and seeking judicial review and compensation under the NZ Bill of Rights Act. In 2002 he brought proceedings in the TRA challenging an assessment for the 1997 year on very similar grounds, also alleging bias, abuse of power, and bad faith against IRD officers. Because of the overlap between the issues in the two proceedings, the Commissioner applied to have the TRA proceeding transferred to the High Court and consolidated with the High Court case. Decision The Court held that the application was correctly brought under section 138N of the TAA which authorised it. It was a straightforward procedural application not requiring a statement of claim. The Court found that the application should be granted for two main reasons: ïThe substantial overlap, legally and factually, between the proceedings as they related to the correctness of the assessments; ïThe inappropriateness of the TRA as a forum for deciding serious allegations of bad faith and abuse of power. The recent Court of Appeal decision in Dandelion Investments Ltd v CIR (CA204/01, 5 December 2002) determined that the TRAís role was concerned with the correctness of the assessment and ìdid not extend to conducting what was effectively a broad-based judicial review of the process leading up to the Commissionerís assessment Öî. The Court also referred to the criteria listed in the recent Court of Appeal decision in CIR v Erris Promotions (CA175/02, 7 November 2002), and discussed these briefly in relation to the present case. 13 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) DOCUMENTS NOT PREPARED WITH A DOMINANT PURPOSE OF LITIGATION Case:Glenharrow Holdings v CIR Decision date:13 February 2003 Act:Tax Administration Act 1994 Keywords:Discovery, litigation privilege, legal professional privilege Summary The High Court held that litigation privilege did not apply to documents prepared by and for the Commissionerís experts prior to the issuing of the Commissionerís statement of position. Facts This was an interim interlocutory decision relating to the interaction between litigation privilege and legal professional privilege and the disputes process in Part IVA of the Tax Administration Act 1994. This is the second interlocutory decision relating to this taxpayer. The first is reported at Glenharrow Holdings Ltd v CIR (2002) 20 NZTC 17,792. In this dispute the plaintiff sought an order for discovery of all documents in respect of which the Commissioner had claimed litigation privilege, up to 6 December 2000 (the date the Commissioner issued his statement of position), on the basis that litigation was not reasonably in contemplation until after that date. The plaintiff also made a similar claim in relation to documents the Commissioner contended were covered by legal professional privilege. The Commissioner had instructed four experts prior to 6 December 2000. The Commissioner and each of the experts had produced a list of documents, all of which made claims of privilege. The substantive issue relates to a disallowed input tax credit arising from the purchase of a mining licence. Decision Justice Panckhurst set out some of the legislation relating to the disputes resolution procedure, and a chronology of the facts. His Honour noted a potential conflict between the concept of litigation privilege and the ìall cards on the tableî philosophy of the disputes process. The Judge decided that it was not ìnecessary or appropriate to decide the privilege exclusion question with reference to Part IVA generallyî, but that the ìappropriate course is to reach a decision tailored to these circumstances and not seek to determine the more general question.î Justice Panckhurst noted that the test for the availability of legal professional privilege was a two-step process. Firstly there is a threshold requirement that litigation must be in train or at least reasonably apprehended. Secondly the relevant document must be one which was prepared to enable legal advice to be received in relation to that litigation. His Honour concluded that litigation was reasonably apprehended by December 2000. However, he did not accept the Commissionerís contention that the dominant purpose for which the relevant documents were prepared was to advise in relation to apprehended litigation. Rather, Panckhurst J considered that the dominant purpose must have been to enable the Commissioner to prepare and issue his statement of position, a statutory requirement. Litigation privilege was not available up to and including 6 December 2000. In respect of solicitor-client privilege, Panckhurst J noted that the Commissioner had claimed the privilege in relation to a large number of documents. His Honour stated (paragraph \[45\]): ìMany appear to be communications emanating from the Commissionerís legal advisors where a claim to legal professional privilege is unsurprising. In relation to these aspects of the claim to privilege I see no grounds to go behind the privilege claim made in the list itself, supported as it is by affidavit evidence.î However, in relation to solicitor-client privilege claims by the Commissionerís experts Panckhurst J indicated that he would like to inspect a sample of the documents to see whether privilege properly applied. His Honour ordered the parties to confer to see what documents should be provided to him to inspect. After such inspection a final judgment would be issued. The Commissioner is not appealing this decision. 14 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) TAXPAYERíS OBJECTION PROCEDURALLY FLAWED; TRA LACKS JURISDICTION TO DETERMINE OBJECTION. Case:TRA 026/01 Decision 002/2003 Decision date:30 January 2003 Act:Income Tax Act 1994 Tax Administration Act 1994 TRA Regulations 1994 and 1998 Keywords:Objection not disallowed, case stated request invalid, points of objection notice invalid, challenge proceedings Summary The taxpayerís case stated request was invalid as the objection had not been determined and it was not made in time. The taxpayerís points of objection notice (PON) was also invalid as it was not provided within the statutory time frame. Facts This was a J G Russell related matter. In 1996 assessments for the tax years 1985 to 1996 were issued. Those assessments relied upon sham as the basis of assessment although later section 99 ITA 1976 was added as a ground of assessment. The taxpayer objected on 22 November 1996 however that objection has not been determined by the Commissioner. Subsequently (20 November 2000) two notices of proposed adjustments (NOPAs) were issued covering the tax years 1985 to 2000 which relied on different bases of proposed reassessment. Those NOPAs expressly proposed to reverse the assessments made in 1996 and to replace them with new assessments. The taxpayer replied with two notices of response (NORs) expressly accepting the adjustment to cancel the 1996 assessments but rejecting the balance of the proposed adjustments. Since then one NOPA has been abandoned and the other has proceeded via a statement of response (SOP) to Adjudication. The taxpayer purported to request a case be stated on 21 January 2002 (received by the Commissioner on 25 January 2002) using the NOPAs as the alleged determination of the objection. A (PON) dated 18 April 2001 was then received from the taxpayer at the Wellington Service Centre on 30 April 2001 (received by Litigation Management on 2 May 2001). This case was focussed on the preliminary issues of whether the case could proceed given the objection had not been determined. The taxpayer argued that the NOPA in effect decided the objection and that triggered the right to request a case stated. The taxpayer also argued that the Commissioner had failed to file a timely case stated. Decision Barber J concluded that there was no jurisdiction for the case to continue: ìIt seems to me that there is no jurisdiction for this Case Stated to proceed because there has never been a disallowance of the objection. The issue and service of the NOPAs, which is all the objector could rely upon, did not trigger off an event permitting the objector to request that the objection be heard and determined by a Taxation Review Authority.î (paragraph 42) In those circumstances Barber J stayed the case. While he considered the case invalid as the objection was not determined he thought it ìprudentî to leave it at the TRA Registry until the Adjudication process ended on the later NOPA and NOR (paragraph 50). While his Honour considered the delay in addressing the objection ìthoroughly unsatisfactoryî he also recognised the difficulties in addressing the Russell template and the need for ìcare and thought due to extensive consequencesî (paragraph 51). He also rejected an allegation the Commissioner had failed to file a timely case stated. His Honour was taken through the various timeframes of the objection procedure and concluded that if the Commissionerís NOPA was a determination of the objection (which it was not) then: ïThe request for a case stated was not notified to the Commissioner within the relevant statutory timeframe and the objection was at an end (paragraph 46 to 56). This was a timeframe the Authority had no jurisdiction to enlarge (paragraph 54). In considering this the Authority rejected the application of any deemed receipt by the Commissioner under the TRA Regulations or the District Courts Rules or the Postal Services Act 1998 (paragraphs 58 to 64). ïThe PON was not timely and therefore invalid (paragraphs 66, 73). ïUsing the PON date of receipt by the Commissioner the case stated (if it had been necessary: assuming the taxpayerís steps had been timely and valid) was received by the TRA within time (paragraph 66). In concluding His Honour noted the probable invalidity of the assessments but concluded he lacked jurisdiction to deal with that issue but considered it moot anyway in light of the Disputes Resolution procedure that was underway (paragraph 76-78). Finally he reiterated his earlier call for a Commission of Inquiry into the Russell template (paragraph 84). 15 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) FUNDAMENTAL VARIATION Case:TRA Decision 003/2003 Decision date:26 February 2003 Act:Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 Keywords:Supply, cancellation, alteration, fundamental variation, contract, insolvency, liquidation, credit note Summary The Disputant entered contracts to buy land and claimed input credits in respect of the supplies. The vendor became insolvent and the mortgagees exercised their rights of sale. The contracts were not completed, neither were they expressly cancelled. The liquidator did not issue credit notes but the Commissioner considered the supplies to have been cancelled and reversed the input credits to the disputant. The TRA held that the Commissioner was entitled to do so. Facts The disputant, MHL, entered into contracts with KIL for the purchase of two townhouses. GST input tax claims were made for the full purchase price of each unit. Prior to settlement of the purchases, KIL went into liquidation, and the mortgagees exercised their powers of sale to sell the units to third parties. The department considered that the supplies had been cancelled. As a result, a dispute arose as to whether the taxpayer was required to account for the GST originally claimed as input tax. MHL ultimately did this in its GST return for the two-month period ended 29 February 2000. MHL then issued a Notice of Proposed Adjustment proposing that the debit adjustment of $56,667.67 made in its GST return for the period ended 29 February 2000 was incorrect. The grounds for the adjustment proposed were that the contracts had not been cancelled as neither party to the contracts had served the notices required to cancel the contracts. The department disagreed with the adjustment proposed by the taxpayer, and the dispute proceeded to Adjudication. The department accepted that MHL correctly claimed the original input tax credits on the payment of the deposits for the properties, having received tax invoices for both purchases. The department contended however, that because the supplies have been cancelled or fundamentally varied or altered, an adjustment is required under section 25 of the GST Act. Evidence was given for the Commissioner by the departmentís investigator and the liquidator of KIL. An employee adviser of the disputant company gave evidence for the disputant. Decision The Authority reviewed the agreed facts and the evidence brought by the parties and concluded: ìÖin any event there cannot now be specific performance of the contracts. The most the disputant could hope for is damages for the vendorís breach and possibly a claim against the mortgagee. The vendor has ceased to exist. A claim against the mortgages might conceivably have included a claim for the GST but even if possible cannot alter the legal relationships between the Commissioner and the taxpayer. At best it could only indemnify the taxpayer from any claim the Commissioner may have.î And: ìÖit was open to the disputant to cancel the contracts when the vendor failed in its obligation to build the units. On the facts as I find them to be it failed to do so, and any rights to cancel it may have had under the Contractual Remedies Act has long since expired.î The Authority then reviewed the scope of section 25 of the GST Act and concluded that the provisions therein contemplated the situation before the court: ìBecause the agreements for sale and purchase to the knowledge of the disputant have been cancelled, the disputant therefore knows that the tax invoices issued to it by the vendor are ìincorrectî for the purposes of section 25(4). The disputant has therefore made a ìdeduction of an amount of input tax Ö to which that other knowledge Ö relatesî and therefore it is obliged to repay to the Commissioner the amount by which ìthe input tax deducted exceeds the output tax properly chargedî.î He concluded by noting: ìThe fact the vendor company in liquidation did not issue a credit note and the liquidator refused to do so does not assist the disputant. In those circumstances the Commissioner is entitled to invoke section 25(3B). He was satisfied from the records available to him that there was a sale to the disputant which did not proceed and therefore a ìcredit note is not required to be issuedî. Section 25(3B) is clearly intended to break what would otherwise be a procedural impasse to the implementation of section 25, and was property invoked for the purpose in this case.î 16 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) OTHER ITEMS OF INTEREST STATEMENT OF POLICY WITHDRAWAL AND REVISED INTERPRETATION Time limits for new companies to make qualifying company elections ñ where extension-of-time arrangements with tax agents exist ñ previous policy withdrawn The Commissioner has reviewed the position on the time limits for new companies to make qualifying company or loss attributing qualifying company elections that will apply from the commencement of the companyís first income year. The previous policy was set out at pages 4 to 6 of Tax Information Bulletin (TIB) Vol 6, No 13 (May 1995). The legislative requirement for qualifying company elections is that they be filed for newly-formed companies within the time allowed by section 37 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 for filing a tax return if the election is to take effect on the first day of the companyís first income year. For taxpayers who do not have extension-of-time (EOT) arrangements for filing their tax returns through tax agents, this means that if a companyís return is filed before 7 July, which is the last day for companies to file their tax returns if there are no extension-of-time arrangements, then shareholders and directors will still have until 7 July to file any QC elections. In cases where the company has a late balance date, the date for the filing of the return will differ from 7 July and it will be that date which will apply in place of 7 July. This left some uncertainty, however, in relation to the required date for filing elections where taxpayers did have EOT arrangements in respect of tax returnsóie whether those elections had to be filed by the same time as the tax return or whether the taxpayer had until the end of the extension period of 31 March (or some other date that may be given pursuant to the Commissionerís discretion) to file the election even if the return had been filed at an earlier date. The view taken in the 1995 statement was that after 7 July the election was required to be filed no later than the filing of the income tax return under those EOT arrangements. In other words, a post-7 July election filed subsequent to the filing of the income tax return was not accepted. As a result of the review, the Commissioner no longer considers that the previous policy where a company is subject to an EOT arrangement correctly states the law. The previous policy (as set out in TIB, Vol 6, No 13, pages 5 and 6, under the heading ìLast date for elections for newly-formed companies on an agency listingî) is hereby formally withdrawn. The Commissioner now considers that, on both the current and previous versions of section 37 of the Tax Administration Act 1994, in conjunction with the provisions of sections HG 3(3), HG 4(5), and HG 14(c) of the Income Tax Act 1994, the time allowed for filing elections is the same as the time permitted for the taxpayer to file an income tax returnóregardless of whether or not the tax return is filed prior to the filing of elections. For taxpayers subject to a tax agentís EOT arrangement, this will generally be 31 March of the year following the income year to which the first income tax return relates. Consistent with what was foreshadowed in the AGENTSanswers of March 2002, this revised interpretation will be applied from the 2001 and subsequent income years. 17 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) 18 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) These dates are taken from Inland Revenueís Smart business tax due date calendar 2003 - 2004 REGULAR FEATURES DUE DATES REMINDER April 2003 7Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deduction per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due ïEmployer monthly schedule (IR 348) due End-of-year income tax 7 April 2003, 2002 end-of-year income tax due for clients of agents with a March balance date 22Employer deductions Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deduction per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Small employers (less than $100,000 PAYE and SSCWT deductions per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or ( IR 346) form and payment due ïEmployer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 30GST and return payment due May 2003 5Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deduction per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due ïEmployer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 20Employer deductions Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deduction per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Small employers (less than $100,000 PAYE and SSCWT deductions per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or ( IR 346) form and payment due ïEmployer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 30GST and return payment due 19 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 3 (March 2003) INLAND REVENUE NATIONAL OFFICE PO BOX 2198 WELLINGTON TELEPHONE (04) 498 5800