TIB Appendices Volume Four, No. 7March 1993 Contents Appendix A: Livestock Valuation......................................................................................2 Appendix B: Accrual Determinations Determination 5B: Mandatory Conversion Convertible Notes......................................................23 Determination G7C: Futures and Options Markets........................................................................27 Determination G26: Variable Rate Financial Arrangements..........................................................32 ISSN 0114-7161 2 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Appendix A Livestock Production - Establishing a Self Assessed Cost Guidelines for Farmers and Livestock Dealers 1.Background In its report to Government, the Livestock Valuation Consultative Committee recommended that a simplified method for valuing the cost of producing livestock should be introduced. The Government accepted this recommendation. The following Guidelines set out the new valuation method. Farmers can use this method for 1991-92 and following income years. All legislative references in this Appendix refer to the Taxation Reform Bill (No.6) 1992, which is currently before Parliament. This Bill is due to be passed into law before the end of March 1993. 2.Introduction Any taxpayer may value inventory on hand at the end of an income year at its cost. These guidelines explain how to work out the cost of production for sheep, cattle, deer and goats. The methods are the same as those used to establish National Standard Costs (section 86C of the Income Tax Act), except that they use costs derived from the taxpayer's own costs of production. These guidelines relate directly to section 86B of the Income Tax Act. These Guidelines set out the method for sheep, cattle, deer and goats. Similar guidelines for establishing a cost of production for pigs will be released separately. 3.Summary of Guidelines These are the main steps in the method for determining the production cost of sheep, cattle, deer and goats: 1.Identify and specify the direct costs of livestock production, and assign identifiable costs to each particular livestock type. 2.Calculate the total farm livestock units (LSUs). 3.Apportion the undivided direct costs of livestock production between the livestock types. Do this based on the proportion of LSUs associated with each type and age grouping of livestock. 4.Use dual product multipliers to allocate some of the costs to the production of wool, fibre, milk or velvet. 5.Include the costs of livestock purchased. 6.Calculate an average cost per head and use it to value that year’s intake of stock in each age group- ing on hand at the end of the income year. Where mature livestock of mixed ages and intake years are valued at cost, you will need an inventory system to account for livestock over their lifetime on the farm. You can get forms from any Inland Revenue office to help with calculating the cost of livestock production. These forms are all reproduced at the end of this Appendix. Later in the year we will also develop computerised spreadsheets for this purpose. 4.Direct costs of livestock production 4.1Costs to be Taken into Account Taxpayers can take into account all tax deductible costs of production and business operation on a farm when determining the cost of livestock production. These include depreciation, but exclude taxation and any capital expenditure. However, taxpayers may exclude certain categories of costs, and apportion other costs between livestock and non-livestock enterprises. This is known as partial absorption costing (PAC), and it is used for inventory costings in other sectors. The costs that taxpayers can exclude from the total deductible farm costs in any year are: •Costs of harvesting and selling livestock products (e.g., shearing expenses, milking expenses, labour associated with these activities, velvet harvesting) •Costs of producing, harvesting and selling non- livestock production, where these costs are clearly identified (e.g., cash crop expenses, forestry or horticultural expenses, costs associated with a separate business such as contracting, poultry, fitch farming or horse breeding) •Repairs and maintenance of all farm buildings except buildings associated with pig production •Depreciation on all farm buildings •Depreciation and repairs and maintenance on plant primarily used in producing secondary (dual) livestock products or non livestock enterprises (e.g., depreciation on milking machines, shearing plant, machinery used in crop production) •Outward freight from the farm •Deductible share of car expenses •Accounting and legal fees, consultancy fees, rates and general farm (non livestock) insurance •Interest, rent and bailment fees (Note that the lease of livestock, but not the bailment of livestock, is included in partial absorption costs.) •Livestock purchase costs (these are treated sepa- rately within the cost of production formulae.) 3 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 •Imputed costs of labour or livestock depreciation (other than actual depreciation associated with the High Priced Livestock Scheme) •The livestock owner may apportion the cost of wages, salary or management fees paid (which are tax-deductible) over all the farming operation on a fair and reasonable basis. This would apply regard- less of whether the payment was made to an indi- vidual, a partner, a shareholder-employee or anyone else. These expenses could be apportioned to the following activities: -activities excluded from partial absorption costs, such as accounting and administration; -other farm enterprises, such as forestry and cropping (see “Allocation of Costs to Non- Livestock Enterprises” below); -specified livestock production Partial absorption costs worked out by excluding the above expenses can be classified as direct production costs, since they don't include the overhead costs of operating a farm business. This net cost represents the minimum cost of producing livestock; it must be included in the total livestock production costs. A livestock owner can also choose to include any or all of the above costs. 4.2Allocating Specific Costs to Livestock Types If any costs included in the partial absorption cost total clearly belong to one group or type of livestock, the taxpayer should allocate these costs directly to that livestock group. Costs such as stud fees for a sheep flock should be assigned directly to the rising one year group of sheep. All pig production costs should be assigned directly to pigs. Allocating these specific costs directly will reduce the total of partial absorption costs which must be shared between the livestock types. Taxpayers should allocate all livestock purchase costs directly to the age group and type of livestock con- cerned. The only exception is the cost of breeding sires, if the taxpayer is using the herd scheme for any live- stock of that type. When a taxpayer is using the herd scheme for a livestock type, s/he must include all breeding sires of that type in the herd scheme unless they are subject to the high-priced livestock scheme. The forms provided by Inland Revenue have specific sections for the costs directly allocated to any livestock type, including the cost of any stock purchases. Show all other costs which are to be included in column one of Form One (Undivided Partial Absorption Costs Form). This form is reproduced at the back of this Appendix. 4.3Allocating Costs to Non-Livestock Enterprises Many farms have enterprises which are not related to livestock farming (e.g., cash cropping and forestry). Although these guidelines allow exclusion of identifi- able costs associated with these enterprises, some of the costs are not separately recorded. These may include vehicle expenses, fertiliser, wages, repairs and mainte- nance, etc. Taxpayers should allocate these costs between the livestock and non livestock enterprises on a fair and reasonable basis. This approach includes allocation based on logbooks and other records, or allocation on an area basis (e.g., where 20 hectares of cash crops are grown on a 100 hectare farm, then 20% of the undi- vided costs may be allocated to cash cropping). Alloca- tion on the basis of gross receipts will not be accepted. Once a taxpayer has settled on an allocation basis, s/he can make an adjustment to the cost categories con- cerned in column three of Form One (reproduced at the back of this Appendix). A taxpayer cannot apportion PAC costs on a crop s/he is producing for consumption by livestock on the farm (e.g., hay, silage, feed grain crops). If a taxpayer is carrying forward feed supplies (other than growing feed crops) to a future income year s/he can apportion the costs of those supplies, providing the supplies are valued in the end of year accounts. 4.4Example of an Undivided Partial Absorption Costing Form One excludes any costs allocated directly to a livestock type, or which are allowed as exclusions from the costings as listed under “Costs to be Taken into Account” above. Taxpayers can record details of adjustments made (including actual exclusions, assign- ment of specific costs, private use adjustments, and the method for allocating costs to non livestock enterprises) on the back of this form. Keeping details of the basis for any allocations will maintain consistency between years, and will help with any questions during an Inland Revenue audit. Taxpayers can expand the expenditure categories on the form to incorporate any other cost items which should be included, and any other additional categories which they wish to include. There is an example of Form One completed for a hypothetical farm on pages 4 and 5. 5.Apportioning Costs between Livestock Types Section 3 of this appendix sets out Guidelines for identifying the costs of producing livestock. •Specific costs associated with particular livestock types should be directly assigned to those types. •Specific costs associated with non-livestock produc- ing enterprises or activities should be removed from the livestock costs. •Costs that arise partly from livestock activities and partly from non-livestock activities should be continued on page 6 4 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Undivided Partial Absorption Costs (Form One) Farm: Example FarmYear Ending: 31 March 1993 Farm ExpensesAmountPrivate UseAllocated toCommentAdjusted PAC (Business only)AdjustmentLivestock $Y/N%$ Wages10,000N85Crop and Forest 15%8,500 Managerial salary5,000N502,500 Animal health2,100N1002,100 Breeding (general)100N100100 Electricity1,200Y90Crop 10%1,080 Feed purchased2,000N1002,000 Hay making400N100400 Silage making3,000N1003,000 Feed crops grownN0 Fertilser9,500N90Crop 10%8,550 Lime200N100All pastoral200 Seeds400N100Crops excluded400 Freight inwards800N100Estimated800 Weed and pest500N100Excludes crop500 Vehicles4,000Y85Crop and forest 15%3,400 Fuel2,700Y85Crop and forest 15%2,295 Repair.maintenance5,500N85Crop and forest 15%4,675 Administration0N00 Livestock insurance500N100Not split by type500 Depreciation1,400N100Pastoral only1,400 Other: (1)New fence1,400N100Deduction claimed1,400 (2)Scrub clearance600N100Deduction claimed600 (3)Contracts600NForestry Exp.100 (4) (5) (6) Total$51,900$44,500 (PAC) Completed example of Form One. The (PAC) total in the right hand column is the undivided Partial Absorption Costs associated with sheep, cattle, deer and goat enterprises on this farm for this income year. Allocate this (PAC) total between livestock types in Forms Three to Five. 5 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Details of Adjustments to Costs Allocation to Non-Livestock Expenses EnterpriseAdjustmentUse byTotal Farm Use% AllocatedActual Amount BasisEnterprise Cash cropArea30 ha300 ha10 Cash crop seedsActual---$2,100 ForestryArea15 ha300 ha5 Contract hay balingLogbook hours250 hours1,000 hours25 Hay baling wagesActual---$5,000 Managerial salaryAdmin hours250 hours500 hours50 Specific Costs Allocated to Livestock Types SheepCattleDeerGoatsPigs Age Group (Years)0 - 11 +0- -11 +Bobby0 - 11 +0 - 11 +0 - 1 $$$$$$$$$$ Purchase costs7,5001,2004,0001,800------ Animal health---------- Vet fees---700------ Stud and A.I.---------- HP depreciation400--------- Feed---------- Insurance---------- Other 1. 2. 3. 4. Private Use AdjustmentOther Adjustments/Comments Item% Adj$Crop seeds of $1,200 excluded 1.Private car-400Freight inwards estimated at 30% of total 2. Fuel (car)10300Hay baling wages of $5,000 deducted 3. Electricity-800Weed and pest pastoral costs only 4.Crop fertiliser not separated 5.Shearing wages of $3,000 excluded 6.Forestry contract of $500 to be excluded Completed example of the reverse side of Form One. 6 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 apportioned using Form One. This will leave a total undivided cost which is the Partial Absorption Cost of producing livestock - shown as total \[PAC\] on the form. This undivided \[PAC\] must be apportioned between the specific livestock types and age groupings for sheep, cattle, deer, goats and any other livestock owned or grazed for which a livestock unit conversion is available (e.g., horses). The system of apportioning production costs to the different livestock types (sheep, cattle, deer and goats) is based on the equal treatment of these livestock types. The assumption underlying this approach is that specific livestock of these types and ages can be expressed in terms of LSUs. This is the widely accepted method of measuring farm carrying capacities and performance, and overcomes difficulties in comparing different types of livestock. The common definition of a LSU is: One LSU is equivalent to one ewe producing one lamb to weaning age and an average of 5 kg of wool. It has a live weight of about 55kg and, on average, consumes 520 kg of DM per year in achieving its production cycle. Based on this definition of a livestock unit, conversions are made for all other ages, types and classes of speci- fied livestock. See Form Two at the back of this Appen- dix for a full list of these coefficients. 5.1Calculating Livestock Units and Numbers You can use Form Two (reproduced at the back of this Appendix) to calculate the LSU equivalents for live- stock. There is a completed example of this form on pages 8 and 9. The main points of the method are: 1.The layout of the form is important in calculating the number of livestock units associated with growing livestock. 2.You should use the preset livestock unit coefficients unless you have a good case for adopting different indices (These are detailed on the third page of Form Two at the back of this Appendix). 3.Taxpayers do not have to assign livestock units to purchased livestock except in such circumstances where this treatment seriously distorts the allocation of costs between livestock types. However, taxpay- ers may allocate a proportion of the full livestock unit coefficient according to the time they keep purchased livestock on the farm in an income year. 4.There is a livestock unit coefficient for dairy-bred bobby calves which are purchased and reared. This coefficient accounts for the period between purchase and weaning, after which there is no further allocation required (this is consistent with the treatment of other purchased livestock). Taxpayers must include dairy bred bobby calves that they purchase in the beef cattle section of Form Two. 5.Taxpayers may assign livestock units to non- specified livestock carried on the farm (e.g., horses). Any livestock which is grazed but not owned should also be included, with an adjustment to livestock units to account for the proportion of the year they were on the farm. 6.Homebred rising one year stock are counted on a survival to sale basis. 7.For each specified livestock type included in Form Two, the totals calculated represent the following: Total \[A\]is the number of rising one year stock which passed through the farm that year. Total \[B\]is the number of growing livestock older than one year, plus other adult stock purchases which passed through the farm that year (total \[BB\] is a separate total for rising three year male non-breeding beef cattle) Total \[C\]is the total LSUs associated with rising one year stock in that year. Total \[D\]is the total LSUs associated with growing livestock older than one year in that year. (Total \[DD\] is a separate total for rising three year male non-breeding beef cattle) Total \[E\]is the total LSUs carried on the farm in that year. These are the important indices used to allocate the undivided \[PAC\] between livestock types and age groups for that income year. 8.All livestock that a taxpayer owns (except livestock subject to bailment, lease or a share-farming agree- ment) must be included whether or not they have been grazed on or off the farm. 9.Male non-breeding cattle in the rising three year and older class carried on dairy farms must be accounted for as beef cattle. 10.Where a taxpayer purchases nurse cows during the year for rearing bobby calves, these are to be entered under the beef cattle section with a LSU co-efficient of 4.0. 5.2Breeding Sires - Treatment under Self Assessed Cost As mentioned in section 4.2 above, where a taxpayer values some livestock of any type under the Herd Scheme (section 86D of the Act), then s/he must account for all breeding sires of that livestock type under the Herd Scheme at the end of that income year (unless they are subject to the high-priced livestock scheme). This means that the taxpayer must exclude the cost of any breeding sires purchased in that income year from the Self Assessed Cost calculations. This rule from page 3 7 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 prevents double counting the cost of sires under this scheme where a taxpayer intended to value them under the Herd Scheme anyway. The number of sires pur- chased must also be excluded from the calculation (Form Two). This treatment applies to each livestock type separately. 5.3High Priced Livestock - Exclusion If a taxpayer buys any livestock which must be valued under the provisions of the High Priced Stock Scheme (section 86I of the Act), s/he must exclude them from the Self Assessed Cost calculations in the year of purchase. Both their number and their cost price must be excluded. Any specified writedown (depreciation) arising in any year from livestock valued on the High Priced Stock Scheme will be allocated as a cost of production to the rising one year group of livestock of that type. 5.4Transfer of High Priced Stock to Self Assessed Cost Under the provisions of the High Priced Stock Scheme, an animal is depreciated until its book value is equal to or less than the herd value (National Average Market Value under section 86G of the Act). In the year in which an animal's written down value will reach NAMV, the taxpayer should stop accounting for it under the high priced stock scheme. If the taxpayer still owns the animal at the end of the income year, s/he should account for it under the Herd Scheme if s/he is using that scheme for any other livestock of that type. If the taxpayer is not using the Herd Scheme for that livestock type, and all of the animals older than one year of that type are being valued under Self Assessed Cost, then the taxpayer should account for the animal under this option. The animal must be included as a normal purchase in the calculation at a deemed cost equal to the NAMV for its age class in the income year concerned. This treatment will allow the full writedown from the High Priced Stock Scheme to the SAC cost for that year. 5.5Dual Product Multipliers The calculations include allowances to exclude the cost of producing wool, fibre, milk and velvet. These allowances are called dual product multipliers. The rates are: ProductDual Product Multiplier Sheep’s wool 0.7 South Island Merino) Sheep’s Wool 0.8 (all other types) Goat fibre0.9 Dairy goat and sheep 0.67 milk Deer velvet0.98 Dairy cow milkSee calculation in next column All other stock1.0 The dual product multiplier for dairy cattle is calculated separately using actual figures for the farm concerned. All of the necessary figures will already be entered in the dairy section of Form Two. Follow the steps in the formula on Form Three to complete the calculation. The following table is an example of the dairy dual product multiplier for an example farm. Dual Product Multiplier - Dairy Cattle Use the following indices and formulae to calculate the Dual Product Multiplier for dairy cattle. The dairy cat- tle section of Form Two contains all the indices. a = no. of homebred calves weaned70 b = average LSU per cow bred from6.5 c = opening number of rising 1 yr heifers40 d = opening number of rising 1 yr male cattle5 e = opening number of breeding cows180 f = opening number of breeding bulls1 Complete the following calculations 1.a x ( b + 0.5 ) = \[L\] 2 70 x ( 6.5 + 0.5 ) = \[L\]= 262.5 2 2.(c x 4.3) + (d x 4.7)= \[M\] (40 x 4.3) + (5 x 4.7)= \[M\]= 195.5 3.(e - a) x b= \[N\] (180 - 70) x 6.5= \[N\]= 715 4. ( a x b ) + (f x 6)= \[Q\] 2 ( 70 x 6.5 ) + (1 x 6)= \[Q\]= 233.5 2 Dual Product Multiplier = \[L\] + \[M\] = \[K\] \[L\] + \[M\] + \[N\] + \[Q\] 262.5 + 195.5 = \[K\]= 0.326 262.5 + 195.5 + 715 + 233.5 This multiplier applies to both rising one year and two year stock, and fully accounts for bobby calves sold. All multipliers are calculated on a weight of production basis, and should be used as stated. There is no dual product multiplier for dairy bred bobby calves which are purchased. The dual product multipliers for dairy cows and dairy goats or sheep apply to the rising one and two year groups of these livestock. 5.6Allocation of Undivided \[PAC\] Use the following formula to allocate the undivided PAC between livestock types and age groups. This formula is included in Forms Three to Five, which continued on page 10 8 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Stock Numbers and Livestock Unit Co-Efficients (Form Two) (Note: LSUs may be assigned to purchased stock at the taxpayer’s option) Farm:Year Ending: SheepNo.LSU/headTotal LSUGroup LSU Lambs homebred (S/S)2,000x 0.18 =360 Lambs purchased300x 0 =0 Total lambs2,300\[A\]2,360\[C\] Breeding Stock2,000x 1.00 =2,000 Hoggets (opening)600x 0.70 =420 2 Tooths purchased0x 0 =0420\[D\] Other adults pirchased100x 0 =0 Total Intake700\[B\] Non-breeding Adults (opening)100x 0.70 =70 Total Sheep LSUs2,850 Deer (Breed:)No.LSU/headTotal LSUGroup LSU (Insert LSU co-efficients associated with the breed) Fawns homebred (S/S)x = Fawns purchasedx 0 = Total fawns\[A\]\[C\] Breeding Stockx = Rising 1 yr (opening)x = Rising 2 yr purchasesx 0 =\[D\] Other adults purchasedx 0 = \[B\] Non-breeding adults (opening)x = Total Deer LSUs Beef Cattle and Bobby Calves PurchasedNo.LSU/headTotal LSUGroup LSU Calves homebred (S/S)90x 0.5 =45 Bobby calves purchased0x 0.5 =0 Weaners purchased10x 0 =0 Total calves100\[A\]645\[C\] Breeding stock100x 6.0 =600 Nurse cows purchased0x 4.0 =0 Rising 1 yr heifers (opening)20x 4.3 =86 Rising 1 yr males (opening)30x 4.7 =141227\[D\] Rising 1 yr olds purchased3x 0 =0 Other adults purchased2x 0 =0 Total intake55\[B\] Rising 2 yr males (opening)0x 5.0 =0 Rising 3 yr males purchased0x 0 =00\[DD\] Total rising 3 yr0\[BB\] Other beef cattle (opening)x 5.0 = Total Beef Cattle LSUs Completed example of the front of Form Two 9 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Dairy CattleNo.LSU/headTotal LSUGroup LSU Calves homebred (S/S)x 0 = Waners purchasedx 0 = Total calves\[A\]\[C\] Fresian cowsx 7.0 = Jersey cowsx 6.0 = Breeding bullsx 6.0 = Rising 1 yr heifers (opening)x 4.3 = Rising 1 yr males (opening)x 4.7 =\[D\] Rising 2 yr olds purchasedx 0 = Other adults purchasedx 0 = Total Intake\[B\] Other dairy cattle (opening)x 5.0 = Total Dairy Cattle LSUs \* Exclude bobby calves sold Goats (All purposes)No.LSU/headTotal LSUGroup LSU Kids homebred (S/S)x 0.1 = Kids purchasedx 0 =\[C\] Total Kids\[A\] Breeding Stock Dairy Goatsx 1.8 = Other Goatsx 0.7 = Hoggets (opening)x 0.5 = Rising 1-2 yr purchasesx 0 =\[D\] Other adults purchsedx 0 = Total intake\[B\] Non=breeding adults (opening)x 0.6 = Total Goat LSUs Livestock grazed but not owned, andNo.LSU/headProportion ofTotal LSU non-specified livestock (e.g. horses)(specify)Year on Farm Type and Age: MA Horses6x6.0x100%=36 Hoggets (grazed)100x0.7x20%=14 xx= Total Other LSUs50 Total LSUs on Farm Total Sheep LSUs2,850 Total Deer LSUs0 Total Beef LSUs872 Total Dairy LSUs0 Total Goat LSUs0 Total Other LSUs50 3,772\[E\] Completed example of the back of Form Two 10 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 calculate the average cost per head for each age grouping and livestock type. All these forms are reproduced at the back of this Appendix. \[PAC\] x \[C\] \[E\] x \[K\] = amount allocated Where: \[PAC\]is the total of the undivided costs of livestock production calculated on Form One; \[C\]is the LSU total for rising one year group of a livestock type as calculated on Form Two (This variable is \[D\] and \[DD\] for older age groupings); \[E\]is the total LSUs carried on the farm in that income year as calculated on Form Two. \[K\]is the dual product multiplier. This formula is part of the final step in calculating the average cost per head for an income year. There are examples of its use in the following section of this Appendix. 6.Calculating the Average Cost Per Head Calculating the average cost per head is the final step in the Self Assessed Cost calculation. This calculation involves the following: 1.Share of undivided \[PAC\] adjusted by the dual product multiplier; plus 2.Specific costs allocated to that age grouping of livestock adjusted by the dual product multiplier; plus 3.Purchase costs of any stock bought for that age grouping of livestock; plus 4.Opening book value growing livestock in the age groupings older than the rising one year group; divided by 5.The number of animals in that age grouping which passed through the farm in that income year as calculated on Form Two. There are two examples of this calculation on pages 12 and 13, which are based on the data in the examples on pages 4 and 5 (representing Form One) and pages 8 and 9 (representing Form Two). These examples are for rising one year and the maturing age groupings of sheep. These calculations are the same as those for other livestock types, including the special group of rising 3 year old male, non-breeding beef cattle. The forms to use in these calculations are: Form Three:Rising one year group for sheep, cattle, deer and goats. Form Four:Maturing age grouping all livestock types for sheep, cattle, deer and goats. Form Five:Rising 3 year old grouping of male non- breeding cattle. All these forms are reproduced at the back of this Appendix. The examples on pages 12 and 13 calculate (hypotheti- cal) average costs per head of: rising one year sheep$13.08/head maturing groups of sheep$19.94/head These are the costs which would be used to value those age groupings of stock on hand at the end of the income year. The same calculations are made using the appro- priate forms for each of the other livestock types and age groupings owned. Dairy cattle and beef cattle must be calculated separately. 7.Splitting Age Groupings into Separate Inventories The age groupings contained in these guidelines are the minimum requirements. Taxpayers may increase the number of groupings they use. Farmers who have substantial livestock trading policies may wish to do this, particularly if they buy and sell any stock in the same year, or if they buy growing male cattle. Farmers may also wish to separate adult wether flocks from their adult ewe flocks. We have not prepared any special forms for this separation of inventory groups. Instead, farmers can make this calculation on Forms Two to Five simply by filing in extra copies of the same forms. For example, a farmer may wish to separate stock destined for breeding purposes from true trading stock, and identify them separately as stock on hand at the end of the income year. The livestock unit Form Two would have the sheep section filled in twice: •Once for the stock in each age grouping which are destined for breeding purposes; and •Once for the true trading stock in each age grouping. Then, the farmer would complete two copies of Form Three, with specific costs and purchases assigned to the appropriate groups. 8.Inventory Requirements If a farmer is going to value mature livestock of mixed ages and years of intake under Self Assessed Cost (or National Standard Cost), s/he must use an inventory control system. The minimum requirement is the average cost inventory system (described in this section), but farmers can use more sophisticated inventory systems. Such systems include FIFO (First In, First Out), and full livestock tracing. The usual guide- lines for these inventory systems should be applied for livestock valued at cost. 8.1Average Cost Inventory System This system simply calculates an average closing cost for all the mature mixed age livestock valued at cost. from page 7 11 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 The method of calculation is described in formula form as follows: Average Cost = ((a - b) x c) + ((e - (a - b)) x d) (per head)e Where: ais the opening number of mature livestock; bis the sales and deaths of mature livestock during the income year; cis the average cost of livestock calculated for the previous year; dis the average cost of this year’s intake of maturing livestock (1-2year age group except for fattening male cattle); eis the closing number of mature livestock. The formula averages the cost of surviving inventory livestock at the end of the income year with that year’s new intake of livestock. The following example demonstrates this procedure. The opening number of mature sheep is 4,000, at an average cost of $20. During the year, 1,000 are sold or die. The closing number of mature sheep is also 4,000, and the calcu- lated cost of the new year’s intake is $24 per head. The averaging method takes the 3,000 surviving inventory at the end of the year, and averages their cost with the 1,000 sheep entering the flock that year. Using the formula, the calculation is: Average=((4,000 - 1,000) x $20) + ((4,000 - 1,000)) x 24) Cost4,000 =(3,000 x $20) + (1,000 x 24) 4,000 =84,000 4,000 =$21 per head This average cost of $21 per head is then used to value all of the mixed age sheep on hand at closing balance date in that income year. Farmers can apply this average cost on a class-by-class basis (the same average cost for each class), or they can apply it to the whole of that inventory as a single group. A simpler layout of this same calculation is: Surviving number (opening number less sales and deaths: 4,000 - 1,000)=3,000 Total value of surviving number (3,000 @ $20)=$60,000 New intake this year (4,000 - 3,000)=1,000 Total value of new intake (1,000 @ $24)=$24,000 Total Closing value=$84,000 Average cost per head ($84,000/4,000 sheep)=$21 This example shows how to calculate stock values using the average cost inventory system. This is the minimum standard of inventory system for use with either Self Assessed Cost or National Standard Cost. Farmers may change the inventory system they use without advising Inland Revenue, providing they follow the normal consistency rules that generally apply to inventory systems. 8.2Opening Inventory Costs in First Year of SAC (or NSC) Use When a farmer changes from any other option to Self Assessed Cost (or National Standard Cost), his/her opening inventory values in the year of change will be deemed to be the closing values of those livestock in the previous year. If the farmer uses the average cost inventory system, s/he must calculate an average opening cost per head. If s/he uses a FIFO type system, s/he should phase out the opening values over a period of years in this order: 1.Breeding sires; 2.Mixed age male non-breeding stock; 3.Oldest female age classes in order. 9.Using SAC in Association with other Valuation Options The following rules relate to the use of Self Assessed Cost (SAC) in association with other valuation options. These rules are contained in the appropriate sections of the Income Tax Act. 1.If a farmer uses SAC, s/he cannot use National Standard Cost (NSC) in that business in the same income year. 2.A farmer must notify Inland Revenue two income years before changing valuation options between SAC and NSC (section 85A of the Act). 3.A farmer can use SAC in association with the herd scheme, market value or replacement price. Where s/he uses market value or replacement price, she must use it to value a complete inventory age grouping, for any livestock type for which the option is to be used. 4.Whenever a farmer uses SAC as an option for any livestock, s/he must make the calculation according to these guidelines on a whole farm basis. S/he must then use the average cost per head thus calculated to value those stock on hand at the end of the income year which are to be valued under the SAC option. 5.Where a farmer is using SAC in association with the herd scheme, s/he must include all breeding sires of that type of livestock in the herd scheme, and completely exclude any purchase costs of those breeding sires from the SAC calculation. 10.Sharemilking Arrangements In agreements in which the sharemilker does not own the milking herd, the livestock owner will calculate SAC for livestock as if the share of the milk proceeds paid to the sharemilker were wages. Thus, the remuneration that the sharemilker receives would be included as wages in the partial absorption costs continued on page 14 12 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Costs to Rising One Year - All Livestock Types (Form Three) Farm:Example FarmYear Ending: 31/3/93 Livestock Type:Sheep (Not Merino Breed) Use the following formula to calculte the cost per head of rising one year livestock of this type. Enter actual figures in place of the variables, and make the calculation accordingly. Total Cost for Livestock Type $44,500 \[PAC\] x 2,360 \[C\] x0.8\[K\]=$22,274 \[E\] 3,772 PlusSpecific costs allocated to this group: $ 400x0.8\[K\]=$320 PlusCost of rising one year purchases=$7,500 Total Cost of all rising one year livestock=$30,094\[G\] Average Cost per Head $30,094 Total Cost \[G\] above =$13.08per head \[A\] 2,300 Variables and Multipliers \[PAC\]is the total undivided cost from Form One \[C\]is the stock unit total from Form Two \[E\]is the total farm stock units from Form Two \[K\]is the dual product multiplier, which is: 0.70 for South Island merino sheep 0.80 for all other sheep 0.67 for rising one year dairy bred goats 0.90 for fibre goats 0.98 for deer (red, wapiti, elk and related crossbreeds) see the calculation below for dairy cattle 1.00 for all other types and age groupings \[A\]is the stock number total from Form Two Dual Product Multiplier for Dairy Cattle Use the followung indices and formulae to calculate the dual produce multiplier for dairy cattle. All these indices are contained in the dairy cattle section of Form Two. a = the number of homebred calves weaned\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_d = the opening number of rising one year male cattle\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ b = the average LSU per cow bred from\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_e = the opening number of breeding cows\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ c = the opening number of rising one year heifers\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_f = the opening number of breeding bulls\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Complete the following calculations: 1. a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x ( b + 0.5 ) = \[L\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 2 2.(c \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 4.3) + (d \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 4.7)= \[M\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 3.(e \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ - a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ) x b \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_= \[N\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 4. ( a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x b ) + (f \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 6)= \[Q\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 2 Dual Product Multiplier = \[L\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[M\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ = \[K\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \[L\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[M\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[N\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[Q\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Completed example of Form Three 13 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Costs to Rising Two Years - All Livestock Types (Form Four) Farm:Example FarmYear Ending: 31/3/93 Livestock Type:Sheep (not merino breed) Use the following formula to calculte the cost per head of rising one year livestock of this type. Enter actual figures in place of the variables, and make the calculation accordingly. Total Cost for Livestock Type $44,500 \[PAC\] x 420 \[C\] x0.8\[K\]=$4,955 \[E\] 3,772 PlusSpecific costs allocated to this group: $ 0x0.8\[K\]=$0 PlusOpening value of rising 1 year stock=$7,800 PlusCost of rising two year and older purchases=$1,200 Total Cost of all rising two yr and mature livestock=$13,955\[G\] Average Cost per Head $13,955 Total Cost \[G\] above =$19.94per head \[A\] 700 Variables and Multipliers \[PAC\]is the total undivided cost from Form One \[C\]is the stock unit total from Form Two \[E\]is the total farm stock units from Form Two \[K\]is the dual product multiplier, which is: 0.70 for South Island merino sheep 0.80 for all other sheep 0.67 for rising one year dairy bred goats 0.90 for fibre goats 0.98 for deer (red, wapiti, elk and related crossbreeds) see the calculation below for dairy cattle 1.00 for all other types and age groupings \[A\]is the stock number total from Form Two Dual Product Multiplier for Dairy Cattle Use the followung indices and formulae to calculate the dual produce multiplier for dairy cattle. All these indices are contained in the dairy cattle section of Form Two. a = the number of homebred calves weaned\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_d = the opening number of rising one year male cattle\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ b = the average LSU per cow bred from\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_e = the opening number of breeding cows\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ c = the opening number of rising one year heifers\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_f = the opening number of breeding bulls\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Complete the following calculations: 1. a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x ( b + 0.5 ) = \[L\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 2 2.(c \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 4.3) + (d \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 4.7)= \[M\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 3.(e \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ - a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ) x b \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_= \[N\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 4. ( a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x b ) + (f \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 6)= \[Q\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 2 Dual Product Multiplier = \[L\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[M\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ = \[K\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \[L\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[M\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[N\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[Q\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Completed example of Form Four 14 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 associated with producing livestock. The dual product multiplier would account for the proportion of wages paid which was associated with milk production. In agreements in which the sharemilker owns the stock, SAC would be calculated using the partial absorption costs actually incurred by the sharemilker. In agreements in where there is mixed ownership of stock, SAC would be calculated on a whole farm basis incorporating all partial absorption costs incurred by either party to the agreement. If this was not satisfac- tory to either party and the full partial absorption costs were not disclosed, then they could not use SAC. 11.People who may not use Self Assessed Cost These taxpayers may not use Self Assessed Cost: •owners of bailed stock; •owners of leased stock; •non-farming parties to a sharefarming agreement. 12.Feedlot Operations Operators of feedlots who purchase livestock for intensive finishing before sale or slaughter may use average or actual purchase costs of livestock on hand at the end of any income year to value these livestock. No allocation of other costs of production is required, this being consistent with the treatment applied to other livestock purchases within these guidelines. 13.Livestock Valuation Forms The following pages contain the guideline forms for completing the calculation of the costs of livestock production. These forms are: Form NumberTitle OneUndivided Partial Absorption Costs TwoStock Numbers and Livestock Coefficients ThreeCosts to Rising One Year FourCosts to Rising Two Years (Maturing Group) FiveCosts of Rising Three Year Male Non-breeding Beef Cattle from page 11 15 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Undivided Partial Absorption Costs (Form One) Farm:Year Ending: Farm ExpensesAmountPrivate UseAllocated toCommentAdjusted PAC (Business only)AdjustmentLivestock $Y/N%$ Wages Managerial salary Animal health Breeding (general) Electricity Feed purchased Hay making Silage making Feed crops grown Fertilser Lime Seeds Freight inwards Weed and pest Vehicles Fuel Repair.maintenance Administration Livestock insurance Depreciation Other: (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Total (PAC) 16 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Details of Adjustments to Costs Allocation to Non-Livestock Expenses EnterpriseAdjustmentUse byTotal Farm Use% AllocatedActual Amount BasisEnterprise Specific Costs Allocated to Livestock Types SheepCattleDeerGoatsPigs Age Group (Years)0 - 11 +0- -11 +Bobby0 - 11 +0 - 11 +0 - 1 $$$$$$$$$$ Purchase costs Animal health Vet fees Stud and A.I. HP depreciation Feed Insurance Other 1. 2. 3. 4. Private Use AdjustmentOther Adjustments/Comments Item% Adj$ 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 17 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Stock Numbers and Livestock Unit Co-Efficients (Form Two) (Note: LSUs may be assigned to purchased stock at the taxpayer’s option) Farm:Year Ending: SheepNo.LSU/headTotal LSUGroup LSU Lambs homebred (S/S)x 0.18 = Lambs purchasedx 0 = Total lambs\[A\]\[C\] Breeding Stockx 1.00 = Hoggets (opening)x 0.70 = 2 Tooths purchasedx 0 =\[D\] Other adults pirchasedx 0 = Total Intake\[B\] Non-breeding Adults (opening)x 0.70 = Total Sheep LSUs Deer (Breed:)No.LSU/headTotal LSUGroup LSU (Insert LSU co-efficients associated with the breed) Fawns homebred (S/S)x = Fawns purchasedx 0 = Total fawns\[A\]\[C\] Breeding Stockx = Rising 1 yr (opening)x = Rising 2 yr purchasesx 0 =\[D\] Other adults purchasedx 0 = \[B\] Non-breeding adults (opening)x = Total Deer LSUs Beef Cattle and Bobby Calves PurchasedNo.LSU/headTotal LSUGroup LSU Calves homebred (S/S)x 0.5 = Bobby calves purchasedx 0.5 = Weaners purchasedx 0 = Total calves\[A\]\[C\] Breeding stockx 6.0 = Nurse cows purchasedx 4.0 = Rising 1 yr heifers (opening)x 4.3 = Rising 1 yr males (opening)x 4.7 =\[D\] Rising 1 yr olds purchasedx 0 = Other adults purchasedx 0 = Total intake\[B\] Rising 2 yr males (opening)x 5.0 = Rising 3 yr males purchasedx 0 =\[DD\] Total rising 3 yr\[BB\] Other beef cattle (opening)x 5.0 = Total Beef Cattle LSUs 18 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Dairy CattleNo.LSU/headTotal LSUGroup LSU Calves homebred (S/S)x 0 = Waners purchasedx 0 = Total calves\[A\]\[C\] Fresian cowsx 7.0 = Jersey cowsx 6.0 = Breeding bullsx 6.0 = Rising 1 yr heifers (opening)x 4.3 = Rising 1 yr males (opening)x 4.7 =\[D\] Rising 2 yr olds purchasedx 0 = Other adults purchasedx 0 = Total Intake\[B\] Other dairy cattle (opening)x 5.0 = Total Dairy Cattle LSUs \* Exclude bobby calves sold Goats (All purposes)No.LSU/headTotal LSUGroup LSU Kids homebred (S/S)x 0.1 = Kids purchasedx 0 =\[C\] Total Kids\[A\] Breeding Stock Dairy Goatsx 1.8 = Other Goatsx 0.7 = Hoggets (opening)x 0.5 = Rising 1-2 yr purchasesx 0 =\[D\] Other adults purchsedx 0 = Total intake\[B\] Non=breeding adults (opening)x 0.6 = Total Goat LSUs Livestock grazed but not owned, andNo.LSU/headProportion ofTotal LSU non-specified livestock (e.g. horses)(specify)Year on Farm Type and Age: xx= xx= xx= Total Other LSUs Total LSUs on Farm Total Sheep LSUs Total Deer LSUs Total Beef LSUs Total Dairy LSUs Total Goat LSUs Total Other LSUs \[E\] 19 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Livestock Unit Co-Efficients by Livestock Type and Age These are the livestock unit (LSU) co-efficients for all classes of livestock by type and age. You will need to get Inland Revenue approval to depart from these indices. Livestock TypeAge GroupLSU per head SheepHomebred lambs0.18 1 to 2 years0.7 2 years and over (breeding)1.0 2 years and over (non-breeding)0.7 Cattle (Beef)Homebred calves0.5 Purchased bobby calves0.5 1 to 2 years female4.3 1 to 2 years male4.7 2 years and over (breeding)6.0 2 years and over (non-breeding)5.0 Cattle (Dairy) Friesan dairy cows2 years and over (milking)7.0 Jersey dairy cows2 years and over (milking)6.0 Other dairy cattleAll breeds and agesAs for beef cattle DeerRedFallowOther Homebred fawns0.150.100.20 1 to 2 years1.30.82.0 2 years and over (breeding)1.91.03.0 2 years and over (non-breeding)1.91.02.8 Goats (Fibre)Homebred kids0.1 1 to 2 years0.5 2 years and over (breeding)0.7 2 years and over (non-breeding)0.6 Goats (Dairy)2 years and over (milking)1.8 All other dairy-bred goatsAs for fibre goats PigsNo LSU conversion 20 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Costs to Rising One Year - All Livestock Types (Form Three) Farm:Year Ending: Livestock Type: Use the following formula to calculte the cost per head of rising one year livestock of this type. Enter actual figures in place of the variables, and make the calculation accordingly. Total Cost for Livestock Type $44,500 \[PAC\] x 2,360 \[C\] x0.8\[K\]=$22,274 \[E\] 3,772 PlusSpecific costs allocated to this group: $x0.8\[K\]=$ PlusCost of rising one year purchases=$ Total Cost of all rising one year livestock=$\[G\] Average Cost per Head $30,094 Total Cost \[G\] above =$per head \[A\] 2,300 Variables and Multipliers \[PAC\]is the total undivided cost from Form One \[C\]is the stock unit total from Form Two \[E\]is the total farm stock units from Form Two \[K\]is the dual product multiplier, which is: 0.70 for South Island merino sheep 0.80 for all other sheep 0.67 for rising one year dairy bred goats 0.90 for fibre goats 0.98 for deer (red, wapiti, elk and related crossbreeds) see the calculation below for dairy cattle 1.00 for all other types and age groupings \[A\]is the stock number total from Form Two Dual Product Multiplier for Dairy Cattle Use the followung indices and formulae to calculate the dual produce multiplier for dairy cattle. All these indices are contained in the dairy cattle section of Form Two. a = the number of homebred calves weaned\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_d = the opening number of rising one year male cattle\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ b = the average LSU per cow bred from\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_e = the opening number of breeding cows\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ c = the opening number of rising one year heifers\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_f = the opening number of breeding bulls\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Complete the following calculations: 1. a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x ( b + 0.5 ) = \[L\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 2 2.(c \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 4.3) + (d \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 4.7)= \[M\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 3.(e \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ - a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ) x b \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_= \[N\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 4. ( a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x b ) + (f \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 6)= \[Q\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 2 Dual Product Multiplier = \[L\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[M\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ = \[K\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \[L\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[M\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[N\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[Q\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 21 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Costs to Rising Two Years - All Livestock Types (Form Four) Farm:Year Ending: Livestock Type: Use the following formula to calculte the cost per head of rising one year livestock of this type. Enter actual figures in place of the variables, and make the calculation accordingly. Total Cost for Livestock Type $44,500 \[PAC\] x 420 \[C\] x0.8\[K\]=$ \[E\] 3,772 PlusSpecific costs allocated to this group: $x\[K\]=$ PlusOpening value of rising 1 year stock=$ PlusCost of rising two year and older purchases=$ Total Cost of all rising two yr and mature livestock=$\[G\] Average Cost per Head $13,955 Total Cost \[G\] above =$per head \[A\] 700 Variables and Multipliers \[PAC\]is the total undivided cost from Form One \[C\]is the stock unit total from Form Two \[E\]is the total farm stock units from Form Two \[K\]is the dual product multiplier, which is: 0.70 for South Island merino sheep 0.80 for all other sheep 0.67 for rising one year dairy bred goats 0.90 for fibre goats 0.98 for deer (red, wapiti, elk and related crossbreeds) see the calculation below for dairy cattle 1.00 for all other types and age groupings \[A\]is the stock number total from Form Two Dual Product Multiplier for Dairy Cattle Use the followung indices and formulae to calculate the dual produce multiplier for dairy cattle. All these indices are contained in the dairy cattle section of Form Two. a = the number of homebred calves weaned\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_d = the opening number of rising one year male cattle\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ b = the average LSU per cow bred from\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_e = the opening number of breeding cows\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ c = the opening number of rising one year heifers\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_f = the opening number of breeding bulls\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Complete the following calculations: 1. a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x ( b + 0.5 ) = \[L\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 2 2.(c \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 4.3) + (d \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 4.7)= \[M\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 3.(e \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ - a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ) x b \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_= \[N\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 4. ( a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x b ) + (f \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ x 6)= \[Q\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 2 Dual Product Multiplier = \[L\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[M\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ = \[K\]\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \[L\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[M\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[N\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_+\[Q\] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 22 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Costs of Rising Three Year Male Non-Breeding Beef Cattle (Form Five) Farm:Year Ending: Use the following formula to calculte the cost per head of rising three year male non-breeding cattle. Enter actual figures in place of the variables, and make the calculation accordingly. Total Cost for Livestock Type $44,500 \[PAC\] x 420 \[C\] x0.8\[K\]=$ \[E\] 3,772 PlusSpecific costs allocated to this group: $x\[K\]=$ PlusOpening value of rising two year male=$ non-breeding beef cattle PlusCost of rising three year and older male=$ non-breeding beef cattle Total Cost of all rising three year male beef cattle=$\[G\] Average Cost per Head $13,955 Total Cost \[G\] above =$per head \[BB\] 700 Variables and Multipliers \[PAC\]is the total undivided cost from Form One \[DD\]is the stock unit total from Form Two \[E\]is the total farm stock units from Form Two \[BB\]is the stock number total from Form Two 23 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Determination G5B: Mandatory Conversion Convertible Notes This determination may be cited as “Determination G5B: Mandatory Conversion Convertible Notes”. 1 Explanation (which does not form part of this determination) (1)This determination replaces Determination G5A: Mandatory Conversion Convertible Notes for notes entered into on, or after, the date of publication of this determination in the Gazette. (2)A Mandatory Conversion Convertible Note is a financial arrangement in which the holder of the Note provides money to a company, and the debt is discharged at a future date by the issue of shares (or stock) in that company only. Interest may be payable for the period between the issue of the Note and conversion into shares. Such payments are called Coupon Interest payments. (3)As a share is an excepted financial arrangement under section 64B of the Act, only the coupon interest payments and amounts attributed to those payments by this determination are regarded as income or expenditure for the purposes of calculat- ing accrual income or expenditure. (4)Determination G5B prescribes the method to be used when calculating for accrual purposes the income derived or expenditure incurred in respect of a Mandatory Conversion Convertible Note. It also details which amounts are to be included for this calculation, and which are attributable to an ex- cepted financial arrangement. (5)Determination G5B differs from Determination G5A by providing a method for allocating coupon interest payments between seller and purchaser when a Note is sold part way through an interest period. The seller is to calculate interest that accrues before the date of sale (on a straight-line basis) and that amount is treated as the buyer’s acquisition price. 2 Reference This determination is made pursuant to section 64E(1)(b) and (e) section 64E(6) of the Income Tax Act 1976. 3 Scope of Determination Except where its application is specifically excluded in another determination, Determination G5B applies to every Mandatory Conversion Convertible Note which: (1)is entered into on, or after, the date of publication in the Gazette (however, it does not apply to notes which are issued pursuant to a binding contract entered into before the date of publication), and (2)meets the following criteria: (a)conversion into shares of a company is at a predetermined ratio; and (b)coupon interest payments, if any, are payable at regular intervals of not more than 12 months; and (c)coupon interest payments are of equal amount, or are set in relation to a market interest rate indicator (if this condition is not satisfied because of the issue date or conversion date of the Note, but the rate at which the payment is calculated is consistent with the other coupon interest payments required under the Note, this determination shall apply as if the condition were met); and (d)at the date of issue of the Note, the market value of the underlying shares amounts to at least 80% of the acquisition price of the Note; and (e)the Note is not part of another financial arrange- ment. 4 Principle (1)A Mandatory Conversion Convertible Note has both debt and equity components. It can be regarded alternatively as: (a)a loan to a company with repayment in shares (debt component); or (b)a forward purchase of shares (in which case the holder of the Note is buying a share of a business and has equity in it). The accruals regime is not intended to deal with equity, and therefore classifies a share (equity in a business) as an excepted financial arrangement (see section 64B). (2)As a Mandatory Conversion Convertible Note has this dual character, when calculating income/ expenditure in relation to the Note it is first neces- sary to separate the debt and equity components of the Note. (3)This determination specifies that, apart from the coupon interest payments and amounts attributed to those payments by this determination, all amounts relate to the underlying shares (equity component), and will not be dealt with under the accruals regime (sections 64B to 64M) when calculating assessable income. (4)Income and expenditure in respect of the Note is calculated by pro-rata daily apportionment of the coupon interest payment to income years. (5)For the purposes of this determination it is assumed that any change in the market value of the shares Appendix B - Accrual Determinations continued on page 24 24 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 (3)For convenience, words and phrases defined in this determination are indicated by initial capital letters, but the absence of a capital letter shall not alone imply that the word or phrase is used with a mean- ing different from that given by its definition. 6 Method (1)Amounts to be included when calculating income or expenditure with regard to a Mandatory Conversion Convertible Note: (a)In respect of income, gain or loss, or expendi- ture, and also of any other consideration receiv- able by the holder or payable by the issuer, the amounts taken into account to calculate income/expenditure consist of: (i)coupon interest payments; (ii)amounts attributed to coupon interest pay- ments as set out in subclause 6(3). (b)In respect of the acquisition price, the amounts to be included when calculating income/expendi- ture are those attributed to coupon interest payments as set out in subclause 6(4). (2)The income derived or expenditure incurred in respect of a Mandatory Conversion Convertible Note shall be calculated by daily apportionment of the coupon interest payments to income years. For the method, see Determination G1A: Apportionment of Daily Income and Expenditure. (3)If a Mandatory Conversion Convertible Note on which interest is payable is sold part way through an interest period, then it is necessary to apportion the coupon interest payment between the seller and the purchaser. The seller is allocated interest, on a daily straight line basis, that accrues before the date of sale. (See Example C). Note: If the coupon interest payment is not known until after the date of sale, it shall be assumed to be equal to the coupon interest payment for the previ- ous period (adjusted for any difference in the length of the period). (4)The portion of the sale price thus attributed to accrued interest and allocated to the seller is, in turn, treated as the purchaser’s acquisition price of the financial arrangement. If the purchaser later receives the coupon interest payment for the sale period, then this acquisition price may be immedi- ately offset against the amount received when calculating the amount of income derived from the financial arrangement in that year. (See Example C). 7 Example Example A On 13 September 1987 a convertible Note is issued for $100 with an interest coupon of 12% payable half- between the issue date of the Note and the conver- sion into shares is due to the equity component. Therefore the difference in share price can be ignored when calculating income and expenditure. 5 Interpretation In this determination, unless the context otherwise requires: (1)Expressions used, except the expression “income year”, have the same meaning as in section 2 and section 64B of the Income Tax Act 1976. (a)The “Act” means the Income Tax Act 1976. (b)“Coupon Interest Payment” means any amount payable on the Note by the Note issuer (bor- rower) to the Note holder (lender) other than payments relating to the redemption or conver- sion of the Note. (c)“Income Year” (i)When a taxpayer furnishes a return of income under section 15 of the Act for an accounting year ending with a balance date other than the 31st day of March, “income year” means the period of twelve months ending on that balance date. (ii)For any other person, “income year” means the year ending 31 March in which the income has been derived or expenditure has been incurred by that person. (d)“Mandatory Conversion Convertible Note”, or “Note” means any debenture, bond, certificate, document, Note or writing issued or given by a company: (i)which provides evidence that the company is indebted to the holder of the Note, whether for a loan to the company, money subscribed to the company or any other liability of the company (whether or not the amount for which the company has issued the Note is secured over the undertaking or any of the assets of the company); and (ii)which provides for the debt to be discharged only by the issue of shares in the capital of the company. This may be pursuant to a trust deed. (e)“Underlying Shares” in relation to a Note means the shares or stock into which the Note is convertible, or in which it may be redeemed or paid. (2)A determination to which Determination G5B refers may be changed or rescinded by a new determina- tion made by the Commissioner. In such a case, a reference to the old determination is taken to be extended to the new determination. from page 23 25 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 yearly in arrears. The Note is mandatorily convertible on 13th September 1988 to 10 shares in the issuing company. The market value of each share at issue date is $9.00. By conversion date this has risen to $15.00. Both the issuer and the holder use a 31 March balance date and apply Determination G1A on a 365 day basis when apportioning daily income and expenditure. The coupon interest payments are made as follows: 13 March 1988$6.00 13 September 1988$6.00 (a) Year ended 31 March 1988 Coupon payment 13/3/88$6.00 Apportionment of coupon payment due on 13/9/88 (There are 18 days between 13 March and 31 March 1988, and 184 days between 13 March and 13 Sep- tember 1988) 18/184 x $6.00$0.59 Income/Expenditure$6.59 (b) Year ended 31 March 1989 As the Note matures in this year the base price adjust- ment (section 64F of the Act) is required. The formula a - (b + c) is applied: a = the sum of all amounts paid ($12.00) b = acquisition price c = income/expenditure in previous years ($6.59) As all amounts other than the coupon payments are attributable to the underlying shares, the issue price and sharemarket value can be ignored for the purposes of calculating income and expenditure. This effectively gives the Note an acquisition price of nil (for accrual purposes). Therefore, in this example “b” has a value of zero. Income/Expenditure= a - (b + c) = $12.00 - (0 + $6.59) = $5.41 Example B On 13 November 1992 a convertible Note is issued for $100 with an interest coupon of 10% payable half- yearly in arrears, with the exception of the first period which is 5 months. The Note is mandatorily convertible on 13th October 1994 to 10 shares in the issuing company. The market value of each share at issue date is $9.00. By conversion date this has risen to $15.00. Both the issuer and the holder use a 31 March balance date and apply Determination G1A on a 365 day basis when apportioning daily income and expenditure. The coupon interest payments are made as follows: 13 April 1992$4.15 13 October 1992$5.00 13 April 1993$5.00 13 October 1993$5.00 (a) Year ended 31 March 1993 Apportionment of coupon payment due on 13/4/93 There are a total of 151 days in the first period. Of these, 138 are in the year ended 31 March 1993 138/151 x $4.15$3.79 Income/Expenditure$3.79 (b) Year ended 31 March 1994 Apportionment of Coupon Payment due on 13/4/93 There are a total of 151 days in the first period. Of these, 13 are in the year ended 31 March 1994 13/151 x $4.15$0.36 Coupon Payment due on 13/10/93$5.00 Apportionment of coupon payment due on 13/4/94 There are a total of 182 days in the period between payments. Of these, 169 are in the year ended 31 March 1994 169/182 x $5.00$4.64 Income/Expenditure$10.00 (c) Year ended 31 March 1995 As the Note matures in this year the base price adjust- ment (section 64F of the Act) is required. The formula a - (b + c) is applied: a = sum of all amounts paid ($19.15) b = acquisition price c = income/expenditure in previous years ($13.79) As all amounts other than the coupon payments are attributable to the underlying shares, the price and share market values can be ignored for the purposes of calculating income and expenditure. This effectively gives the Note an acquisition price of nil (for accrual purposes), hence in this example “b” has a value of zero. Income/Expenditure= a - (b + c) = $19.15 - (0 + 13.79) = $5.36 Example C The original holder of the Note described in Example B sells the Note on 20 December 1992, for $120, to a new holder who holds the Note to maturity. The sale of the Note takes place part way through an interest period, so it is necessary to apportion the coupon interest payment between the seller and the purchaser. The coupon interest payment for this period amounts to $4.15. Using a straight-line apportionment, $1.01 of the $4.15 is attributable to that portion of the period ending continued on page 26 26 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 138/151 x $4.15$3.79 From this, the holder can subtract the acquisition price$1.01 Income/Expenditure$2.78 (b) Year ended 31 March 1993 As for Example B Income$10.00 (c) Year ended 31 March 1994 As the Note matures in this year the base price adjust- ment (section 64F of the Act) is required. The formula a - (b + c) is applied: a = the sum of all amounts paid ($19.15) b = acquisition price ($1.01) c = income/expenditure in previous years ($12.78) Income/Expenditure= a - (b + c) = $19.15 - ($1.01 + $12.78) = $5.36 This determination is signed by me on the 22nd day of January in the year 1993. R D Adair Deputy Commissioner of Inland Revenue from page 25 20 December 1992 during which the Note is owned by the original holder. ($4.15 x 37/151. There are 151 days in the coupon period, and there are 37 days from the beginning of the period until the day that the Note is sold.) This amount of $1.01 is income to the original holder and acquisition price to the new holder. The original holder would be considered to have sold the equity portion of the convertible Note for $118.99. (a) Income for the Original Holder: Year ended 31 March 1993 Since this is the “final Year” of the arrangement from the point of view of the original holder, the base price adjustment is applied, using the following values: a = the sum of all amounts paid ($1.01) b = acquisition price c = income/expenditure in previous years ($0) Income= a - (b + c) = $1.01 - (0 + 0) = $1.01 (b) Income for the New Holder: Year ended 31 March 1993 Apportionment of coupon payment 13/4/93 There are a total of 151 days in the first period. Of these, 138 are in the year ended 31 March 1993 27 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Determination G7C: Futures and Options Markets This determination may be cited as “Determination G7C: Futures and Options Markets”. 1 Explanation (which does not form part of the determination) (1)This determination rescinds and replaces Determina- tion G7B: New Zealand Futures and Options Markets and Determination G18: International Futures and Option Markets, both of which were made by the Commissioner on 4 December 1989. This determination differs from Determinations G7B and G18 by amalgamating the two, updating the terminology used in relation to the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange and members thereof, adding to the list of approved markets on that exchange and to the list of approved overseas futures and options markets, modifying the ap- proved sources of information in respect of those overseas markets and substituting more relevant and up-to-date examples. (2)This determination applies where, for the purpose of calculating the income or expenditure of a person in respect of a Futures Contract or Option Contract, it is necessary to determine the price of that contract. (3)This determination sets out the approved markets, sources of information, and method, used for determining the prices for Futures Contracts and Option Contracts that are either traded on the New Zealand Futures Exchange or denominated in a foreign currency. It does not apply in relation to Option Contracts in respect of shares, as such contracts are “excepted financial arrangements” (as defined in subsection 64B(1) of the Act) and are not subject to the accrual provisions. 2 Reference (1)This determination is made pursuant to Subsections 64E(1) and (6) of the Income Tax Act 1976. (2)This determination rescinds and replaces Determina- tion G7B: New Zealand Futures and Options Markets and Determination G18: International Futures and Option Markets, both of which were made on 4 December 1989. 3 Scope of Determination This determination applies where, for the purpose of calculating the income or expenditure of a person in respect of a Futures Contract or Option Contract, it is necessary to determine the price of that contract. It does not apply in relation to Option Contracts in respect of shares, as such contracts are “excepted financial arrangements” (as defined in subsection 64B(1) of the Act) and are not subject to the accrual provisions. It does, however, apply to options relating to share price indices (such as the NZSE-40 Capital Share Price Index Option Contract). 4 Principle (1)Markets are approved having regard to the following criteria - (a)The number of participants in the market or having access to the market; (b)Frequency of trading in the market; (c)The nature of trading in the market - how the price or rate is determined and how the financial assets are traded on the market; (d)The existence, in relation to the market, of an appropriate regulatory body established by law; (e)The potential or demonstrated capacity of a person or group of persons to significantly influence the market; (f)Significant barriers to entry; and (g)Discrimination on the basis of quantity bought and sold unless based on the risks involved or the transaction costs or economies of scale. (2)Sources of information are approved having regard to the following criteria - (a)Reliance on the sources of information by the market; and (b)The accessibility of the sources of information by participants in the market. (3)A method of obtaining a price for Futures Contract or Option Contract is approved if it is determined by an independent source and is adopted by participants in the market. 5Interpretation (1)In this determination, unless the context otherwise requires - Expressions used, except the expression “Income Year”, have the same meanings as in the Act, and where a word or expression is given a particular meaning for the purposes of sections 64B to 64M of the Act, it shall have the same meaning as in the said sections 64B to 64M. “The Act” means the Income Tax Act 1976. “Approved Exchange” means the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange and any exchange listed in subclause 6(3) of this determination. “Futures Contract” means a futures contract traded on the New Zealand futures and options market or on a futures market outside New Zealand. continued on page 28 28 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 American Stock Exchange (AMEX) Australian Options Market (AOM) Belgian Futures & Options Exchange (Belfox) Bolsa de Mercadorias & Futuros (BM&F) Budapest Commodity Exchange (BCE) Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) Chicago Rice & Cotton Exchange (an affiliate to MidAm) Citrus Associates of the New York Cotton Exchange Inc Commodity Exchange, Inc (COMEX) Copenhagen Stock Exchange Deutsche Terminborse (DTB) European Options Exchange (EOE) Financial Futures Market Amsterdam (FTA) Financial Instruments Exchange (FINEX - a division of NYCE) Finnish Options Market Exchange and Clearing House (FOM) Guarantee Fund for Danish Futures & Options (FUTOP) Hokkaido Grain Exchange Hong Kong Futures Exchange Ltd (HKFE) Index & Options Market (IOM - a division of CME) International Monetary Market (IMM - a division of CME) International Petroleum Exchange (IPE) Irish Futures & Options Exchange Kansas City Board of Trade (KCBT) Kobe Raw Silk Exchange Kobe Rubber Exchange Kuala Lumpur Commodity Exchange Kuala Lumpur Options & Financial Futures Exchange (KLOFFE) London Futures & Options Exchange (London Fox) London International Financial Futures Exchange (LIFFE) London Metal Exchange (LME) Exchange (CBOE) Maebashi Dried Cocoon Exchange Manila International Futures Exchange Marche a Terme International de France (MATIF) Marche des Options Negociables de Paris (MONEP) Meff Renta Fila Meff Renta Vanable Mercardo de Futuros y Opciones S.A (Merfox) Mid America Commodity Exchange (MidAm) from page 27 “Income Year” means - (a)Where a taxpayer furnishes a return of income under Section 15 of the Income Tax Act 1976 for an accounting year ending with an annual balance date other than the 31st day of March, the period commencing in the day after the end of the immediately preceding accounting year and ending on that balance date; (b)In respect of the income of any person, the year in which that income has been derived by that person. “New Zealand Dealer” means a public broker or principal trader on the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange: “New Zealand Futures and Options Market” means the market in futures and option contracts adminis- tered by the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange Limited. “Option Contract” means an option contract traded on the New Zealand futures and options market or on an organised and regulated option market outside New Zealand. “Subscriber Screen Broadcast” means a screen broadcast by any subscriber to the ticker price feed of the relevant approved exchange. (2)Any reference in this determination to another determination made by the Commissioner shall be construed as including a reference to any fresh determination made by the Commissioner to vary, rescind, restrict, or extend that determination. (3)For convenience, words and phrases defined in this determination are indicated by initial capital letters, but the absence of a capital letter shall not alone imply that the word or phrase is used with a mean- ing different from that given by its definition. 6Method (1)Determination G7B: New Zealand Futures and Options Markets and Determination G18: Interna- tional Futures and Option Markets are hereby rescinded with effect from the day on which this determination is signed. (2)The New Zealand futures and options markets in the following contracts are approved: Any contracts (other than Option Contracts in respect of shares) listed for trading on the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange. (3)In relation to Futures Contracts or Option Contracts traded in foreign markets, the following futures and options markets are approved: Any contracts (other than Option Contracts in respect of shares) listed for trading on any of the following Approved Exchanges: 29 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Minneapolis Grain Exchange Montreal Exchange Nagoya Textile Exchange New York Coffee Sugar & Cocoa Exchange (CSCE) New York Cotton Exchange (NYCE) New York Futures Exchange (NYFE) New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) OM London Ltd OM Stockholm Ltd Osaka Grain Exchange Osaka Securities Exchange (OSE) Osaka Sugar Exchange Osaka Textile Exchange Oslo Stock Exchange Osterische Termin Und Optionenbouse (OTOB) Pacific Stock Exchange (PSE) Philadelphia Board of Trade (PBOT) Philadelphia Stock Exchange (PHLX) Singapore International Monetary Exchange (SIMEX) South African Futures Exchange (SAFEX) Swiss Options & Financial Futures Exchange AG (SOFFEX) Sydney Futures Exchange (SFE) Tokyo Commodity Exchange Tokyo Grain Exchange Tokyo International Financial Futures Exchange (TIFFE) Tokyo Stock Exchange Tokyo Sugar Exchange Toronto Futures Exchange Toyahashi Dried Cocoon Exchange Vancouver Stock Exchange Winnipeg Commodity Exchange Yokahama Raw Silk Exchange (4)The following sources of information for futures and options prices are approved in relation to Futures Contracts or Option Contracts traded on the New Zealand Futures & Options Exchange: (a)For New Zealand Dealers - the Statement of Open Position provided by a New Zealand Dealer. (b)For persons other than New Zealand Dealers - advice as to the price for a Futures Contract or Option Contract given to that person by a New Zealand Dealer, which price shall be obtained from a source approved in paragraph 6(4)(a) of this determination. (5)The following sources of information for futures and options prices are approved in relation to Futures Contracts or Option Contracts traded on foreign markets: (a)A Subscriber Screen Broadcast that quotes prices for Futures Contracts or Option Contracts; (b)Where a person does not have access to a Subscriber Screen Broadcast, advice as to the price of a Futures Contract or Option Contract from a member of the exchange at which the contract is traded. The price shall be derived from a source approved in paragraph 6(5)(a) of this determination, and shall be the price at which the member would buy or sell the Futures Contract or Option Contract. (6)(a)Where, for the purposes of determining the income or expenditure of a person in respect of a financial arrangement, it is necessary to deter- mine the price for a Futures Contract or Option Contract at the end of an Income Year the price for the Futures Contract or Option Contract shall be the market price for that contract in the market in which it is traded on the same ex- change, as advised by an approved source of information (in respect of that exchange), at the close of trading on the last permitted day for trading in the person’s Income Year. If the relevant contract has not been traded on that day, the price shall be the closing call price as determined by the relevant exchange’s clearing house, or the exchange, for margin purposes at the end of that day. (b)Where, for the purposes of determining income or expenditure of a person in respect of a financial arrangement, it is necessary to deter- mine in New Zealand dollar value of the futures or option contract at the end of the Income Year, the spot rate for the currency in which the Futures Contract or Option Contract is quoted shall be ascertained in accordance with Determi- nation G5D: Foreign Currency Rates, and used to convert the value of the Futures Contract or Option Contract to New Zealand dollars. Example (1)The Statement of Open Position referred to in paragraph 6(4)(a) of this determination will gener- ally set out information relevant to the particular Futures Contract or Option Contract, including delivery month, number bought and number sold. The following are illustrative examples of advice as to the market price of Futures Contracts and Option Contracts which may be obtained from the New Zealand futures and options market’s clearing house by New Zealand Dealers who subscribe to an optional “brokers package” system: continued on page 30 30 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 (a) In this example, Merchant Bank has positions in the September 92 and December 92 BBC contracts, which it has acquired at different times. The market price for September 92 contracts at 1/5/92 was 93.13, and for December was 92.98. The margin column states the unrealised profit in terms of margin deposited, and variable margin accumulated and eroded. Therefore, the transaction of 20 bought BBC futures contracts on 12/12/91 has an unrealised profit of $54,062.80. Merchant Bank has an unrealised profit of $49,774.60 for the September 92 maturity, and $51,666.80 for the December 92 maturity, giving a total of $101,441.40. (b) In this example, Merchant Bank has a position of 53 bought, and 13 sold call and put options on the NZSE-40 Share Price Index. The net unrealised profit position of Merchant Bank is indicated in the margin column. The premium value indicates the maximum profit that could be received by the option writer (seller) at the expiration of the option contracts (the declaration date). from page 29 MERCHANT BANK, OPEN POSITION 18TH FLOOR, MERCAHNT BANK HOUSE STATEMENT 105 SYMONDS STREET AUCKLAND TEL -90-123456FAX -09-123457 TOPAGE No.:2DATE: 01/05/92 TRADING ACCOUNTMARKET:NEW ZEALAND FUTURES & OPTIONS EXCHANGE LIMITED ACCOUNT No. 2222LOT SIZE AND CONTRACT:NZ$500,000 FACE VALUE 90 DAY BANK ACCEPTED BILL PRICE/RATE\* \*:INDEXED YIELD PER ANNUM DELIVERY No. OF LOTS TRADE TYPEDATE OFPRICEREFERENCEPREMIUMDECLARATIONDEPOSITMARKETMARGINPREMIUM VALUE MONTHSOLD/BOUGHT/TRADENUMBERRATEDATEPRICE GRANTEDTAKEN SEP 9220Open12/12/9190.8593.1354062.80CR SEP 9210Open20/03/9292.7893.134168.90 SEP 9210Open01/04/9293.1493.13119.30 SEP 921030 TOTAL49774.60CR DEC 9220Open04/02/9290.8092.9851666.80CR DEC 92020 TOTAL51666.80CR 1050ACCOUNT TOTAL101441.40CR THIS STATEMENT LISTS ALL CONTRACTS AND/OR OPTIONS HELD OPEN BY US ON YOUR ACCOUNT ON THE MARKET AS INDICATED AT THE CLOSE OF BUSINESS ON THE DATE HEREON. THE MARKET PRICE IS THE QUOTATION FOR THE APPROPRIATE MONTH(S) FIXED ON THE DATE HEREON. ISSUED SUBJECT TO THE CORRECTION OF ERRORS AND OMISSIONS Z1MERCHANT BANK, OPEN POSITION 18TH FLOOR, MERCAHNT BANK HOUSE STATEMENT 105 SYMONDS STREET AUCKLAND TEL -90-123456FAX -09-123457 TOPAGE No.:2DATE: 01/05/92 TRADING ACCOUNTMARKET:NEW ZEALAND FUTURES & OPTIONS EXCHANGE LIMITED ACCOUNT No. 2222LOT SIZE AND CONTRACT:NZ$ VALUE OF 20 X INDEX NZSE40 CAPITAL SHARE PRICE INDEX PRICE/RATE\* \*:SHARE PRICE INDEX DELIVERY No. OF LOTS TRADE TYPEDATE OFPRICEREFERENCEPREMIUMDECLARATIONDEPOSITMARKETMARGINPREMIUM VALUE MONTHSOLD/BOUGHT/TRADENUMBERRATEDATEPRICE GRANTEDTAKEN JUN 9250Call Option15/04/9114008729/06/92914,000.00CR JUN 923Call Option01/04/9214504529/06/92621020.002700.00 JUN 924Call Option13/04/9214505329/06/9262720.004240.00 JUN 923Call Option20/04/9214755029/06/9250.00 JUN 926Put Option27/04/9213752229/06/9223120.002640.00 JUN 921353 TOTAL2140.00CR9580.00 THIS STATEMENT LISTS ALL CONTRACTS AND/OR OPTIONS HELD OPEN BY US ON YOUR ACCOUNT ON THE MARKET AS INDICATED AT THE CLOSE OF BUSINESS ON THE DATE HEREON. THE MARKET PRICE IS THE QUOTATION FOR THE APPROPRIATE MONTH(S) FIXED ON THE DATE HEREON. ISSUED SUBJECT TO THE CORRECTION OF ERRORS AND OMISSIONS 31 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 If, on the expiration date, there is a debit margin (i.e., loss), that amount will be deducted from the premium value before any profit is realised. (2)Subclause 6(5) of this determination refers to a Subscriber Screen Broadcast that quotes prices for Futures Contracts or Option Contracts. Such a service is commonly provided by companies such as Reuters, Telerate and Bloomberg LP. The following are examples of Subscriber Screen Broadcast pages provided by Telerate New Zealand Limited and Reuters New Zealand Limited: (a) This is an example of a Subscriber Screen Broadcast page provided by Telerate New Zealand Limited. It shows price information for the three year T-Bond futures contract traded on the Sydney Futures Exchange. Two maturities are quoted - the September 1992 contract, and the December 1992 contract. The market price for the September 1992 three year T-Bond futures contract is 93.58 (or 6.42%) being the LAST price at which trades occurred. (b) This is an example of a Subscriber Screen Broadcast provided by Reuters New Zealand Limited, relating to the same Futures Contract as in paragraph 7(2)(a) above. The market price for the September 1992 three year T-Bond futures contract is 93.58 (or 6.42%), being the LAST price. (c) This is a different example of a Subscriber Screen Broadcast page provided by Reuters New Zealand Limited. It shows market prices for a Eurodollar Futures contract maturing in December 1989 as traded on the London International Financial Futures Exchange. The market price of the contract is 91.70, being the last traded price and identified by the description “LAST” (as distinguished from “LAST 1”, “LAST 2” etc.). The closing price for the previous trading day is 91.68. This determination is signed by me on the 22nd day of January in the year 1993. R D Adair Deputy Commissioner of Inland Revenue 06/080:19 GMT\[ SFE 3 YR T-BOND FUTURES \]PAGE 6182 MONTHGMTBIDASK\[LAST\]PREV 1PREV 2PREV 3HIGHLOWVOLP SET Sep9200:1993.5793.5893.5893.5893.5893.5893.6093.55456893.60 Dec9200:1993.1293.1493.1393.1393.1393.13 2593.14 Mar9321:03 Jun9321:03 1500 Official Cash Settlement Price for Jun92 is 92.68 S = Settlement PriceP SET = Previous Settlement Price 0#YTT3YR T BONDSFE AUD MTHLASTBIDASKHIS.CLSETTLECL.BDCL.ASOPENHIGHLOWVOLUMTIME Sep293.5893.5893.5893.6093.5893.6093.55457112:20 Dec293.1393.1293.1493.1493.1393.1593.1393.1393.13 2511:02 FSEZ9EURODOLLAR DEC90LIF USD15NOV89 02:58 LASTLAST 1LAST 2LAST 3LAST 4BIDASK 91.7091.7091.7091.7091.6991.6991.70 NET.CHNGCLS:14NOV 89OPENHIGHLOWOPE.BIDOPE.ASK -0.0291.6891.6991.7191.6991.6991.70 SETTLEVOLUMEOPEN.INTCNT.HIGHCNT.LOWRTR.NEWSN.TIME 91.70167424459130.0171.24 CNT.XPRYLOT.SIZELIMITSTATUSBKGRND 18DEC89IM USDOCL/\*\*\*\* 32 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Determination G26: Variable Rate Financial Arrangements This determination may be cited as “Determination G26: Variable Rate Financial Arrangements”. 1 Explanation (which does not form part of this Determination) (1)Determination G26 applies to variable rate financial arrangements on which Interest is paid at least annually. Any income or expense relating to a variable rate financial arrangement must be accrued. Determination G26 sets out two alternative methods by which this should be done, and explains the circumstances in which each should be used. A variable rate arrangement may be a floating rate arrangement or a reviewable rate arrangement. Floating rate arrangements are those where the Interest rate is reset periodically according to a predetermined formula. The formula links the Interest rate to an indicator rate such as the bank bill or interbank rate. Reviewable rate arrangements are those where the Interest rate is set periodically in line with market rates. Any change in the Interest rate reflects and is consistent with changes in market Interest rates. The most common form of reviewable rate loan is a mortgage where the Interest rate is subject to periodic review by the lender. (2)The income or expense in relation to a variable rate arrangement could consist of: (a)Periodic Interest payments as determined from time to time; (b)A premium or discount on the issue or face value of the arrangement; (c)Fees paid or received in relation to the arrange- ment. These amounts must be accrued. (3)The methods provided in this determination sepa- rately accrue: (a)Periodic Interest on a daily basis over the income year to which it relates; (b)Any discount or premium and fees over the term of the arrangement, on either a straight line basis (Method A) or a yield to maturity basis (Method B). (4)The critical factor in deciding whether Method A or Method B applies to an arrangement is the size of the premium or discount (including fees) relating to the arrangement. (a)Method A applies to financial arrangements where there is a small (or no) discount or premium. These are arrangements where the discount or premium and fees (non-contingent fees with a limit of 2% of the core acquisition price, plus contingent fees) is less than 2% of the average amount of principal outstanding over the term of the arrangement. (For a full definition see clause 5 - Interpretation). (b)Method B is of general application, and may be applied to any variable rate financial arrange- ment within the scope of this determination. (5)Method A permits the spreading of fees and pre- mium or discount over the term of a financial arrangement on a straight line basis, in proportion to the principal outstanding. The simplest case of Method A occurs where the principal is fixed throughout the term. In that case, the premium or discount and fees are spread on a straight line basis over the term of the arrangement. (6)Method B can be applied regardless of the amount of fees and premium or discount. It requires the fees and premium or discount to be spread on a yield to maturity basis. Since the future cashflows are not known, the actual yield to maturity rate cannot be calculated, but must be estimated. This is done by using the initial Interest rate (or price or index) and assuming that this rate will apply throughout the term of the financial arrangement. The spreading of fees and premium or discount may be done on either a per Period basis or a per income year basis. To calculate the yield to maturity, Method B uses either Determination G3: Yield to Maturity Method or Determination G10B: Present Value Calculation Methods and G11A: Present Value Based Yield to Maturity Method. (7)It is important to note that in both Method A and Method B there is no recalculation or respreading of fees and discount or premium when there is a change in Interest rate, price, or index. The spread- ing is done only once, at either the date of acquisi- tion or issue as the case may be. (8)Interest is calculated separately for each period (or income year) depending on the actual Interest rate applying in the Period (or the Periods within that income year). (9)A holder of a variable rate financial arrangement to which this determination applies may bring any fees or premium received at the date of issue of the financial arrangement into income at that time. (10)Those taxpayers to whom section 64C(2A) of the Act applies should use Determination G24: Straight Line Method. 2 Reference This determination is made pursuant to section 64E(1)(b) of the Income Tax Act 1976. 33 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 3 Scope Determination G26 shall be applied to any variable rate financial arrangements where: (a)All of the amounts payable (other than the principal, any discount or premium, and any fees) are either: (i)set periodically according to a predetermined formula. That formula must link the amounts payable to economic, commodity, industrial, or financial indices or prices, or banking rates, or general commercial rates; or (ii)set periodically by reference to market interest rates; and (b)The amounts of principal (including any fees and any premium or discount) and the times or intervals at which they are to be advanced and repaid, are known, or are able to be determined, or can reason- ably be anticipated, as at the first balance date after issue or acquisition. (c)Interest is paid at least annually. Determination G26 provides two alternative methods acceptable for the purposes of section 64C(3) of the Act. (Note: A determination to which Determination G26 refers may be changed or rescinded by a new determi- nation made by the Commissioner. In such a case, a reference to the old determination is taken to be ex- tended to the new determination.) 4 Principle (1)The income deemed to be derived or expenditure deemed to be incurred by a person in a Period (or income year) is calculated by adding together: (a)The amount of the Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest allocated to that Period (or income year); and (b)The amount of Interest payable or receivable in that Period (or income year). (2)Method A and Method B find and then allocate the Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest to each Period (or an income year) of the financial arrange- ment. Once this amount has been allocated, the amount of Interest payable or receivable in that Period (or income year) is added to it. This gives the income or expenditure for each Period (or income year) of the financial arrangement. (a)Method A may only be applied to Small Dis- count or Premium Financial Arrangements. It results in an allocation to each Period propor- tionate to the amount of principal outstanding in that Period, and the length of that Period. (b)Method B may be applied to other financial arrangements. It assumes that the rate, price or index known to apply in the first Period applies to all subsequent Periods. The Act and determi- nations are used to spread the Total Finance Charges over the term of the financial arrange- ment. The assumed Interest content of the Total Finance Charges in each Period (or in each income year) is then subtracted. The yield to maturity method or other permissible method would be used for calculation purposes. 5 Interpretation (1)In this determination, unless the context otherwise requires- Expressions used have the same meanings as in the Act and where a word or expression is given a particular meaning for the purposes of sections 64B to 64M of the Act, it shall have the same meaning as in this determination. “the Act” means the Income Tax Act 1976: “Interest” does not have the meaning given in section 2 of the Act. Rather for the purposes of this determination it means any periodic payment in relation to the financial arrangement, to the extent intended to provide a return to the lender on the sums provided to the borrower. It does not include fees, discounts, or premiums, or payments effecting a reduction of principal. “Period” means a term commencing immediately after a payment is payable or receivable, and ending when the next payment is payable or receivable. Where the Period is longer than one year, the Period is deemed to comprise one or more Periods each of one year followed (or preceded, at the option of the holder or issuer as the case may be) by a Period of less than one year. The duration of the financial arrangement should be evenly divided into Periods, which may be measured in days, weeks, fortnights, months, quarters, half years, or years. If an even division is not possible, then the remainder should be treated as a partial Period, and expressed as a fraction of a full Period. m x n o where m = the number of days in the partial Period n = number of full Periods in a year o = number of days in a year For example, if all other Periods are measured in months then a Period of 5 days would be treated as 5 x 12 = 0.1644 of a month 365 There must be no more than two partial Periods in any financial arrangement. continued on page 34 34 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 “Small Discount or Premium Financial Arrange- ments” means a financial arrangement to which this determination applies, in respect of which - (a)The only variable parts of an amount payable comprise Interest which: (i)is payable at yearly or more frequent inter- vals; and (ii)is calculated on the amount of the principal outstanding from time to time since the previous Interest payment (or since the date of issue or acquisition if that is later); and (b)The amount of the Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest (ignoring whether it is a positive or negative amount) is not more than the product of: (i)Two per cent; and (ii)The expected term of the financial arrange- ment calculated in years and fractions of a year; and (iii)The time-weighted average amount of principal that is reasonably expected to be outstanding during the expected term of the financial arrangement. Clause 7 of this determination provides examples which show whether or not a financial arrangement is a Small Discount or Premium Financial Arrange- ment. “Total Finance Charges” in relation to a financial arrangement means- (a)For an issuer, the total of all amounts payable by the issuer less the total of all amounts receivable by the issuer, pursuant to the financial arrange- ment; (b)For a holder, the total of all amounts receivable by the holder less the total of all amounts payable by the holder, pursuant to a financial arrangement. Any fees payable in relation to the financial arrange- ment must be reduced by the amount of item z as defined in sections 64BA(2) or 64BA(3) of the Act. “Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest” in relation to a financial arrangement means the Total Finance Charges excluding all amounts of Interest payable or receivable. (2)For convenience, words and phrases defined in this determination are indicated by initial capital letters, but the absence of a capital letter shall not alone imply that the word or phrase is used with a mean- ing different from that given by its definition. 6 Method (1)A person may apply Method A to Small Discount or Premium Financial Arrangements, and Method B to any other financial arrangement. In order to deter- mine whether Method A can be applied, use the criteria outlined in the Interpretation clause of this determination. (2)Method A shall be applied in respect of Periods. Method B may be applied either in respect of income years or Periods. (3)The proviso to paragraph (a) of section 64C(3) of the Act allows for another method, similar to those in this determination, to also be used. (4)Once a method has been selected for a financial arrangement, that method must be applied until that financial arrangement matures or is remitted, sold, or otherwise transferred by the person unless the prior consent of the Commissioner to adopt another method is obtained. (The Commissioner’s consent may be given conditionally). (5)A person who: (a)is a holder; and (b)who receives a premium or fee on the issue or acquisition of a financial arrangement may elect to include that fee or premium in the income derived by that person in the income year of issue or acquisition. (6)The formula x + y is used to calculate the income derived or expendi- ture incurred by a person in a Period (or an income year) in relation to the financial arrangement. In this formula: xis the amount of Total Finance Charges Exclud- ing Interest allocated to that Period (or to that income year); and yis the amount of Interest payable or receivable in that Period (or that income year). (7)Method A and Method B differ in the method used to calculate the value of x. (a)Under Method A x = a x b x c d where, ais the Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest payable by the issuer or receivable by the holder as the case may be; bis the length of the Period (b = 1 if the Period in question is a full Period, or, for a partial Period, b = a fraction calculated in accord- ance with the formula given in the clause 5 Interpretation); cis the amount of principal outstanding during the Period; dis the sum of all items (b x c) calculated in respect of every Period; from page 33 35 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 (b)Under Method B x = e - f Since, in a variable rate arrangement, the rate, price, or index varies during the term of the arrangement, the assumption is made that the rate, price or index that applies to the first Period after the date of issue or acquisition applies to all Periods of the financial arrangement. Using the assumption: eis the income derived, or the expenditure incurred, for a Period (or income year); and fis the Interest deemed to be payable by the issuer or receivable by the holder as the case may be. The yield to maturity method is used in accord- ance with the Act and determinations to decide the value of e. (8)Amounts calculated using this determination should be apportioned between income years using Deter- mination G1A: Apportionment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis. 7 Examples Example A (illustrating Method A) On 12 February 1991 a company issues notes with a face value of $10,000 for 5 years, at an interest rate of bank bill plus 0.75% p.a. payable half yearly in arrears. The notes are issued at a discount of 5%. The borrower is a New Zealand company. Contingent fees of 2.5% of $10,000 are payable by the borrower; there are no non- contingent fees. There is no change in the principal outstanding over the 5 years. The average principal outstanding is therefore $10,000, both overall and within each half year Period. (a)Before calculating the amount of expenditure deemed to be incurred by the borrower over the term of the arrangement, it is first necessary to determine whether Method A or Method B is to be used. For Method A to be used, the arrangement must satisfy the criteria for a Small Discount or Premium Financial Arrangement (see clause 5 Interpretation). In this example, the Total Finance Charges Exclud- ing Interest payable by the borrower are calculated as follows: $ 10,000principal payable + 250fees paid - 9,500 principal received a = 750 Ignoring sign, $750 is less than the amount which determines whether or not Method A can be used, calculated as follows: 2% x the expected term of the financial arrangement calculated in years and fractions of years (5) x the average principal outstanding ($10,000) 2% x 5 x 10,000 = $1,000 So Method A of this determination may be applied. (b)The expenditure deemed to be incurred by the borrower in a specific Period is calculated using the formula x + y (i)“x” is the amount of Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest allocated to that Period. Using Method A x = a x b x c d where a =the Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest payable by the issuer or receiv able as the case may be; b=the length of the Period =1 throughout the time of the financial arrangement, as all of the Periods are the same length (half a year) c=the amount of principal outstanding during the Period; =$10,000 in all Periods. d=the sum of all items (b x c) calculated in respect of every Period; =1 x $10,000 x 10 (as there are 10 half year Periods); =$100,000. Therefore, (ii)y is the amount of Interest payable or receivable in the Period. Therefore, in this example, y =Interest calculated at the bank bill rate plus 0.75%. (iii)Therefore, the expenditure incurred by the borrower in each half year would be: x + y ($75 + Interest calculated at the bank bill rate plus 0.75%) This expenditure would be spread using Determina- tion G1A: Apportionment of Income and Expendi- ture on a Daily Basis. If the fees were payable to a holder who was a New Zealand taxpayer (but not a cash basis holder), this taxpayer would be deemed to have derived similar amounts of income. continued on page 36 36 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Example B (a further illustration of Method A) On 12 February 1991 a company issues notes with a face value of $10,000 for five years at an interest rate of bank bill plus 0.75% p.a. payable half yearly in arrears. The notes are issued at a discount of 4.5%. The bor- rower is a New Zealand company. $2,000 of the face value of the notes is to be repaid on each anniversary of the issue. There are no fees. The length of each Period is measured in half years, so b = 1 throughout. The average principal outstanding over the five years is: (10,000 + 8,000 + 6,000 + 4,000 + 2,000) = $6,000 5 (a)Decide whether Method A can be applied. The Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest payable by the borrower are equal to: $10,000principal payable +0fees paid - 9,550principal received (after discount) a =450 Ignoring sign, this is less than: 2% x 5 (years) x 6,000 (average principal outstand- ing) = $600 So Method A of this determination may be applied. (b)Calculate the value of x The following table sets out the allocation of the Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest: Half YearPrincipalSum ofAllocation PeriodOutstanding(b x c)a x b x c b = 1d $$$ 110,00010,000 75 210,00010,000 75 3 8,000 8,000 60 4 8,000 8,000 60 5 6,000 6,000 45 6 6,000 6,000 45 7 4,000 4,000 30 8 4,000 4,000 30 9 2,000 2,000 15 10 2,000 2,000 15 Total60,000450 (i)y = Interest on the principal outstanding in the half year at the bank bill rate plus 0.75% p.a. (ii)The expenditure incurred by the borrower in each half year Period would be: x (calculated in accordance with the above table) + y This expenditure would be spread using Determina- tion G1A: Apportionment of Income and Expendi- ture on a Daily Basis. If the fees were payable to a holder who was a New Zealand taxpayer (but not a cash basis holder), this taxpayer would be deemed to have similar amounts of income. Example C (another illustration of Method A) This is similar to Example B, but issued at a premium, and seen from the holder’s viewpoint. It is somewhat artificial, in order to illustrate a point. On 12 February 1991 a company borrows $10,000 for 5 years at an interest rate of bank bill plus 2% p.a. payable half yearly in arrears. The money is raised by issuing notes at a premium of 5%. The purchaser is a New Zealand company. Contin- gent fees of 2% are payable by the issuer to the pur- chaser (holder). $2,000 of the face value of the notes is to be repaid on each anniversary of the issue. The length of each Period is measured in half years, so b = 1 throughout. The average principal outstanding over the five years is: (10,000 + 8,000 + 6,000 + 4,000 + 2,000) = $6,000 5 (a)Decide whether Method A can be applied. The Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest payable to the lender are equal to: $ 10,000principal receivable + 200fees received - 10,500 principal paid a = -300 Ignoring sign, this is less than: 2% x 5 x 6,000 = $600 So Method A of this determination may be applied. (b)The income deemed to be derived by the holder in a Period is calculated using the formula x + y (i)Calculate the value of x The following table sets out the allocation of the Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest: Half YearPrincipalSum ofAllocation PeriodOutstanding(b x c)a x b x c b = 1d $$$ 110,00010,000 -50 210,00010,000 -50 3 8,000 8,000 -40 4 8,000 8,000 -40 5 6,000 6,000 -30 6 6,000 6,000 -30 7 4,000 4,000 -20 8 4,000 4,000 -20 9 2,000 2,000 -10 10 2,000 2,000 -10 Total d =60,000a = -300 Note: x is negative because a premium has been paid. from page 35 37 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 (ii)y = Interest on the principal outstanding in the half year at the bank bill rate plus 2% p.a. (iii)The income derived by the holder in each half year Period would be: x (calculated in accordance with the above table) + y This income would be spread using Determination G1A: Apportionment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis. Example D (illustrating Method B on a Period Basis This example uses Determination G3: Yield to Maturity Method. A New Zealand company issues notes with a face value of $10,000 for a term of 3 years at a discount of 10% ($1,000). The Interest rate is equal to Libor plus 1% p.a., and Interest is payable half yearly in arrears. There are no fees. The Interest rate is 10% in the first Period after issue. Assuming that this interest rate holds throughout the term of the notes, the yield to maturity is 14.21% p.a., calculated at half yearly rests. (a)Decide whether Method A can be applied. Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest are equal to: $ 10,000principal payable + 0fees paid - 9,000principal received (after discount) a = 1,000 Ignoring sign, this is more than: 2% x 3 (years) x 10,000 (average principal outstanding) = $600 Because the Small Discount or Premium criteria are not met, Method A may not be applied. (b)The expenditure deemed to be incurred by the borrower in a Period is equal to x + y. (i)Calculate the value of x (Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest allocated to that Period) x = e - f Method B assumes that the Interest rate applying in the first Period (10% in this example) applies throughout the financial arrangement. “e” is the Total Finance Charge. This is calculated using Determination G3: Yield to Maturity Method (or G10B in conjunction with G11A). The yield to maturity rate is 14.21% p.a. (See table for the value of e in each Period.) “f” is the Interest that would be payable by the borrower if the rate that applied in the first Period after the date of issue applied to all Periods of the financial arrangement. Since the initial Interest rate is 10% in this example, f = 500 for each Period. (ii)y = the actual Interest paid in a Period. Values for this example are shown in the table below. (iii)The expenditure deemed to be incurred in each Period using Method B is calculated in the following table: PeriodTotal Finance ChargesInterestTotal FinanceActual InterestActual InterestTotal Expenditure (assuming 10% p.a. interest)(at 10% p.a.)Charges ExcludingRate % p.a.Payabledeemed to be (Note 1)(Note 2)Interestincurred efx = e - fyx + y 1 640 500 14010 500 640 2 649 500 14911 550 699 3 660 500 1609 450 610 4 671 500 1719 450 621 5 683 500 1838 400 583 6 697 500 1978 400 597 4,0003,0001,0002,7503,750 Note 1:Based on a yield to maturity of 14.21% p.a. calculated using Determination G3 and an interest rate of 10% p.a. through- out Note 2:10% is the rate applying in the first Period after issue continued on page 38 38 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Whole dollars and minor adjustments have been made to aid readability. The results still satisfy the requirements of Determination G2: Requirements as to Precision. That Determination allows for the use of results other than those calculated using the Yield to Maturity Method, provided they do not result in a difference of more than $5 per period. The total expenditure is confirmed as: $ 1,000discount (x) + 2,750 interest actually payable (y) $ 3,750 (Note: In practice the expenditure in the final income year would be determined using the base price adjustment in section 64F of the Act.) The expenditure for each Period would be apportioned using Determination G1A: Apportionment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis. If the fees were payable to a holder who was a New Zealand taxpayer (but not a cash basis holder), this taxpayer would be deemed to have derived similar amounts of income. Example E (illustrating the application of Methods A and B to a reviewable rate loan) A company borrows $1,000,000 for 5 years. The loan will be repaid on a table mortgage basis over the 5 year period with yearly interest reviews. The initial interest rate is 14.5% pa. A fee of $10,000 is charged when the loan is drawn down. The company is a New Zealand taxpayer and the issuer in relation to the financial arrangement. For the purposes of this example, the total expenditure incurred has been calculated using both Method A and Method B. (a)Method A The Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest payable by the issuer equals: $ 1,000,000principal payable + 10,000fees paid - 1,000,000 principal received a = 10,000 Ignoring the sign, this is less than: 2% x 5 x 653,736 (average principal outstanding) = $65,373 Therefore Method A may be applied. The expenditure deemed to be incurred by the issuer is equal to x + y (i)Calculate the value of x. The following table sets out the cashflows in relation to the arrangement (based on an initial interest rate of 14.5% pa) and the allocation of the Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest to each income year on a straight line basis, as allowed for in Method A. PeriodPrincipal OutstandingPaymentPrincipalInterestx = Allocation to each (Note 1)Reductionat 14.5% p.a.one year period b = 1ca x b x c d Year 11,000,000294,792 149,792145,000 3,059 Year 2 850,208294,792 171,512123,280 2,601 Year 3 678,696294,792 196,381 98,411 2,076 Year 4 482,315294,792 224,856 69,936 1,476 Year 5 257,459294,792 257,459 37,333 788 3,268,6781,000,000473,96010,000 Note 1:Calculated at 14.5% p.a. Note 2:Figures rounded to nearest whole dollar Note 3:b = 1, since are same length, a = 10,000, and d = 3,268,678 throughout the term of the arrangement. from page 37 39 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 (ii) In this case, “y” is the actual Interest paid in a Period. Values for this example are shown in the table below. (iii) The expenditure deemed to be incurred in each Period is shown in the table below. The example assumes that the annual payment is adjusted to reflect the move in Interest rates. Thus the principal outstanding in any period will be as calculated in the table above. YearAllocationInterest RateActual Interest PayableTotal Expenditure Incurred x%yx + y 1 3,05914.5 145,000 Note 2a 148,059 2 2,60113.5 114,778 Note 2b 117,379 3 2,07612.8 86,873 88,949 4 1,47612.0 57,878 59,354 5 788 12.9 33,212 34,000 10,000437,741447,741 Note 1:Figures rounded to whole numbers Note 2:(a) $1,000,000 (principal outstanding in the first Period) x 14.5% = $145,000 (b) $850,208 (principal outstanding in the second period) x 13.5% = $114,778 Note 3:The allocation of the Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest does not change as the interest rate changes (b)Method B This example assumes that the borrower chose to account for all its variable rate financial arrangements using Method B of this Determination. The expenditure deemed to be incurred is calculated using the formula x + y. In Method B, x = e - f. (i)Calculate e. The yield to maturity is calculated as 14.923% pa using Determination G3: Yield to Maturity Method and the expected cashflows which are as follows: (990,000)principal lent net of fees paid 294,792annual payments 294,792annual payments 294,792annual payments 294,792annual payments 294,792annual payments The table below shows the values of e for each Period. (ii)Calculate f at an Interest rate of 12.45%, the rate for the first Period. The values for f are shown on the table below. The following table shows the calculation of the expenditure deemed to be incurred by the borrower. PeriodTotal FinanceAssumedTotal FinanceActualActualTotal Expenditure Charges (assumingInterest atChargesInterest RateInterestDeemed to be 14.5% p.a. interest)14.5%Excluding Interest% p.a.PayableIncurred (Note 1)(Note 2)(Note 3) efx = e - fyx + y 1147,734145,000 2,73414.5145,000147,734 2125,790123,280 2,51013.5114,778117,288 3100,000 98,411 2,15912.8 86,873 89,032 4 71,587 69,936 1,65112.0 57,878 59,529 5 38,279 37,333 94612.9 33,212 34,158 483,960473,96010,000437,741447,741 Note 1:Based on the yield to maturity rate of 14.923% p.a., calculated using Determination G3 and an interest rate of 14.5% throughout. Note 2:At 14.5%p.a.; this is the same as in the first table in paragraph (a) of this example Note 3:Actual interest payable (y) is calculated on principal outstanding in each Period and is the same as the second table in paragraph (a) above. Note 4:Figures rounded to whole numbers. continued on page 40 40 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 Example F (illustrating Method B on an income year basis) Method B may be applied in respect of Periods or income years. In example D and E, Determination G3 was used to calculate the yield to maturity rate, which was then used to calculate e (Total Finance Charges), for each Period. In the present example, Determination G10B: Present Value Calculation Methods is used in conjunction with Determination G11A: Present Value Based Yield to Maturity Method to calculate the yield to maturity rate and e for each income year. Example F is similar to example D. On 1 March 1992 a New Zealand investor purchases, for $9,000 a 3 year note with a face value of $10,000 maturing 1 March 1995. Interest at Libor plus 1% pa, is payable half yearly in arrears. Fees of 2% of the face value are payable by the borrower to the investor on issue. The investor balances on 31 March and elects to use a 365 day basis. The Interest rate is 10% pa in the first Period after issue. Assuming that this Interest rate holds throughout the term of the notes, the yield to maturity is 15.12% pa, calculated at half yearly rests. This allows for the 2% fees, and uses the net purchase price of 9,000 - 200 = 8,800. Income deemed to be derived during an income year is calculated using the formula x + y. (a)Method A of this determination cannot be used because the Small Discount or Premium Criteria are not met. That is, 2% x 3 (years) x 10,000 (average principal outstanding) = 600 which is smaller than the discount plus fees of $1,200. (b)Apply Method B to calculate the value of x. x = e - f The following table sets out the allocation of the Total Finance Charges Excluding Interest (x) between the income years. Income YearPresent ValueAssumed AmountsTotal FinanceInterest atTotal Finance Ending 31/3at Year EndReceivable DuringCharges10% p.a.Charges Excluding (Note 1)Year(Note 2)Interest efx = e - f 19928,906- 8,800 106- 106 19939,253 1,0001,3471,000 347 19949,654 1,0001,4011,000 401 1995-11,000 1,3461,000 346 4,2004,2001,200 Note 1:Calculated at 15.12% p.a. in accordance with Method A of Determination G10B: Present Value Calculation Methods. Note 2:Calculated in accordance with Determination G11A: Present Value Based on Yield to Maturity Method. In the 1994 income year, for example - Total Finance Charges = (a)9,654Present value at year end - (b) 0Amounts payable by holder + (c)1,000Amounts receivable by holder - (d)9,253Present value at preceding year end =1,401 (c)In this case, y is the actual Interest paid in a Period. Values for this example are shown in the table below. Income YearPeriodActual InterestInterestInterestTotal FinanceIncome Ending 31/3Rate % p.a.Received inReceived inCharges ExcludingDeemed to be PeriodIncome YearInterestDerived yxx + y 1992---- 106 106 19931105001,050 3471,397 211550 199439450 900 4011,301 49450 199558400 800 3461,146 68400 2,7501,2003,950 from page 39 41 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.7 - Appendices - March 1993 The income deemed to be derived in each income year will be as follows: The total is confirmed as: 1,200discount plus2,750interest actually receivable 3,950 (Note: In practice the income in the final year would be determined using the base price adjustment in section 64F of the Act.) If the fees were payable by a borrower who was a New Zealand taxpayer with the same income year end, this taxpayer would be deemed to have incurred similar amounts of expenditure. This determination is signed by me on the 22nd day of January in the year 1993. R D Adair Deputy Commissioner of Inland Revenue