Volume Eight, No.9November 1996 The Taxation (Core Provisions) Bill was introduced into Parliament on 7 December 1995. It was passed on 26 July 1996, and became the Taxation (Core Provisions) Act 1996 \[No.67\]. This Act amends the Income Tax Act 1994 and the Tax Administration Act 1994. It also makes consequential amendments to several other Acts. See the inside front cover for a full list of this TIB’s contents. This TIB has no appendix. (TIB Volume Eight, No.8 will appear at the end of November. The out-of-sequence numbering arises because we needed to allocate an issue number to coincide with a NZ Gazette notice, and at the time it was uncertain which TIB would be ready first.) This is an Inland Revenue service to people with an interest in New Zealand taxation. ISSN 0114-7161 TAX INFORMATION BULLETIN Contents Taxation (Core Provisions) Act 1996...............................................................................................................1 New Part A - Purpose and Application.............................................................................................................2 New Part B - Core Provisions..........................................................................................................................3 General consequential changes........................................................................................................................8 Consequential amendments to Part C - Income Further Defined....................................................................11 Consequential amendments to Part D - Deductions Further Defined..............................................................15 Consequential amendments to Part E - Timing of Income and Deductions.....................................................17 Consequential amendments to Part F - Apportionment and recharacterised transactions................................19 Consequential amendments to Part G - Avoidance and non-market transactions............................................20 Consequential amendments to Part H - Treatment of net income of certain entities........................................21 Consequential amendments to Part I - Treatment of net losses.......................................................................23 Consequential amendments to Part J - Surcharges.........................................................................................26 Consequential amendments to Part K - Rebates.............................................................................................26 Consequential amendments to Part L - Credits...............................................................................................27 Consequential amendments to Part M - Tax payments...................................................................................28 Consequential amendments to Part N - Withholding taxes and taxes on the income of others........................29 Consequential amendments to Part O - Definitions and related matters..........................................................30 Consequential amendments to Part Y - Amendments, repeals, savings and transitional provisions................31 Consequential amendments to the Tax Administration Act 1994...................................................................31 Comparative tables of old and new provisions................................................................................................32 Changes to the Income Tax Act 1994.......................................................................................................32 Changes to the Income Tax Act 1976 or the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974..................................35 Changes to definitions..............................................................................................................................37 Changes to the Tax Administration Act 1994...........................................................................................37 Taxation (Core Provisions) Act 1996 Part B, Income Tax Act 1994 and consequential amendments to the Income Tax Act 1994 and Tax Administration Act 1994 Introduction The Taxation (Core Provisions) Act 1996 represents the first phase of the rewrite of the Income Tax Act in plain language. It contains new core provisions which set out the key laws on which the rest of our income tax legislation is based. The core provisions: •provide an overview of the scheme and purposes of the Act •provide all the essential rules for taxpayers to calcu- late and satisfy their income tax liability •provide the basis for the application of other Parts. The new core provisions adopt a “global/gross” ap- proach to the calculation of an income tax liability. The core provisions have been drafted in plain lan- guage. The new drafting style for the core provisions minimises complexity, repetition and the use of redun- dant words. The structure of the core provisions is represented in diagrams in the Act. The legislation makes consequential amendments to all Parts of the Act to ensure that tax legislation conforms to the “global/gross” approach being implemented by the core provisions. This process has necessitated significant amendments to the Income Tax Act and other Inland Revenue Acts. Although the core provisions and consequential amend- ments are not intended to change policy, in a few areas it has been necessary to clarify policy. These are high- lighted in this TIB. Background In its final report, the Consultative Committee on the Taxation of Income from Capital (the Valabh Commit- tee) noted the importance of a coherent scheme in tax legislation. The re-ordering and renumbering of the Income Tax Act 1976 and the subsequent enactment of the Income Tax Act 1994 was the first step in this process. The Working Party on the Reorganisation of the Income Tax Act 1976 recommended that the re- ordering be followed by a full rewrite of tax legislation in a number of phases over the next four to five years. The Government adopted this recommendation. The aim of the rewrite, as outlined in the December 1994 discussion document Rewriting the Income Tax Act: Objectives, process, guidelines, is to reduce the various costs (such as compliance, administrative and legal costs) incurred by taxpayers and society generally because of the way tax law is expressed. The new core provisions are the first step in the rewrite of the Act. Core Provisions: Rewriting the Income Tax Act, A discussion document, released in May 1995, outlined the Government’s objectives and proposals for the new core provisions. The Government received submissions and undertook further consultation before the introduction of the Taxation (Core Provisions) Bill, in December 1995. Further submissions were received at the Select Com- mittee stage. The new core provisions, which differ from the draft legislation in the discussion document and the commentary on the bill, are the result of an extensive consultation process. Key features The new core provisions are intended to give an over- view of the scheme and purposes of the Act. The core provisions also provide all the essential rules for taxpayers to calculate and satisfy their income tax liability. The core provisions provide the basis for the application of other Parts of the Income Tax Act. In particular, the role of each of the Parts in calculating and satisfying a taxpayer’s income tax liability is set out in the core provisions. The core provisions govern the application of the rest of the Act by referring readers to the later Parts of the Act dealing with particular steps in the calculation e.g., Part I for losses (see section BC 6 (4)). The global gross approach begins with the allocation of gross income and allowable deductions to income years under the relevant timing rules. The calculation of a taxpayer’s income tax liability then begins with the determination of “annual gross income”, being the total of all gross income for a particular year. The total amount of deductions for the year - “annual allowable deductions” - is then calculated. This is subtracted from annual gross income, resulting in a single net income or net loss figure. This approach is in contrast to the approach of under- taking separate calculations of net income or loss in respect of a number of sources of income. The new core provisions have been drafted in plain language. The plain language drafting style is intended to minimise complexity, repetition and the use of redundant words. Wherever possible, the legislation adopts words that are commonly used. The complexity of the subject matter means that the resulting legislation is not simple, but the complexity is reduced by the new drafting style. The new Part B includes charts, descriptive headings for subsections and, at the end of each section, a list of defined terms used in the section. These are aids to interpretation only and are not part of the operative text of the legislation. The interpretive sections in the new Part A make it clear that if there is a conflict between the new aids to interpretation and the substantive sections of the Act, the substantive section will apply. continued on page 2 HF 1 (2), relating to mutual associations, it has been necessary to clarify an ambiguity. The amendments confirm the Court of Appeal’s deci- sion in CIR v Inglis (1992) 14 NZTC 9,180: that a loss on disposition of personal property is in effect deduct- ible where, if a profit had been derived in the same circumstances, it would have been assessable. The savings provision inserted for the 1994 reordered Act has been retained in Part Y for sections that have not been amended subsequently. There are also new savings provisions in section 2 of the Taxation (Core Provisions) Act in relation to the use of the terms “gross income” and “exempt income” generally and, in particular, the replacement of the words “profits or gains” with “amounts” in section CD 3 relating to business income. Binding rulings issued before the application of the core provisions legislation may cease to apply if they were based on any provision amended or repealed by the legislation. A special process has been established for rulings affected by changes in the core provisions legislation only (as contained in section 3). The Com- missioner will: •reissue the ruling, if the Taxation (Core Provisions) Act has not substantially altered the way the tax law in the ruling applies; •at the taxpayer’s request only issue a new ruling if the ruling cannot be reissued along the same lines as the existing ruling due to the nature of the changes in the core provisions legislation (any substantial changes made to the tax law other than those noted in this TIB will be reported to the Government). Affected rulings will be reissued (or issued), free of charge, on the basis of the taxpayer’s original applica- tion. Application date The new core provisions and consequential amendments will apply to the 1997-98 and subsequent income years. from page 1 The new Part A contains a purpose provision, setting out the main purposes of the Act and a new interpreta- tion provision which emphasises the importance of the core provisions, purpose provisions and the structure of the Act in interpreting legislation. Part A also includes a provision stating in general terms to whom the Act applies which is not intended to alter the residence or source rules in the Act. Consequential amendments have been made to all other Parts of the Act and to other legislation to ensure that the body of tax legislation conforms to the global/gross approach being implemented by the new core provi- sions. Because these consequential amendments have been made to Parts that are yet to be rewritten, the drafting style of those Parts has been retained. Most of the consequential changes are terminological. The most frequent change is the replacement of the term “assessable income” with “gross income”, “net income” or “taxable income”. The term “assessable income” was used inconsistently throughout the pre-core provisions Act to encompass different levels of income. Sometimes it referred to gross income, other times to net income and occasionally to both in the same section (see for example, the former section BB 7). It is intended that the amendments will remove these inconsistencies. More substantial drafting changes have been made in the following areas: •Provisions which referred to “profit”, such as land transactions, personal property, forestry and minerals. These have generally been split into income, deduc- tions and timing components. The deductions and timing components have been made explicit through a new provision applying to “revenue account property” (section DJ 13) and a new matching provision (sec- tion EF 2); •Regimes containing net or schedular components, such as mineral mining and life insurance. In general the amendments are not intended to change policy. However, in some instances, as in section New Part A - Purpose and Application Section AA 1 - purposes of Act The new section AA 1 provides that the main purposes of the Income Tax Act 1994 are to: •impose tax on income •impose obligations in respect of tax •set out rules to be used to calculate the tax and to satisfy the obligations imposed. The new purpose provision distinguishes the Income Tax Act from other Revenue Acts. A purpose provision for the Income Tax Act as a whole was envisaged in the December 1994 discussion docu- ment 1 . The discussion document went on to say that: “Purpose provisions will be used where they assist taxpayers and other users of legislation to appreciate the general intention of the particular Part, Subpart or sections to which they relate. Purpose provisions can also assist in the resolution of unforeseen ambiguities.” This is consistent with the original recommendations of the Valabh Committee that led to a Subpart A being set aside, in each Part in the 1994 reordered Act, for the insertion of a purpose provision. New section AA 2 gives readers a preliminary indica- tion of the persons to whom the Income Tax Act 1994 and the Tax Administration Act 1994 apply. Persons who are “resident in New Zealand or who (have) income from New Zealand” must satisfy the obligations 1. Rewriting the Income Tax Act: Objectives, process, guidelines. New Part B - Core Provisions The structure of the core provisions is illustrated by the following diagram: continued on page 4 imposed by the Income Tax Act and the Tax Adminis- tration Act. The reference to “income” is to income in a non-technical sense rather than a defined term. This new provision is not intended to affect the application of the specific residence and source rules in the Act. Section AA 3 - Interpretation New section AA 3 introduces an interpretation provi- sion to the Income Tax Act. It requires the user to have regard not only to the words of a particular provision, but also to the purpose provisions, the core provisions and the way in which the Act has been organised. It is intended that each of these features of the re-ordered and rewritten Act be used to improve the reader’s ability to understand the meaning of a provision. Section AA 3 (2) makes it clear that diagrams and lists of defined terms at the end of sections are aids to interpretation only. They are designed to help readers follow the structure of a Part and its connection to other Parts of the Act. They are also designed to help readers identify the steps that must be taken to determine an income tax liability under the Income Tax Act 1994. If there is a conflict between these new aids and the sections of the Act, section AA 3 (2)(a) makes it clear that the aids to interpretation do not apply. If a defined term is inadvertently omitted from a list, and the term is defined for the purposes of the section (or the Act), the meaning conferred by the definition is still applicable, as the lists are an aid to interpretation only. Section AA 4 - Definitions New section AA 4 consolidates the provisions that were previously found in sections AA 2 and AA 3. Subsection (1) ensures that a reference to ‘this Act’ still includes a reference to the Tax Administration Act 1994, unless the context requires that it not be included. Subsection (2) refers the reader to Part O for definitions and for general provisions relating to the interpretation and construction of the Act. Old section AA 2 (2) provided that references to the definition of a particular word were references to the definition of that word as it appeared in section OB 1. Old section AA 4 provided that a reference, for exam- ple, to “paragraph (f)” was a reference to the paragraph (f) of the section, subsection, definition, or clause in which that reference was made. These sections were products of the re-ordering process. As they are now taken to be implicit, they no longer require legislative force and have been omitted from the core provisions. However, section AA 1 (2) has been saved as section YB 4 (3). Section AA 1 (2) provided that the re- ordering and changes of style carried out in the Income Tax Act 1994 were not intended to affect the interpreta- tion of the provisions of the Income Tax Act 1976 as they were included in the re-ordered Act. The new section YB 4 (4) provides that the changes in style and language carried out by the Core Provisions Act are to be applied to the interpretation of the provisions of the 1976 Act which continue to apply. Subpart A Purpose 1 Subpart B Income tax and resulting obligations 1 Subpart G Avoidance 1 Subpart H Double tax agreements 1 Subpart F Other obligations 1 Subpart E Withholding liabilities 1 Subpart C Calculation and satisfaction of income tax liabilities 1 Subpart D Gross income, allowable deductions and timing 1 agreements need to be considered as part of the process of determining a person’s income tax liability. Subpart BC - Calculation and satisfaction of income tax liabilities New Subpart BC sets out the methods for determining and satisfying a person’s income tax liability. Section BC 1 - Calculation and satisfaction The method of determining a person’s income tax liability depends on whether a person is: •a non-filing taxpayer (defined in section OB 1) •a taxpayer other than a non-filing taxpayer; or •a taxpayer with “schedular gross income”. New section BC 1 (1) directs these different types of taxpayers to the appropriate provisions in Subpart BC that govern the calculation of their types of income tax liability. New section BC 1 (2) states that the income tax liability for an income year may be satisfied by crediting any tax paid or withheld, or by paying terminal tax under section BC 9, or by both. Section BC 2 - Calculation of income tax liability of a non-filing taxpayer “Non-filing taxpayer” is defined in section OB 1 to include: •a taxpayer to whom section 33A of the Tax Adminis- tration Act 1994 applies (formerly known as “pay- period taxpayers”); (i)who does not elect to file a return; or (ii)whose income tax liability for an income year would be larger if determined under sections BC 4 to BC 8, than if it were equal to the total of all tax deductions required to be made from the gross income derived in that income year. •a non-resident entertainer who elects not to file; and •a taxpayer who derives only non-resident withholding income subject to NRWT as a final tax. Under section BC 2, non-filing taxpayers have their income tax liability determined by the amount of tax deductions required to be made from their gross income for the relevant year. Sections BC 4 to BC 8 - Income tax liability of all taxpayers other than non-filing taxpayers New sections BC 4 to BC 8 set out the general calcula- tion provisions for determination of an income tax liability. Taxpayers who are not “non-filing taxpayers” must follow this process. Taxpayers with schedular gross income must also apply this process in the manner described below. The first step to calculating the taxpayer’s income tax liability under the general calculation provisions is to calculate the taxpayer’s taxable income. The process is illustrated diagrammatically on page 5. Part B contains the main rules for calculating and satisfying income tax liabilities. While most of the detail is contained in other Parts of the Act, the other Parts are subject to the core provisions. Subpart BA - Purpose The new section BA (1) sets out the purposes of Part B. The purposes of core provisions are: •to impose income tax, provisional tax, withholding liabilities and other obligations in respect of taxes •to set out procedures to be followed to calculate the tax and satisfy the obligations imposed under the Income Tax Act 1994 and the Tax Administration Act 1994 •to provide a basis for the application of the other Parts •to set up the scheme of the Act and the main links between its Parts. Part B is intended to be the only Part of the Act within which all the various taxes dealt with in the Act are imposed, so as to make it as straightforward as possible for users to locate charging provisions. Consequently, Part B contains the charging provisions in relation to FBT, PAYE, RWT, provisional tax and so on. Subpart BB - Income Tax and Resulting Obligations The new Subpart BB imposes income tax and provides the links with the later subparts. Section BB 1 - Imposition of tax New section BB 1 is the central charging provision, intended to retain the effect of the former central charging provision (section BB 1). Income tax is imposed on taxable income at the rate(s) of tax fixed by an Act and is payable to the Crown. Section BB 2 - Principal Obligations The new section BB 2 provides that: •income tax liabilities must be calculated and satisfied under Subpart BC •provisional taxpayers must pay provisional tax in respect of an income year in accordance with the provisional tax rules •any withholding liabilities under Subpart BE must be satisfied •any other taxes imposed under Subpart BF must also be satisfied. Section BB 3 - Overriding effect of certain matters The new section BB 3 provides that a person’s income tax liability may be affected by the existence of a tax avoidance arrangement or a relevant double tax agree- ment. The rationale for including the section in the core provisions is to reflect the fact that the implications of the general anti-avoidance rule and of double tax from page 3 Filing taxpayer - calculation of taxable income The definitions of “annual gross income” and “annual allowable deductions” in new sections BC 4 and BC 5 set the foundation for the global/gross approach. “Annual gross income” and “annual allowable deductions” are, respectively, the total amounts of gross income and allowable deductions allocated, under Subpart BD, to the year for which taxable income is calculated. Annual allowable deductions are deducted from annual gross income to arrive at the “net income” or “net loss” of a taxpayer. Under new section BC 6, if a taxpayer’s annual gross income is more than, or equal to, the taxpayer’s annual allowable deductions, the difference is the taxpayer’s net income for the year (subsections (1) and (2)). By contrast, if a taxpayer’s annual gross income is less than the annual allowable deductions, the difference is the taxpayer’s net loss. A taxpayer with a net loss is deemed to have net income of zero (subsection (3)). This avoids the neces- sity to refer continuously to “net income or net loss” throughout the Act. Section BC 6 (4) provides that a net loss may, in accordance with Part I, either be: •carried forward by the taxpayer to future income years along with net losses of previous income years and offset against net income of the taxpayer in those future years; or •made available to another taxpayer for offset against their net income (under the company grouping rules or the loss attributing qualifying company rules). continued on page 6 43 42 40 net income if positive or zero Less Subpart D BD 1 Gross income 3 BD 2 Allowable deductions 4 BD 4 Allocation of allowable deductions 5 BC 4 Annual gross income 6 BC 5 Annual allowable deductions 7 Net income 10 Sum Sum Part I Losses 11 net loss if negative less Available net losses 12 Taxable income 13 BC 8 Income tax liability 14 BD 3 Allocation of gross income 2 equals 41 BC 6 BC 7 equals income tax liability is the result of the following calcu- lations: •Multiplying taxable income by the applicable basic tax rate (set out in Schedule 1 of the Act) to arrive at the “unadjusted income tax liability” (section BC 8 (2)); •Subtracting the taxpayer’s allowable rebates from the unadjusted income tax liability, and adding the New Zealand superannuation surcharge (the applicable surcharge) to arrive at the “interim income tax liability” (section BC 8 (3)). If the result of these calculations is positive or zero, that amount is the income tax liability of the taxpayer. If the result is negative, the taxpayer’s income tax liability is zero (section BC 8 (5)). In the latter case, the Commis- sioner is then required, under section BC 8 (6) and section BC 10, to make a refund in respect of any refundable rebates (defined to include Family Support credits and rebates of non-resident investment compa- nies) to the extent that they exceed the interim income tax liability. The excess is called a “surplus rebate”. The steps for calculating the income tax liability that follow from the calculation of taxable income are illustrated in the following diagram: Section BC 8 - Income Tax Liability Under section BC 7 “available net losses” are deducted from net income to arrive at “taxable income”. An “available net loss” is defined in section OB 1 as an amount that a taxpayer is entitled at any relevant time to offset against net income under Part I. In addition to net losses referred to in the more general loss provisions in Part I, the term includes particular sources of loss such as CFC and FIF losses and specified activity losses. Section BC 3 - Income tax liability of a taxpayer with schedular gross income Section BC 3 introduces the concept of “schedular gross income”. This is defined in section OB 1 to mean income of the following types: •non-resident withholding income subject to NRWT as a final tax •policyholder income of a life insurer •certain income of non-resident entertainers •certain gross income of a non-resident general insurer that is not a company •Category A income of a group investment fund •gross income of a non-resident mining operator from a mining venture. In the absence of this section the preceding types of income would not fit within the global/gross approach because a separate income tax liability calculation is required for reasons such as separate return filing requirements or different tax rates. Section BC 3 requires taxpayers with schedular gross income to calculate, under the general calculation provisions, an income tax liability in respect of that income as if it were their only income. This amount determined under section BC 3 (2) is a “schedular income tax liability”. If the taxpayer has more than one type of schedular gross income for an income year, this calculation must be performed for each type of schedular gross income and all the schedular income tax liabilities added together. The schedular income tax liability or the total of the schedular income tax liabilities must then be added to the amount that would be the taxpayer’s income tax liability if the taxpayer did not have any schedular gross income and is other than a non-filing taxpayer. Taxpayers who act in separate capacities, such as agents and trustees, are dealt with elsewhere in the Act as separate taxpayers in respect of those capacities. This means that it is not necessary to aggregate their income from those capacities. Section BC 8 - remaining steps for calculation of income tax liability The remaining steps that must be followed in order to calculate a taxpayer’s income tax liability are set out in section BC 8. Broadly section BC 8 provides the process for calculating taxpayers income tax liability once their taxable income has been determined. It provides that the from page 5 45 44 less BC 8 (1) Application 15 Income tax liability calculated under this section Calculate unadjusted income tax liability Taxable income 16 Unadjusted income tax liability 18 Calculate interim income tax liability Applicable surcharges 21 equals plus BC 8 (4) Result positive Income tax liability 22 BC 8 (5) Result negative Income tax liability = 0 23 BC 9 Satisfaction of income tax liability 24 BC 8 (6) Surplus rebates 25 BC 10 Amounts owing to taxpayers 26 BC 7 Taxable income 19 multiplied by Applicable basic tax rate 17 (BC 8 (2)) (BC 8 (3)) equals 46 Allowable rebates 20 Section BC 9 - Satisfaction of income tax liability Having determined the income tax liability of a tax- payer, section BC 9 outlines the manner in which it must be satisfied. The liability is first satisfied by credits that are available to the taxpayer and then through the payment of terminal tax. If the total of the taxpayer’s credits for tax paid or withheld exceeds the taxpayer’s income tax liability, section BC 9 (2) requires the excess credits first to be set off against other tax obligations of the taxpayer. Any remaining excess is to be dealt with in accordance with Part L (credits), Part M (tax payments) or is to be refunded by the Commissioner under section BC 10. To determine the composition of any excess credits, new section BC 9 (3) provides that the taxpayer’s credits are to be treated as having been set off in the following order: •non-refundable credits (such as credits for foreign tax) •credits allowed to the taxpayer under Part L in respect of supplementary dividends •convertible credits (such as imputation credits) •refundable credits (such as PAYE and provisional tax). This ordering rule ensures that maximum credit is available for foreign taxes and other amounts which are capped at the level of domestic income tax liability. The following diagram illustrates the process for satisfying income tax liabilities: BC 9 - Satisfaction of income tax liability Section BC 10 - Amounts owing to taxpayers New section BC 10 gives the Commissioner the author- ity to refund surplus credits and rebates. Subpart BD - Gross income, allowable deductions and timing The new subpart BD contains the sections relating to gross income, allowable deductions and timing that must be applied to determine annual gross income and annual allowable deductions for the purposes of new Subpart BC. Section BD 1 - Gross income New section BD 1 defines gross income as all amounts included in gross income under various Parts of the Act. The main Part dealing with gross income is Part C, although currently items are included in gross income throughout the Act. Section BD 1 contains the exclusions from gross income. They are exempt income, amounts excluded under various later Parts of the Act and, if the taxpayer is a non-resident, amounts that are foreign-sourced. The last exclusion gives effect to the rules that determine liability to tax by reference to residence and source (former section BB 3). This approach is intended to place those rules more clearly within a global/gross context as income tax liabilities are now triggered through derivation of gross income. Section BD 2 - Allowable deductions New section BD 2 defines allowable deductions by inclusion of the general deductibility provision and reference to the Parts allowing other deductions. The replacement in the general deductibility provision of the words “gaining or producing” with the word “deriving”, and other changes in wording in the provi- sion, are purely drafting changes and are not intended to affect policy or interpretation. Section BD 2 (2) contains the prohibitions on deduct- ibility. An amount of expenditure or loss is not an allowable deduction to the extent that it is: •of a private or domestic nature •incurred in deriving exempt income •incurred in deriving income from employment •incurred in deriving non-resident withholding income subject to NRWT as a final tax •of a capital nature unless specifically allowed; or •disallowed as a deduction under any other provision of the Act. These exclusions generally reflect the exclusions in the previous legislation. The exception is the exclusion in relation to non-resident withholding income subject to NRWT as a final tax, which reflects current practice and case law as in Lambe v CIR (1980) 4 NZTC 61,599. continued on page 8 less 48 less less less Income tax liability 27 Credits to be set off against income tax liability BC 8 Income tax liability 28 Non-refundable credits 29 Convertible credits 30 Refundable credits 31 BC 9 (2) Surplus credits 33 BC 9 Terminal tax 34 Part M Tax payments 35 Part L Credits 36 BC 10 Amounts owing to taxpayers 37 BC 9 (2)(a) Excess due to convertible credits 38 BC 9 (2)(b) Excess due to refundable credits 39 if negative if positive Result 47 BC 9 (1) Section BD 3 and BD 4 - Allocation of gross income and allowable deductions New sections BD 3 and BD 4 outline the timing rules that allocate gross income and allowable deductions to income years. If a timing regime in Part E applies, the income or deduction must be allocated in accordance with that regime. Otherwise the test is when the income is derived or the expenditure incurred. Both sections contain provisions to ensure that there is no double assessability or deductibility. Subpart BE - Withholding Liabilities New section BE 1 imposes the various withholding liabilities dealt with under the Act. These include: •source deduction payments •resident withholding tax •non-resident withholding tax •fringe benefit tax •specified superannuation contribution withholding tax •dividend withholding payments. The section refers to those Parts of the Act that contain the detail of the relevant regime. Subpart BF - Other obligations New section BF 1 imposes a number of other taxes dealt with under the Act. These include: •qualifying company election tax •income tax on taxable distributions from non-qualify- ing trusts •withdrawal tax •further income tax •further dividend withholding payments Again, the section refers to the Parts of the Act that contain the detail of the relevant regimes. Subpart BG - Avoidance New section BG 1 contains the main aspects of the general anti-avoidance provision and is split into two essential components: the voiding of tax avoidance arrangements, and the ability of the Commissioner to counteract any advantage obtained under such arrange- ments. The rest of the general anti-avoidance provisions are contained in section GB 1 and section OB 1. The changes in wording to the various components of the provisions, including the reference in section BG 1 to the Commissioner being able to “counteract” an arrangement, are not intended to change existing policy. The reference to the Commissioner’s ability to “counter- act” was used in the illustrative core provisions drafted by the Working Party on the Reorganisation of the Income Tax Act 1976. Subpart BH - Double Tax Agreements Section BH 1 rewrites the previous section BB 11, as introduced in the 1994 Act, dealing with the overriding effect of double tax agreements and the provisions that may be contained in a double tax agreement. Subsection (3) provides that any reference in a double tax agreement to profits from a particular activity shall be read as a reference to the amount that would be the taxpayer’s net income if that activity were the taxpay- er’s only activity. This is to ensure that net concepts in double tax agreements are not inconsistent with the global/gross approach. from page 7 General consequential changes New terms and phrases The core provisions use new terms to describe the various components of the income tax calculation. The new terminology is now used consistently throughout the Act. The most common change is to the term “assessable income”, which was previously used to reflect both gross and net concepts. In some instances it was not clear which concept of income was being referred to. The term “assessable income” has been replaced with the more explicit terms “gross income”, “net income” or “taxable income”, as appropriate. Gross income is referred to as being “derived by” a taxpayer. In contrast “net income” and “taxable in- come” are the result of a calculation . Accordingly, the Act refers to the net or taxable income “of” (rather than “derived by”) the taxpayer. Gross income Section BD 1 defines gross income as an amount included in a taxpayer’s gross income under one of the various Parts of the Act that classify amounts as gross income. Gross income is not related to a particular income year until it is allocated to an income year under section BD 3 in accordance with the relevant timing principle. The following phrases have been used in provisions identifying amounts as “gross income”: •“xxx is gross income” •“the gross income of any person includes”; and •“xxx is included in the gross income of any person”. The use of these phrases interchangeably reflects that gross income can be one, or more than one, item. As noted above, total gross income for an income year is called annual gross income. In line with the drafting changes to the general deduct- ibility provision (section BD 2), references to the “production of assessable income” have been changed to the “derivation of gross income”. Similarly, references to “gaining or producing assessable income” have been changed to “deriving gross income”. Generally the Act no longer states the taxpayer is liable to tax in respect of a particular item. This is because the designation of an amount as gross income, by implica- tion, brings the amount into the calculation of an income tax liability. Examples of where “assessable income” has been replaced with “gross income” follow: Section ED 4.Accounting for goods and services tax - (1)...the gross income of any person shall not include - (a)Any amount of output tax charged, levied, or calcu- lated in respect of a supply of goods and services made by that person: (b)Any amount of goods and services tax payable by the Commissioner to that person. Section CH 3 Monetary Remuneration All monetary remuneration derived by a person is gross income. Net income The amount by which annual gross income exceeds annual allowable deductions is net income. An example of where the term “net income” replaces “assessable income” follows: Section KC 2. Rebate in certain cases for children In the assessment of every taxpayer (other than an absentee) who at any time during any income year - (a)Is under the age of 15 years .... there shall be allowed a rebate of income tax for that income year of the lesser of - (d)An amount calculated in accordance with the following formula: (x - y) x (15/100) where x is the net income of the taxpayer for that income year ... Taxable income “Taxable income” is calculated by deducting “available net losses” (see above) from “net income”. An example of where “assessable income” has been amended to “taxable income” follows: Section IG 2 Net loss offset between group companies ... (2)(g)(iii) The \[subvention\] payment would not (otherwise than under this subsection) be taken into account in calculat- ing the taxable income of either the loss company or the profit company; and ... Amount A number of provisions in the Act refer to net concepts of profits or gains, such as section CD 1, relating to land transactions. These references are inconsistent with the gross approach of the new core provisions. The term “any amount” has been adopted in substitution for “profits or gains” to refer to the total consideration derived by the taxpayer from a transaction. The word “amount” is intended to reflect that what is being referred to is a gross item. As noted above, there is a savings provision in relation to the use of the term “amount” in section CD 3 (the predecessor to which, section BB 4 (a), referred to profits or gains from a business). The term “amount” is used more generally to replace generic references to income except where this would change the meaning of a section. “Amount” is defined to include an amount in money’s worth. Allowable deductions The legislation authorising a deduction has been standardised. Consistent with section BD 2, the Act now refers to an amount being “allowed as a deduction” or a variation of that phrase. Terms such as “entitled” or “permitted” in deduction sections have been replaced with “allowed”. For example: Section DD 3. Deduction for interest where funds bor- rowed to purchase shares in amalgamating company - ... interest payable, in the income year in which the amalga- mation takes place or subsequently, on the money borrowed will be allowed as a deduction to the other company. Section DB 1. Certain deductions not allowed ... Under the new core provisions, the allowance of deduc- tions is incorporated as one aspect of the calculation of a taxpayer’s net income. Consequently, references to “in calculating the assessable income” are redundant and have been removed. For example, section DF 2 previ- ously read: Sect DF 2. Contributions to employees’ benefit funds - (1)In calculating the assessable income of any employer the Commissioner may allow a deduction of any amount set aside or paid by the employer as or to a fund (not being a superannuation scheme) to provide individual personal benefits to employees of that employer: That section now reads: (1)The Commissioner may allow a deduction to an em- ployer of any amount set aside or paid by the employer as or to a fund (not being a superannuation scheme) to provide individual personal benefits to employees of that employer: continued on page 10 Annual gross income and annual allowable deductions “Annual gross income” and “annual allowable deduc- tions” are, respectively, the total amounts of gross income and allowable deductions for an income year. These terms are only occasionally used in the Act outside the core provisions. Net loss/Available net losses The term “loss” in the Act previously meant one of two things: expenditure or loss arising from a particular event (for example, theft) or a year’s trading loss. The term “net loss” is now consistently used when referring to the amount by which annual allowable deductions exceed annual gross income. All losses dealt with in Part I, including pre-1997-98 losses are termed “net losses”. References to “a loss incurred by a taxpayer” have been changed to “a net loss of a taxpayer”. The phrase “offset against net income” has replaced “deduct/set off against assessable income”. Available net losses are, as noted above, the sum of losses available to a taxpayer for offset, including attributed foreign losses and specified activity losses. Income tax liability Under the new core provisions, taxpayers have an “income tax liability” in respect of their “taxable income”. When used in this context, the term “income tax payable” has been changed to “income tax liability”. No change has been made where “income tax payable” directly refers to the payment of (or the obligation to pay) tax. The terminology used for the recognition of the payment of an income tax liability is generally that an income tax liability has been satisfied. A liability is first satisfied by credits that are available to a taxpayer being “set off” or “credited against” that liability. Basic rate of income tax for companies As a result of the recent reduction of the tax rate on New Zealand branch income of non-resident companies, the phrase “rate of resident companies’ income tax” has been replaced by “basic rate of income tax for compa- nies”. Other consequential changes Hypothetical calculations As mentioned earlier, the core provisions require that all items of gross income are aggregated for an income year, regardless of their source or type. Net income is calculated by deducting annual allowable deductions from the aggregate amount of gross income for an income year (annual gross income). Therefore there can be only one net income figure. However, various provisions in the Act refer to a particular type or source of net income. In order to preserve the existing policy while conforming with the global/gross approach, it has been necessary to adopt a formulation for a hypothetical calculation of net income. The hypothetical calculation assumes that the gross income from one source is the only gross income of a taxpayer. Under section IH 1 a mining company which incurs a net loss from exploration in a mining licence area may offset the loss against net income for a succeeding income year only to the extent that the loss does not exceed the following amount: gross income derived from mining in the licence area - less - expenditure incurred in deriving that income. Mining income derived from another licence area and any non-mining income derived by that company is not, therefore, taken into account for the purposes of calcu- lating the amount of net loss able to be offset. Section IH 1 has consequently been redrafted as follows: Section IH 1. Losses of mining companies and petroleum miners (1)(b) .... offset against the net income of that company to the extent that it does not exceed the amount that would be the net income of the company if its sole source of gross income for the year of claim was from that licence area... Certain provisions calculate the amount of an allowable deduction by reference to particular types or sources of income. This quarantining is also preserved by the same hypothetical calculation. For example: Section DM 1. Treatment of petroleum mining exploration and development expenditure - (6)(a)The petroleum miner shall be allowed deductions under subsection (5)(b) in respect of that asset only to the extent that the deductions do not exceed the amount that would be the net income of the petroleum miner if the only gross income of the petroleum miner were from that disposition. This change has also been made in section DD 2 (Testamentary annuities charged on property) and HI 4(2) (Tax in respect of Maori authorities with 20 or fewer beneficiaries). The same principles apply to determine the amount of income tax payable on income from a particular source. In these instances it has been necessary to provide a hypothetical calculation of a person’s income tax liability. For example, Section LC 4 Foreign tax credits - controlled foreign companies (4)Any person ... is entitled to set off that credit against the person’s income tax liability - (a)For that income year, to the extent that it does not exceed the amount that would be the person’s income tax liability for that year if the person did not have any gross income for that year other than attributed foreign income ... from page 9 Provisions that previously referred to assessable income as a net concept before taking into account deductions to which the section applies, now use a formulation such as “the amount that would but for this section be the net income”. For example: Section DJ 4.Gifts of money by companies not closely held - ... the amount of the deduction allowed under this section - (a)In respect of the aggregate of all gifts made in that income year by any company not being a close company) to any one donee, shall not exceed the greater of - (i)1% of the amount that would but for this section be the net income of the company; ... Similarly: •The deduction allowed to a Maori authority under section DI 2 (deduction for donations to Maori associations) is expressed as not exceeding 5% of the amount that would be the net income of the Maori authority in the absence of this section. •The net schedular flavour of section DI 3 (2) (treat- ment of expenditure incurred by a superannuation fund if its funds are invested in another superannua- tion fund) has been removed by characterising the amount of the allowable deduction to the second superannuation fund by reference to notional taxable income of the second superannuation fund. “Notwithstanding” The core provisions provide all the essential rules for the calculation of an income tax liability and form the basis for the application of later Parts of the Act. For instance, for expenditure or a loss to be an allowable deduction it must satisfy the general deductibility rule in section BD 2 or the rule in that section defining allow- able deductions by reference to whether they are allowed in a later Part. Accordingly, the Act no longer contains the phrase “notwithstanding anything in section BB 7” (the predecessor to section BD 2). See section DB 1 (Certain deductions not allowed). As another example, section DI 3 (Expenditure incurred by superannuation funds) previously applied “notwith- standing section BB 8 (a)”. Section BD 2 (2)(e) ex- cludes a capital amount from the term “allowable deduction”, unless it is allowed as a deduction under either Part D or E. Therefore it is not necessary to override the capital deduction prohibition in specific deduction provisions. Provisions that replicate the core provisions As noted above, the changes confirm the Court of Appeal’s decision in CIR v Inglis (1992) 14 NZTC 9,180: if any profits or gains from a transaction would have been taxable under the Act, any losses are deduct- ible. This is because the total consideration derived from the sale of property is included in gross income and the cost of that property is identified as an allowable deduction. Consequently, in addition to the changes made to the land, personal property and other “revenue account property” provisions as discussed below, provisions dealing with losses by reference to what the treatment would be if a profit had arisen have been removed. For example: •The proviso in paragraph (c) of section DD 1 (Certain deductions not allowed - rents, interest, and premises) previously stated that in the case of a disposal of premises, the deduction for a loss would not be denied if a corresponding profit would have been assessable. •Sections IE 1 (5) and IG 2 (1)(c) previously provided that a tax loss is not available if no gross income has been derived, as in the case of non-residents. Terminating provisions The core provisions legislation will apply from the 1997-98 income year. The approach taken to amending terminating provisions is to amend only those that have application in the year the core provisions will apply. In the case of provisions that have historical application only, the old terminology is retained. Consequential amendments to Part C - Income Further Defined Subpart CB - Exempt income The new term “exempt income” is used in Subpart CB for consistency with section BD 1 (2) of the core provisions, which excludes “exempt income” from the meaning of gross income. Section CB 1 (Exempt income - interest) incorporates changes that are illustrative of the changes to all the provisions in Subpart CB. It employs the new term “exempt income”, which has been adopted to replace references to items (or persons 2 ) that were previously “exempt from tax”. 2. See section CB 14. Section CB 1 also introduces a new formulation at the beginning of each section that exempts an item from tax. It reads: “to the extent that in the absence of this section the following amounts would be gross income, they are exempt income”. This ensures that there is no overlap between items of exempt income and capital gains. It is also intended that the exempt items are gross amounts. Section CB 1 further illustrates a change which has occurred frequently throughout the consequential amendments: the reference to “income derived” has been replaced with a specific reference to the character of the income being referred to. For example, in section continued on page 12 CB 1 (b), “income derived” has been replaced with “interest on post-war credits derived”. Similarly, references to “income derived by a person” throughout the consequential amendments have often been replaced by “any amount derived by a person”. See, for example, section CB 2 (1)(c) (Non-residents’ exempt income). Section CB 4 (1)(k), which provided for a $1,000 exemption for non-profit organisations, has been repealed and replaced with a $1,000 deduction provi- sion in Part D (limited to the amount of net income of the organisation - see section DJ 17 (Non-profit bod- ies)). For consistency with the global/gross approach, the reference to “exempt income” should be to a gross amount since exempt income is limited to amounts that would otherwise be gross income. Hence, it is not possible to have net amounts as exempt income. To draft the provision on a gross income basis would effectively deny non-profit organisations a deduction for the portion of expenditure that was incurred in relation to their exempt income. This is not the current policy. The redrafting of this provision is a change in mecha- nism only and involves no change to the actual tax position of non-profit organisations. The proviso to section CB 8 (1)(b) (Certain income from Niue exempt) replaces “income or gains derived” with “any amount derived”. Subsection (1)(b) provides that no dividends are exempt income under that para- graph to the extent that those dividends constitute distribution of any amount derived by the company from sources in New Zealand. The substitution of the word “amount” does not alter the capital/revenue boundary inherent in the section: the introductory words of section CB 8 limit the exemption available in subsection (1)(b) to items that would otherwise be gross income, in this case dividends paid by certain New Zealand companies deriving profits from Niue to non-residents. The intention of the proviso is to ensure that the exemption provided under the section does not extend to companies that derive some profits from New Zealand sources. The words “income or gains from New Zea- land” are used in the generic sense (as in profits from New Zealand) rather than in a tax sense. Consequently, the changes have not altered the application of the section. In section CB 12 (Exempt income - employee allow- ances and expenditure on account of an employee), the phrase “deductible in calculating the employee’s assessable income for any income year” has been replaced by the phrase “an allowable deduction to the employee”. This illustrates two generic changes which are consequential to the enactment of the core provi- sions: •The removal of the term “assessable income”. •The use of new terminology for allowing a deduction or providing that an amount is deductible is “allowed as a deduction” for consistency with Subparts BC and BD of the core provisions. Section CB 12 also removes the reference to section DE 1 (formerly Deduction for expenditure or loss incurred in production of income from employment), and replaces it with a reference to section BD 2 (2)(c) of the core provisions (Exclusion from allowable deduc- tions for expenditure incurred in deriving income from employment). Subpart CC - Compensation, Benefits and Grants All provisions in Subpart CC have been placed on a gross basis so that compensation payments and benefits, payments to former service employees, and the labour portion of the forestry encouragement grant are gross income. Section CC 1 (Certain compensation, benefits, and other payments are gross income) now begins: “The gross income of any person includes”. This phrase and the phrase “is included in the gross income of any person” have frequently been added to provisions designating amounts or items as “gross income”. Subpart CD - Activities in the nature of trade A number of significant changes have occurred in Subpart CD. Subpart CD now contains the core assess- ability provisions relating to business and personal property. Sections CD 3 (Business), CD 4 (Personal property) and CD 5 (Gross income according to ordi- nary concepts) replace the former sections BB 4 (a), BB 4 (c) and BB 4 (d) respectively. In line with the core provisions, all the sections in Subpart CD have been placed on a gross basis. Section CD 1 (Land transactions) illustrates two generic changes which are consequential to the enactment of the core provisions: •First, the words “unless (or save so far as) express provision is made in this Act to the contrary” have generally been omitted (see also section CG 1, for example). The accepted rules of statutory interpreta- tion, the new interpretation provision in Part A (section AA 3 (1)) and the Acts Interpretation Act 1924 generally make this phrase redundant. •Second, as mentioned above, generic references to “profits or gains” have for the most part been replaced with a singular reference to “any amount” placing the section on a gross basis. Section CD 3 provides that an amount derived from a business is now “gross income”. Cases such as Califor- nian Copper Syndicate v Harris (1904) 5 TC 159 and more recently CIR v City Motor Service Ltd \[1969\] NZLR 1010 have established the common law principle whereby the assessability of business profits in an income tax statute is determined by focusing on whether the receipt in question is derived from the current operations of a business. Accordingly, the use of the term “amount” instead of “profits or gains” should not from page 11 disturb the application of this principle. A savings provision has, however, been inserted in section 2 of the Taxation (Core Provisions) Act for the avoidance of doubt on the matter. It states that the use of the word “amount” in section CD 3 is not by itself intended to change whether an amount derived by a person is taken into account or disregarded in calculating the person’s income tax liability for an income year. The changes to section CD 4 involve substituting the words “amount derived from the sale ... of personal property” for the existing terminology of “profit or gain derived from the sale ...of personal property”. A provi- sion has also been included in Part D that has the effect of authorising a deduction for the cost of that property under the general deductibility provisions. Section CD 5 (Gross income according to ordinary concepts) replaces the former section BB 4 (d). Section BB 4 (d) included in assessable income “income derived from any other source”. The Act did not contain an exhaustive definition of assessable income, instead determining assessable income on an inclusive basis by listing (for example, under the former section BB 4) the principal sources of income assessable under the Act. In order to maintain, in substance, an inclusive definition of income under the global/gross approach, section CD 5 has been included to provide that the gross income of any person includes “any amount that is included in gross income under ordinary concepts”. This ensures that where any transaction gives rise to an amount that is of an income nature, that amount will be gross income even where that amount would not otherwise fall within the scope of any other specific gross income provision. The comment was made at page 17 of Taxation (Core Provisions) Bill - Commen- tary on the Bill, December 1995 that the intention of this change is to ensure that the courts “recognise and give effect to the full scope of the income concept”. A general provision applying to revenue account property has been inserted in Part D to ensure a deduc- tion for cost under the general deductibility rule in section BD 2. Any specific deduction provisions have been relocated to Part D (for example, former subsec- tions CD 1 (5), (8) and (9)). Relevant to the sections in subpart CD is the insertion in Part E of a new matching provision which requires the allowable deduction for the cost of the property to be deferred until the later of, disposition of the property, or derivation of gross income from the disposition (see comment under section EF 2). Subpart CE - Investment and land income The provisions in Subpart CE have been placed on a gross basis and any related deductibility provisions contained in this Subpart have been relocated to Part D. For example, new section CE 3 (1)(a) provides that the gross income of any person includes the amount re- ceived on the redemption of a commercial bill. Com- mercial bills are, therefore, revenue account property as that term is defined in section OB 1. The corresponding allowable deduction for the cost of the commercial bill was formerly contained in old paragraph CE 3 (1)(a). Now, where the commercial bill is not a financial arrangement to which the accrual rules apply, the cost of the commercial bill will be an allowable deduction under section BD 2 (1)(b)(i) or (ii). New section DJ 13 prevents any such expenditure incurred by a taxpayer as the cost of revenue account property being prohibited from deductibility by the capital exclusion of section BD 2 (2)(e). The cost of the commercial bill will also be subject to the allocation rules set out in section EF 2. Finally, section DJ 16 provides that for the purposes of determining the deduction allowed for the cost of a commercial bill, the taxpayer is treated as having acquired it at a cost equal to its value on the date of acquisition. Section CE 4 (Amounts remitted to be gross income) has been inserted to replace the former section BB 5 (Amounts remitted to be taken into account in comput- ing income). This new section deems any expenditure or loss incurred by the taxpayer and allowed as a deduc- tion, that is subsequently cancelled or remitted, to be gross income in the year in which it was remitted or cancelled. Subpart CF - Dividends Section CF 1 provides that the gross income of any person includes “all dividends”. Other minor changes have been made to the dividend rules to ensure consist- ency with the core provisions. For example: •Sections CF 2 (9) and (10) (Meaning of term “divi- dends”) have been amended so that if dividends are subsequently repaid to the company the Commis- sioner may amend the assessment of the “income tax liability” of the shareholder accordingly. •Section CF 2 (15)(a)(ii) replaces the phrase “rate of resident companies’ tax” with the phrase “basic rate of income tax for companies” (see general consequen- tial changes above). •Sections CF 3 (1)(ia)(iii) and (j)(iii) (Exclusions from term “dividends”) referred to dividends for which a person has been “assessable and liable for tax”. This is replaced with “is included in gross income”. Any amount that is gross income is, by implication, assessable for income tax. •Section CF 3 (7) has been re-structured and re-drafted so that it no longer refers to “profits or gains”. The changes are not intended to alter the application of the section. •Section CF 6 (1) (Amount of dividend includes credits and certain foreign tax) deletes “for the purposes of determining the amount of income derived by a person” because the core provisions explicitly deter- mine the amount of gross income of a person. continued on page 14 Subpart CG - Attributed foreign income Section CG 1 provides that attributed foreign income and foreign investment fund income are gross income. Section CG 11 (5)(b)(ii) (Branch equivalent income calculation), relating to the adjusted base price of financial arrangements, replaces “accrued expenditure” with “expenditure deemed to be incurred” and replaces “accrued income...less consideration received by the holder” with “gross income”. This ensures consistency with the consequential amendments made to Subpart EH (Financial arrangements). Subpart CH - Employment-related income A new section CH 3 (Monetary remuneration) has been added. This replaces the former section BB 4 (b) and provides that all monetary remuneration derived by a person is gross income. Subpart CI - Fringe benefits Section CI 3 (2)(b) (Value of fringe benefit) replaces “amount of income” with “amount of gross income”. Also, the “amount accruing from that loan” has been replaced in that section with the “gross income accruing from that loan”. This clarifies the type of income that is being referred to and makes the terminology of the section consistent with core provisions. Section CI 9 (Application of fringe benefit tax provi- sions) has been removed as section BE 1 (4) (Fringe benefits) makes the section redundant. Income from minerals, timber, or flax The former section CJ 1, dealing with a net concept of profit or gain in relation to the extraction or sale of timber and minerals, has been split into its income, expenditure and timing components. The income component has been retained in Part C. The effect of the phrase “reduced by the cost of those minerals or of that flax or timber” and the proviso to section CJ 1 has been relocated to Part D (see section DJ 13, which provides that the cost of “revenue account property” (as defined in section OB 1) is not a capital cost to which section BD 2 (2)(e) applies. See also Part E (including the new section EF 2) in relation to timing). Group companies The former section CK 1, relating to companies within a group and the recharacterisation of profit as assessable income, has been split into its income and deduction components. The related deductibility provision is section DI 4. Life insurer income The former section CM 1 (Assessable income of life insurers) provided for a net schedular taxation regime for life insurance companies. It is repealed, since the regime has been significantly restructured to enable the life insurance rules to fit within the global/gross frame- work. New section CM 3 (Exclusions from life insurer’s gross income) preserves the tax treatment of life insurance premiums and reinsurance claims received by life insurers as not being of a taxable nature. These were exclusions from the “item i” in the old CM 3 formula. The life insurance regime is, therefore, no longer a code that exists independently of the core provisions. This change does not involve any change to the existing policy. The deduction provisions in the life insurance regime are now all located in Part D. For example, section CM 4 (Adjustment for superannuation policies in respect of property acquired before 1 April 1988) provided a deduction for life insurers, and has been relocated to Part D (see section DK 3C). Section CM 11 (Certain property not trading stock) has also been relocated to Part D as section DK 3E. New sections CM 5, CM 6, CM 7 respectively deem “mortality profit”, “premium loading”, “discontinuance profit” to be gross income. In section CM 12 certain amounts relating to full reinsurance are deemed not to be gross income. This is consistent with the change to section CM 3. Section CM 9, which prohibited double deductions, is repealed because the schedular nature of the regime has been removed and because section BD 4 (4) provides a prohibition on double deductions. Section CM 10 (Sales or disposals of property) is substantially amended to treat as gross income all consideration derived from property subject to the section. The timing of the deduction for the cost of the property is dealt with in Subpart DK. Subsection (4) is relocated to Part E as section EG 19 as this subsection relates to the depreciation rules. The calculation for policyholder income is performed under section CM 15 (Policyholder base income or loss) is termed “the policyholder base calculation”. Policy- holder income is deemed to be gross income (and is included by definition within schedular gross income). A policyholder net loss may only be deducted in accord- ance with sections II 1 and II 2 because of the separate basic rate of income tax for “schedular taxable income in respect of policyholder income” (see clause 1 of Part A of Schedule 1). Former sections CM 15 (3) and (4) have been relocated to section CM 18 (Transfer of life insurance business). from page 13 Loss on disposal of premises Paragraph (c) of section DD 1 denies a deduction for a loss in relation to the demolition, destruction or disposal of premises. As noted above, the proviso stated that in the case of a disposal, the paragraph would not apply if a corresponding profit would have been assessable. The effect of the proviso is achieved by the core provi- sions: deductions in respect of a disposal transaction producing a loss will be allowed if a profit from the transaction would have been liable to tax. The consid- eration in respect of the transaction is included in gross income and the cost of the transaction is separately included in allowable deductions. The proviso has, therefore, been removed as unnecessary. If a profit from the transaction would not have been liable to tax, the consideration in respect of it would not be included in gross income, and no corresponding deductions would, therefore, be allowed. The reference to the term “disposal” is, therefore, also unnecessary as its effect is inherent in the core provisions. The decision in Lyttelton v CIR 3 confirms that “disposal” is distinct from demolition: a building cannot be “disposed of” by demolition because disposal carries with it connotations of sale, assignment or transfer. Expenditure incurred by employees Subsection (1) of section DE 1 is repealed as the exclusion for expenditure in relation to income from employment is now contained in section BD 2. Section DE 1 is now titled Depreciation for asset used in employment. Group companies Section DI 4 is a new deductibility provision required as a result of separating the income and deduction compo- nents of section CK 1, relating to companies within a group and the recharacterisation of profits as assessable income. Section CK 1 treated the profit of a wholly- owned group of companies as if the group of companies were one company. Section DI 4 provides that when any company in a wholly-owned group derives gross income under section CK 1, a deduction is allowed for the cost relating to that gross income. The allowable deduction is matched to the year of allocation of gross income, in line with the effect of the former “profit” terminology. Expenditure of trustees New section DI 5 (Taxpayer who derives beneficiary income) denies beneficiaries deductions in relation to expenditure incurred by a trustee in deriving beneficiary income. This is not intended to change current policy. 3. HC (ChCh) 17 May 1996, at 28. The need for the section arises from the definition of “beneficiary income” as gross income derived by the trustee to the extent that it is vested in or paid to beneficiaries. The new section is intended to remove any doubt on the point. New section DI 6 (Expenditure incurred by trustee) ensures that the deduction is available to the trustee (see also the commentary under Subpart HH). Bad debts, share losses, indemnities Under paragraph (b) of section DJ 1 a share loss deduction is denied if the benefit of the loss has already been taken under the grouping rules - a loss in this sense does not fit within the global/gross approach. This has been dealt with by referring to a decline in the value of the shares and by differentiating between unrealised and realised losses. The latter are expressed as being where gross income in respect of the shares is less than the deduction (if any) allowed for the cost of the shares. Irrecoverable book debts Deductions under section DJ 2 (Deduction from estate income of irrecoverable book debts) were previously allowed first against trustee income and any balance against certain income of a beneficiary. The net schedular aspect of the section has been removed by placing the emphasis on the person obtaining the deduction, rather than on an offset against particular income. Gifts of money The amount of the deduction for charitable donations by companies under section DJ 4 (Gifts of money by companies not closely held) was formerly based in part on the assessable income of the company. The reference to assessable income has been changed to net income, which clarifies the previous treatment. Patent expenses Some minor drafting changes have been made to section DJ 6 in addition to consequential changes to the section. As the section could apply both before and after the 1997-98 income year, paragraph (b) refers to “gross income or assessable income”. Cost of revenue account property New section DJ 13 has been inserted as part of the separation of the following sections into their income, deductions and timing components: Consequential amendments to Part D - Deductions Further Defined continued on page 16 •section CD 1 (Land transactions) •section CD 4 (Personal property) •section CE 3 (Commercial bills) •section CJ 1 (Income from minerals, timber or flax). Section DJ 13 deals with the deductibility of expendi- ture on “revenue account property”, which is defined in section OB 1 as “property... in respect of which any amount derived on disposition would be gross income”. Rather than allowing a specific deduction, section DJ 13 ensures that deductibility is not excluded by reason of the prohibition on expenditure of a capital nature under section BD 2 (2)(e). Deductibility of the cost of revenue account property is, therefore, provided for by a combi- nation of sections BD 2 (1)(b) (the general deductibility provision) and DJ 13. There has been some concern about whether the treat- ment of the cost of minerals has been affected. Inland Revenue’s policy as set out in Chapter 19 of our old series Technical Rulings is not intended to be affected by the Core Provisions Act. Other deductions for revenue account property New sections DJ 14 to DJ 16 and section DL 1 deal with other deductions in relation to revenue account property. They are intended to preserve existing deductions in respect of certain land transactions, dispositions of personal property, commercial bills and timber. Section DJ 14 (Expenditure on acquiring land) provides a deduction, limited to the amount of profit, if amounts are brought into tax in respect of the sale of land because of profit being attributable to zoning changes. The corresponding gross income section is CD 1 (2)(e). Subsection (3) of section DJ 14 deals with the amount that is allowed as a deduction in relation to development work of other than a minor nature. Section CD 1 (2)(g) corresponds. It preserves the deduction for market value of the land at the time of the commencement of the undertaking of the scheme by deeming there to have been a sale to an unrelated third party, and reacquisition, at market value. Section DJ 15 (Expenditure incurred in acquiring personal property) preserves the deduction for market value in respect of undertakings or schemes to which the third limb of section CD 4 (profit making undertak- ings or schemes) applies. Section DJ 16 (Expenditure incurred in acquiring commercial bills) determines the amount of the deduc- tion allowed in respect of the acquisition of a commer- cial bill from another person. The deemed acquisition cost is the value on the date of disposition. Consistently with the changes to section CB 4 (1)(k), noted above, section DJ 17 (Non-profit bodies) converts the $1,000 exemption for non-profit bodies previously provided for in section CB 4 (1)(k) to an allowable deduction of the lesser of $1,000 or a non-profit body’s net income. The reference to net income clarifies existing policy. Deductions for life insurers New sections DK 3 to DK 3E, relating to life insurers, contain the deduction provisions which correspond to the income provisions in Subpart CM and are required as a result of removing the schedular nature of the life insurance regime. Forestry expenditure Section DL 1 (Cost of timber) contains the deductibility provisions relating to forestry expenditure. These include the deduction for planting and maintaining trees, the specific deductions for overheads, weed and pest control under subsection (3), the deduction for access tracks and the restrictions on deductibility for cost of timber if timber is sold to an associated person. They do not include the deduction for cost of timber itself, which is provided in the deduction for cost of revenue account property in section DJ 13. Petroleum mining expenditure The petroleum mining regime had some schedular aspects relating to deferred deductions on seal and abandonment and to sales to associated persons. Minor changes have been made to section DM 1 (Treatment of petroleum mining exploration and development ex- penditure) to conform with the global/gross approach. Mineral mining expenditure Subpart DN, which related to mineral mining expendi- ture, is repealed and replaced as significant drafting changes to the regime were necessary, primarily to bring it into line with the global/gross approach. The changes are intended to preserve existing policy. The main features of the new Subpart are: •Because of the overriding effect of the core provisions, provisions that treat the mineral mining regime as a code, or as overriding the rest of the Act, such as the former sections DN 1 (1) and (3), have been repealed. •The former section DN 1 (5)(a) provided that mining expenditure was deductible first against mining income and then to the extent of two-thirds against other income. The subsection is replaced with a new provision providing that if a mining company has allowable deductions that exceed its gross income from mining, it may include those deductions in its annual allowable deductions only to the extent that they do not exceed the lesser of: –two-thirds of the “mining outgoing excess” (defined in section OB 1 to mean expenditure relating to mining, less mining income); and from page 15 –the company’s gross income other than from mining, less allowable deductions incurred in deriving that gross income. •Under the global/gross approach, the former section DN 1 (5)(b), dealing with non-mining expenditure and the order of offset, was considered unnecessary given that there is no limit on the amount that can be deducted. This provision has, therefore, been re- moved. •Paragraphs (a) and (b) of section DN 1 (17), which give the Commissioner certain powers to deal with the situation where an offset against either mining or non-mining income places the taxpayer at a disadvan- tage, are repealed as they relate to the time when there were differential rates of tax for mining and non- mining income. •Section DN 2 deals with amounts from the sale of mining shares. The section has been redrafted to remove the reference to profits, in line with the global/gross approach. •Changes in section DN 4 to the treatment of a mining outgoing excess for a resident mining operator follow those in section DN 1 for mining companies. Attributed foreign losses and foreign investment fund losses A new subpart DP has been inserted to allow a deduc- tion in the year incurred for attributed foreign losses and foreign investment fund losses. Under section DP 1 a person is allowed a deduction for an attributed foreign loss of the lesser of the loss or the total of the following, arising from the same jurisdiction as the loss: •any attributed foreign income •any foreign investment fund income calculated under the branch equivalent method. Section DP 2 applies to a foreign investment fund loss calculated other than under the branch equivalent method. The loss is allowed as a deduction to the extent that it does not exceed the total of: •any foreign investment fund income calculated other than under the branch equivalent method •the excess of the loss over that income to the extent that the excess does not exceed the total of that income derived by the person in any previous income years. Section DP 3 provides that section DP 1 applies with certain modifications to a foreign investment fund loss calculated under the branch equivalent method. These new sections replicate the current treatment of attributed foreign losses and foreign investment fund losses in Part I (treatment of net losses). However, they clarify that the offset is in effect against a gross amount of income. If the loss is not fully absorbed it can be carried forward and dealt with according to Part I as either an “attrib- uted foreign net loss” or a “foreign investment fund net loss” (both defined in section OB 1). continued on page 18 Consequential amendments to Part E - Timing of Income and Deductions Throughout the Act, references to “apportion” and “attribute” are changed to “allocate” where they are used in a timing sense (see section EB 2 (1), for exam- ple). The use of the word “allocate” follows the new general timing rule in section BD 3 of the core provi- sions. Also, references to “any income year” when referring to gross income have been omitted where timing is not a factor. Further, the words “in calculating the assessable income derived \[by a company\] in any income year” have been omitted, because under the core provisions an allowable deduction will be allocated to an income year and included in annual allowable deductions. It is the amount of annual allowable deduc- tions which is subtracted from annual gross income (see section EG 1, for example). Income credited in account or otherwise dealt with Subpart EB sets out how gross income received in advance or in anticipation is to be allocated to an income year. Section EB 1 (Amounts credited in account or otherwise dealt with) now applies the derivation rules to generic “amounts” instead of “in- come”. This change in terminology is not intended to change policy but is consistent with the use of a generic concept of “income” under the previous section EB 1. Consequences of change in accounting practice Section EC 1 (Adjustment for incorrect accounting practice in previous years) has been substantially redrafted. Previously, section EC 1 applied to assessable income from a business. This is inconsistent with the global/gross approach, in which all sources of income for a particular year are aggregated for tax purposes. In essence, the section as redrafted gives the Commissioner power to adjust the gross income or allowable deduc- tions of a taxpayer from a business. Moreover, if an adjustment made by the Commissioner results in an increase in net income of $1,000 or more, the taxpayer has the ability under section EC 1 (4) to elect that the amount of the adjustment be allocated equally between that year of adjustment and the three subsequent (or preceding) years. The amount so allocated is deemed to be gross income derived in those years. Trading stock Section EE 1 (Valuation of trading stock, including livestock) has been amended to separate out the income and deduction components of the trading stock regime. Section EE 1 (8) includes the value of a taxpayer’s trading stock at the end of an income year in gross income. Section EE 1 (9) provides that the opening value of the taxpayer’s trading stock is allowed as a deduction for that income year. Accrual expenditure Section EF 1 (Accrual expenditure) is amended by replacing subsections (1) and (2) with a new subsection (1) using the new core provision terminology. It pro- vides that if a person has incurred accrual expenditure, that expenditure is allowed as a deduction and the unexpired portion of that expenditure is included in gross income of the person for that income year. The amount of that unexpired portion will then be allowed as a deduction in the next income year. Matching provision The assessability provisions (including sections CD 1, CD 3 and CD 4 have been amended to apply explicitly to gross items rather than to “profits or gains” from a business or from property transactions. An allowable deduction is separately authorised for the cost of the property under sections DJ 13 and BD 2. This has necessitated the insertion of an explicit matching requirement for dispositions of revenue account prop- erty. Section EF 2 (Matching regime for cost of revenue account property) requires deductions for the cost of certain revenue account property to be deferred until the later of: •the year of disposition of the property; or •the year gross income is derived from the disposition of the property. If the gross income from the disposition is derived in more than one income year, the corresponding allow- able deductions must be proportionately allocated to each of those years. Each year’s allocation of allowable deductions is based on the “proportion of the allowable deduction which the gross income derived in that income year represents as a proportion of the total gross income in respect of the disposition” (section EF 2 (3)). If that total gross income cannot be identified with certainty, subsection EF 2 (4) requires the allocation to be on the basis of what the taxpayer “reasonably expects to derive from the disposition”. This change enables taxpayers to calculate their income tax liability (and file a return accordingly) on the basis of a reasonable estimate. Section BD 4 ensures, however, that the total allowable deductions do not exceed the amount of expenditure incurred. Without an explicit matching requirement, the legisla- tion would, on the face of it, allow taxpayers to deduct the cost of revenue account property at the time of purchase rather than at the time of sale. This would produce a mis-match between the expenditure incurred and the income to which it relates. The insertion of section EF 2 is not considered to be a policy change, however, as various decisions of the courts have re- quired such matching. In Murray Darnill Ltd v TRA (No 2) 1994 16 NZTC 11, 126 and Garwen Holdings Ltd v CIR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,396, the courts inter- preted the Act as requiring taxpayers to match their expenditure with the consideration derived from property transactions by adopting a common law trading stock approach. Further, the accrual expenditure rule in section EF 1 was applied to a land transaction in Thornton Estates Ltd v CIR (1995) 17 NZTC 12,230. Section EF 2 will not apply to property held on revenue account that is subject to the trading stock rules, the accrual expenditure rules, the accrual rules applying to financial arrangements, or the specified lease rules. Depreciation Depreciation deductions are now “deductions allowed on account of depreciation” (see sections EG 1, EG 3, EG 11 and EG 12). Section EG 15 (4)(a) (Additional depreciation in respect of certain new assets acquired of improvements made between 16 December 1991 and 1 April 1994) is amended for consistency with amendments to Subpart CB relating to exempt income. Financial arrangements The changes made to this Subpart mostly involve re- terming “income” as “gross income” to make the Subpart consistent with core provision terminology. Section EH 6 (Post facto adjustment) has been amended so that a taxpayer’s “income tax liability” rather than the “assessable income derived or loss incurred” is recalculated (taking into account the substituted amounts of gross income or expenditure from the post facto adjustment). Under subsection (5) the Commis- sioner has the right to reassess the taxpayer’s “income tax liability”. Section EH 9 (f) (Application of accruals rules) has been amended so that interest is payable in relation to the “income tax liability”, not the “tax on income” of the taxpayer. Under the core provisions, taxpayers have an income tax liability in respect of their taxable income. Where the term “income tax payable” (or “tax on income”) is used in this context it has been changed to “income tax liability” for consistency with the core provisions. However, where the term refers directly to an obligation to pay income taxes (including withhold- ing taxes) no change has been made. from page 17 Income equalisation The phrase “without taking into account the value of trading stock at the beginning or at the end of that accounting year, and before the allowance of any deductions under this Act” in section EI 17 (4) is redundant as gross income, by definition, does not include deductions allowed. Spreading of farm income Significant amendments have been made to section EJ 1 (Spreading of income derived from sale or other disposi- tion of timber) to ensure that if a taxpayer spreads back the gross income derived from the sale or other disposi- tion of timber over previous years, the same proportion- ate amount of the cost of the timber is spread back as well. This approach is similar to that employed in sections EF 2 (3) (Matching regime for cost of revenue account property), EN 2 (3A) (Sums received from sale of patent rights) and EN 4 (2) (Spreading of gross income derived and allowable deductions incurred on acquisition of land by Crown). Livestock The reference to “income derived” in section EL 1 (2)(b) (Valuation of livestock generally) is re- placed with “gross income derived”. Bloodstock Significant changes have been made to section EM 3 (Replacement breeding stock) to improve consistency with the core provisions. For example, the term “assess- able gain” has been replaced by the term “net gain”, and definitions of “gross proceeds”, “net gain” and “value of breeding stock” have been added to section OB 1. In addition, references to the inclusion of a net amount in gross income have been changed. The changes are of a drafting nature only and are not intended to affect the application of the section. Other gross income The reference in section EN 4 (1) (Spreading of gross income derived and allowable deductions incurred on acquisition of land by Crown) to the “payment of all income tax that is or may become payable” is no longer appropriate and has been changed to “satisfaction of all income tax liabilities that have arisen or may arise”. The terminology for recognition of tax paid has been changed generally so that an income tax liability is “satisfied” which is consistent with section BC 9 of core provisions. Section EN 4 has been changed substantially along the same lines as section EJ 1 (Spreading of gross income derived and allowable deductions incurred from sale or other disposition of timber) as discussed above. Foreign source income Section EP 1 (Option to use foreign tax balance date) has been substantially amended for consistency with the global/gross approach. This has involved clarifying that the election under subsection (1) applies to both foreign source income and foreign expenditure (being expendi- ture incurred in deriving that foreign source income). In addition, clarification of the limit applying to the election in section EP 1 (8) has been undertaken. The $100,000 threshold is calculated on the following basis: “if...the taxpayer’s net income for the year, but for this subsection, would exceed $100,000 if the only gross income of the taxpayer were foreign source income”. This wording retains the former inclusion of allowable deductions in respect of domestic expenditure relating to that gross income in the calculation of the $100,000 threshold. Apportionment Section FB 1 (Apportionment of expenditure or loss) is repealed as it relates to the time when there were differential rates of tax for dividends and other forms of income. It consequently no longer has any practical effect. Recharacterisation Section FC 3 (Dividend from share dealing) reflects a net schedular concept of income and has been signifi- cantly redrafted to create consistency with the global/gross approach. Assignments of income No change has been made to section FC 11. This section refers to a generic concept of income which would be inappropriately restricted if described as gross or net income. Consolidation The references to “attributed foreign income” and “foreign investment fund income” in section FD 2 (Interpretation) have been removed as they are implicit in the term gross income. References to “attributed foreign loss” and “foreign investment fund loss” are Consequential amendments to Part F - Apportionment and recharacterised transactions continued on page 20 replaced with “attributed foreign net loss” and “foreign investment fund net loss”. References to “loss” are replaced with references to “net loss” where appropriate. The term “profit or gain” in section FD 10, dealing with transfers within a consolidated group, has been replaced with “gross income”. The deduction inherent in the term “profit or gain” is allowed under the new general deductibility provision, section BD 2 (1)(b)(i) and (ii). It was, therefore, considered that a separate deductibility provision was unnecessary. Amalgamation In section FE 4 (Amalgamated company to assume unexpired accrual expenditure, and gross income of amalgamating company), the term “profit or gain” is replaced by the term “amount”, the latter being a gross concept. Again, deductions inherent in the term “profit or gain” are provided by the new core general deduct- ibility provision, section BD 2 (1)(b)(i) and (ii), so a separate deductibility rule is not necessary. Thin capitalisation Sections FG 3, 4 (2) and 8, containing the new thin capitalisation rules, have been consequentially amended to make them consistent with the core provisions. from page 19 Consequential amendments to Part G - Avoidance and non-market transactions Avoidance - general References to income in the detailed part of the general anti-avoidance provision, section GB 1 (Agreements purporting to alter incidence of tax to be void), have been changed to references to gross income, allowable deductions and net losses, as appropriate. This is not intended to change the ambit of the section. Section GB 1 should be read with section BG 1 of the core provisions, which provides for the voiding of tax avoidance arrangements and the Commissioner’s power to counteract such arrangements. The previous section BB 9 has partially been replaced with a definition of “tax avoidance arrangement”. Tax avoidance arrangement means: “an arrangement, whether entered into by the person affected by the arrangement or by another person, that directly or indirectly- (a)Has tax avoidance as its purpose or effect; or (b)Has tax avoidance as one of its purposes or effects, whether or not any other purpose or effect is referable to ordinary business or family dealings, if the purpose or effect is not merely incidental:” The minor changes to existing wording are drafting changes only and are not intended to affect the existing interpretation. The definition of “tax avoidance” in section OB 1 has not been materially altered. Avoidance - specific Section GC 19 (c), which provides for the general anti- avoidance provision to apply to resident withholding tax, has been amended to make it consistent with the amended section GB 1. Non-market transactions Consequential changes to section GD 3 (1), dealing with excessive remuneration to relatives, have been kept to a minimum as the section is largely concerned with generic items of profit, income or loss. GD 10 (2) now provides that section GD 10 (Leases for inadequate rent) applies with respect to any leased property only and to the extent that it is used by the lessee in the derivation of gross income or exempt income. The previous reference was to “income” which could encompass both types of income. New section GD 13, containing the new transfer pricing rules, was inserted by the Income Tax Act 1994 Amend- ment Act (No 3) 1995. Consequential changes have been made to the section, so that it is consistent with the new core provisions terminology. continued on page 22 Consequential amendments to Part H - Treatment of net income of certain entities Consolidated groups of companies Section HB 1 (d) (Returns, assessments, and liability of consolidated group) is amended to refer to the taxable income of the companies in a consolidated group for an income year as if the companies were a single taxpayer. This change was necessary as the core provisions refer only to single taxpayers. In section HB 2, also relating to consolidated groups, the term “relevant period” is deemed to be an income year for the purposes of the section, to enable the terms “gross income”, “amount” and “taxable income”, which relate to an income year, to be used. Special partnerships The special partnership regime is schedular in nature. This has been dealt with in the Subpart by creating three new terms - “partnership gross income”, “partner- ship net income” and “partnership loss”, defined in section HC 1 (12). The latter two definitions refer to net income or a net loss as if the partnership were a tax- payer resident in New Zealand. Section HC 1 (2) provides that if a special partnership sustains a partnership loss, no deduction will be allowed to any partner for any outgoing of the partnership and the partnership gross income will be deemed not to have been derived by the partners. Instead, in line with the original intention to treat special partnership losses as company losses, the loss may be carried forward by the special partnership to be offset against partnership net income in accordance with section HC 1 (3) to (5). If a partnership loss is so offset against partnership net income, section HC 1 (6) allows each of the special partners a deduction of an amount equal to each part- ner’s share of the partnership loss. This deduction is intended to be offset against the proportion of the income included in each partner’s gross income so that the quarantining is removed to the extent that the partners have income from the partnership against which to offset the loss. Partnerships Section HD 1 (Assessment of partners, co-trustees, and joint venturers) prescribes the process for calculating income tax liabilities of taxpayers deriving or incurring amounts jointly. Paragraph (b) relating to partnerships refers only to gross income and not allowable deduc- tions of the partnership. This is intended to avoid any perceived implications that partnerships and similar bodies are tax entities in their own right. In line with the Court of Appeal’s decision in the Hadlee case 4 , only taxpayers can obtain deductions, and the allowable deductions are those of the individual partner, not of the firm. The practice of partnerships filing returns of net 4. Hadlee & Sydney Bridge Nominees Ltd v CIR (1991) 13 NZTC 8116. amounts is not intended to be changed, however. This is dealt with more specifically in the changes to section 42 of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Unit trusts Under section HE 2, group investment funds were required to file separate returns in respect of their category A income and category B income. This re- quirement is reflected in the amended section. The previous section also imposed the liability to tax in respect of each type of income. This schedular aspect is now dealt with in section BC 3, which requires group investment funds to calculate separate liabilities in respect of category A income and category B income and add those liabilities together to calculate a single income tax liability. Mutual associations The rules relating to mutual associations provided that rebates paid by mutual associations to members in respect of member transactions were deducted from the profit from member transactions, to the extent of that profit. The amount of the deduction for an income year is now expressed in a formula as the lesser of: •the rebates paid by the association in the year in respect of member transactions •gross income from member transactions less deduc- tions relating to that gross income and distributions in accordance with section ME 35 (1)(a) (cash distribu- tions with imputation credits attached). There was some ambiguity as to whether “profit” meant a taxation concept of profit or accounting profit. The clarification in favour of a taxation concept of profit was based on the underlying purpose of section HF 1 (Profits of mutual associations in respect of transactions with members) to allow the imputing to members of that part of an association’s assessable income arising from member transactions that is distributed to members by way of rebate. It is consistent with that purpose to interpret profit as a tax concept. Trusts Subpart HH for the most part refers to gross income derived by a trustee that is categorised as trustee income or beneficiary income. Pivotal to the trust regime are the definitions in section OB 1 of “trustee income” and “beneficiary income”. “Beneficiary income” is broadly defined as gross income derived by a trustee of a trust to the extent that it is vested in the beneficiary or is paid or applied within 6 months after the income year for the beneficiary’s benefit. The words “to the extent that” are intended to reflect that deductions may be taken by the trustee. The definition has also been amended to include amounts that vest to a beneficiary that would have been gross income of the trustee if any settlor of the trust had been resident in New Zealand. This change was necessary as, since gross income excludes amounts derived by non-residents (under section BD 1 (2)(c)), the definition of beneficiary income may otherwise have become narrowed as a result of the global/gross approach. The change makes it clear, for example, that resident beneficiaries of a foreign trust (one for which no settlor is resident at any time in New Zealand) can still derive beneficiary income, even though the income is not gross income for New Zealand purposes. “Trustee income” is defined as gross income derived by the trustee of a trust that does not vest in the beneficiary or is not paid or applied for the benefit of a beneficiary within 6 months after the end of the income year. The change from the previous definition (which referred merely to income that was not beneficiary income) was necessary because of the change to the definition of beneficiary income required as a result of the global/gross approach as described above. As a consequence of treating all income derived by a trustee at the gross level, two new provisions (sections DI 5 and 6, discussed above) further clarify that deduc- tions are to be taken by the trustee rather than the beneficiary, regardless of whether the corresponding income is trustee or beneficiary income. The following example compares the pre- and post-core provisions treatment for a trustee who distributes net rental income to a beneficiary. Example Pre 1997-98 treatment Revenue Non-taxable gain from the sale of shares$3,000 Rental income$5,000 Interest$2,000 Dividends$2,000 $12,000 Expenses Accounting fees$1,000 Property costs$2,000 Legal fees (lease renewals)$1,000 $ 4,000 Net profit$ 8,000 Adjustments Non-taxable gain from the sale of shares$3,000 $5,000 Beneficiary income$2,000 Trustee income$3,000 Global/gross approach from 1997-98 Gross income derived by the trustee Rent$5,000 Dividends$2,000 Interest$2,000 $9,000 less beneficiary income$2,000 Annual gross income of trustee$7,000 Allowable deductions Accounting fees$1,000 Property costs$1,000 Legal fees (lease renewals)$1,000 Annual allowable deductions of trustee$4,000 Net income of trustee$3,000 Calculation of beneficiary income (for both methods) Rent$5,000 less property costs$2,000 less legal fees$1,000 $3,000 $2,000 Under the settlor regime, section HH 4 brings certain non-resident trustees deriving foreign-sourced income into the New Zealand tax net. The section has been amended to treat this type of income as gross income. This was necessary because such income is excluded from gross income under the core provisions (section BD 1 (2)(c)). New section HH 4 (3A) ensures the retention of the treatment of non-resident trustees of a trust with a New Zealand resident settlor relating to foreign tax credits, financial arrangements, foreign investment fund income, attributed foreign income and BETA accounts. New section HH 4 (3B) is intended to retain the treat- ment of foreign-sourced amounts of a trust with no New Zealand-resident settlor by providing that these amounts are not gross income. Subsection (2) of section HH 5, relating to the cost base for trustees of trusts who in that capacity are new taxpayers, is repealed. That subsection excluded exist- ing trusts which had no income or made losses from the cost base rules. As the test in subsection (1) is whether or not gross income was derived before the relevant date, it was no longer necessary to exclude such trusts. As mentioned above, this Subpart generally refers to gross income derived by a trustee. However, there are two exceptions: •The income tax liability of the trustee is expressed as being in respect of the taxable income of the trustee, as is required by section BC 8 of core provisions. •Generic references to income have been retained in the ordering rules (section HH 6) as these references would be inappropriately restricted if described as gross or net income. from page 21 Amendments have also been made to the definition of “qualifying trust”. The former focus of the definition was on income derived by the trustee of a trust where that income has been liable to New Zealand income tax. Consistently with the core provisions, the focus of the definition is now on whether or not gross income has been derived. The amended definition is also intended to ensure that a foreign trust cannot be a qualifying trust under the global/gross approach. Maori authorities Section HI 2 in effect provided, with certain exceptions, that the Maori Authority regime was a code. As it is inconsistent with the global/gross approach to have independent codes within the legislation, section HI 2 (Maori authorities and Maori) has been repealed. The specific exclusions from former section HI 2 were in relation to the application of section GC 14 (essentially an anti-avoidance provision applying to distributions to beneficiaries), and sections HH 3 and HH 4 (the trust rules regarding trustee and beneficiary income). These sections have been specifically amended to make it clear they do not apply to Maori authorities or any Maori to whom Subpart HI applies 5 . The legislation, in relation to Maori authorities with more than 20 beneficiaries (section HI 3), taxed undistributed income rather than taxable income. The difference between the two concepts is that undistributed income is the amount remaining after 5. See sections GC 14 (2), HH 3 (6), and HH 4 (8). deducting distributed income from net income. Taxable income is defined in section BC 7 to mean net income less available net losses. The redrafted section HI 3 taxes Maori authorities on taxable income, but with an allowable deduction for distributed income, and makes it clear that the net income of a Maori authority is determined after, rather than before deduction of distributions. Agency Under section HK 1 (Agent to make returns and be assessed as principal), agents are deemed to be separate taxpayers with respect to the income of each principal for which the agency applies. This means that a separate calculation of income tax liability must be made for each agency. The retention of the term “income” reflects the fact that agencies will not generally be restricted to gross in- come. Section HK 15 (Recovery of tax payable in respect of alimony or maintenance) is repealed because alimony payments have been exempt from income tax since 1939. The reference to “income” in section HK 26 (Agents in New Zealand of principals resident abroad) has not been changed as the section is concerned with amounts which might not otherwise fall within the New Zealand tax net, and would not, therefore, be included within “gross income”. Consequential amendments to Part I - Treatment of net losses The former Part I has been replaced with a new Part I because of the substantial number of changes required to the Part. The previous section numbers have been largely retained. Like its predecessor, the new Part I deals with with- drawal tax as well as net losses. As withdrawal tax is a terminating regime, the withdrawal tax provisions have been relocated (with consequential changes for consist- ency with core provisions) to Subpart IZ. The charging section (section ID 2) has been amended so that with- drawal tax is imposed in core provisions (section BF 1 (c)). Part I has been renamed “Treatment of net losses”. Subpart IB, containing administrative provisions, has been removed. The effect of sections IB 1 (Basic rates of tax) and IB 4 (Change of return date) is contained in the definition of “applicable tax rate” as used in the core provisions and the Tax Administration Act 1994. The effect of sections IB 2 and IB 3 (Income derived by non-resident mining operators) is contained in the definition of “schedular gross income” and section BC 3 of the core provisions. Subpart IC (Pay-period taxpayers) has also been re- moved. The effect of Subpart IC is contained in section 33A of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (Annual income tax returns not required from taxpayers) and in section BC 2 of the core provisions (Non-filing tax- payer). “Pay period taxpayers” are now referred to as “taxpayers to whom section 33A of the Tax Administra- tion Act applies”. Section OB 4 (Meaning of “pay period taxpayer”) was consequentially repealed by the Income Tax Act 1994 Amendment Act 1995. In Part I the term “net loss” has been adopted to encom- pass all instances where the result of the net income calculation is a negative figure. Further, this Part refers to “the net loss of \[a taxpayer\]” and “offset against net income”. As well as any net loss arising from the global/gross calculation if annual allowable deductions exceed annual gross income, net losses include losses from specified activities, mineral mining losses and policy- holder losses of life insurers. They also include attrib- uted foreign losses and foreign investment fund losses to the extent that they cannot be taken as a deduction continued on page 24 under the new Subpart DP in the year of incurrence. Subject to the specific rules under a particular regime, the key general provisions in the Part (section IE 1 (the loss carry-forward provision), section IF 1 (the continu- ity rules) and section IG 2 (the grouping provision)) apply to all such losses. Subpart IE - Net losses New section IE 1 (3) (Net losses may be offset against future net income) replaces the former subsection (4), which dealt with the ordering of losses. It clarifies that it is the sum of net losses (in the core provisions re- ferred to as “available net losses”) that cannot exceed net income. Section IE 2 deals with losses from specified activities. The aspects of the regime dealing with the incurrence of the losses are repealed as they are of historical signifi- cance only. “Specified activity net income” and “speci- fied activity net loss” have been defined in subsection (8) as hypothetical calculations of net income or net loss in relation to a specified activity. Sections IE 3 and IE 4 (Attributed foreign net losses and Foreign investment fund net losses) have been significantly amended to ensure that, whilst retaining the existing policy, the treatment of attributed foreign losses and foreign investment fund losses is consistent with the global/gross approach. If the balance of an attributed foreign loss or a foreign investment fund loss has been carried forward from the year of incurrence under new sections DP 1, DP 2, and DP 3 (see above), the maximum amount that can be offset against net income is determined by reference to gross amounts of attributed foreign income or foreign investment fund income as the case may be. Subsections IE 3 (5) and IE 4 (6) provide that if there is insufficient net income to offset the attributed foreign net loss or foreign investment fund net loss, any excess becomes a net loss and ceases to be an attributed foreign net loss or foreign investment fund net loss. This will ensure that any further offset of the excess will not be subject to ring-fencing. This maintains the effect of existing policy whereby attributed foreign and foreign investment fund losses are directly offset against the relevant foreign-sourced income. The following example shows the previous treatment of an attributed foreign loss and the new treatment of the same loss under the new global/gross approach: Previous treatment Year 1 Attributed foreign income$3,000 less attributed foreign loss($6,000) Attributed foreign loss to carry forward($3,000) (ring-fenced) Other income $1,000 less deductions($1,000) Net incomenil Year 2 Attributed foreign income$2,000 Less attributed foreign loss c/forward($3,000) Attributed foreign loss to carry forward($1,000) (ring-fenced) Other income$2,000 less deductions($3,000) Loss to carry forward (not ring-fenced)($1,000) Year 3 Attributed foreign income$2,000 Less attributed foreign loss c/forward($1,000) Attributed foreign income$1,000 Other income$2,000 less deductions($1,000) Other assessable income$1,000 Less loss carried forward($1,000) nil Global/gross treatment Year 1 Attributed foreign income $3,000 Other gross income $1,000 Annual gross income $4,000 Annual allowable deductions($4,000) (incl. $3,000 attributed foreign loss) Net income nil Year 2 Attributed foreign income $2,000 Other gross income $2,000 Annual gross income $4,000 Annual allowable deductions($3,000) Net income$1,000 Maximum attr. foreign net loss for offset($2,000) Loss to carry forward (not ring-fenced)($1,000) Attr. foreign net loss to carry forward($1,000) (ring-fenced) Year 3 Attributed foreign income$2,000 Other gross income$2,000 Annual gross income$4,000 Annual allowable deductions($1,000) Net income$3,000 Less max. attr. foreign net loss for offset($1,000) Less loss carried forward($1,000) Taxable income$1,000 Subpart IF - Losses - companies Some sections (for example, sections IF 1 (4) and IF 4 (d) (Net losses may be offset against future in- come)) refer to the portion of assessable income which is derived during a part of an income year. This termi- nology is changed generally to “the net income which is attributable to that part of the income year”. The changes to section IG 2 (Net loss offset between group companies) include the removal of subsection from page 23 (1)(a), which provided for losses to be ascertained in accordance with the provisions of the Act. The subsec- tion was unnecessary as the core provisions provide for the application of Part I. Subsection (1)(c) has also been removed, as noted above, as the core provisions provide a corresponding treatment for profits and losses. In subsections (2)(h)-(j), the treatment of group loss offsets or subvention payments as assessable income to the loss company and a deduction to the profit company has been changed to, respectively, a reduction in available net losses to the loss company and an offset against net income of the profit company. This is in line with the approach in the core provisions to offset net losses only after net income is determined. Other amendments made to section IG 2 are consistent with this approach. Subsection (6) of section IG 2 deals with, among other things, losses from the sale or valuation of shares. The provision is amended, in the case of a disposal of shares, to refer to gross income from the disposal being less than the allowable deduction for the cost of the shares. Sections IG 4 (Group of companies attributed foreign net losses) and IG 5 (Group of companies foreign investment fund net losses) specify the amount able to be offset by another company and modify the applica- tion of section IG 2, primarily to reflect the quarantin- ing of such losses. Subpart IH - Losses - miners and petroleum miners Substantial drafting changes have been made in Subpart IH because of the complex and schedular nature of the mining loss rules. Again the intention is to retain existing policy. Section IH 1 (Losses of mining companies and petro- leum miners) deals with the offset of mining losses against particular sources of income. Amendments are made, as noted above, using terminology such as “the amount that would be the net income of the company if its sole source of income was from that licence area”. In section IH 3 (Loss carry back by petroleum miners) the reference to “expenditure or deferred deductions that cannot be deducted in full” has been changed to “allow- able deductions...reduced by the amount that would otherwise be a net loss”. This has been done both for reasons of consistency with the core provisions and to improve the drafting. A mining company which is entitled to carry forward a net mining loss in accordance with sections IE 1 and IF 1 or section IH 1 must do so subject to section IH 4 (1) (Companies engaged in exploring for, search- ing for, or mining, certain minerals). Section IH 4 (1)(a) provides that the amount which may be carried forward from the year of loss may not exceed the amount of the “mining outgoing excess” in the year of loss (see the comments under Subpart DN) less 150% of the amount of that mining outgoing excess as was deducted in the year of loss under section DN 1 (3). Paragraph (1)(b) in effect, provides that the maximum amount of mining losses carried forward that can be offset against non- mining income is the lesser of: •“net non-mining income”; and •two thirds of the result of the following calculation: net mining losses carried forward less “net mining income”. The new formula reflects current policy within the global/gross context. Paragraph (c) provides a formula for determining the amount available for further carry forward. This repli- cates the effect of subsection (1)(a), which was to ensure that the carried-forward loss was reduced by 150% of the losses used. Section IH 5 (Resident mining operators) has been consequentially reworded to conform to the approach in the new section IH 4. These amendments, as well as being consistent with the global/gross approach, better reflect the accepted approach to the application of these sections regarding the adjustment of net mining losses to carry forward as a result of the offset of any net mining losses in an income year. Subpart II - Losses - life insurers Section II 2 (1A) has been replaced by a new section II 3 (Carry forward of policyholder net loss) following the Income Tax Act 1994 Amendment Act (No 4) 1995. Consequential amendments to Part K - Rebates Where classes of income are referred to, the terminology is generally changed to “gross income”. Subpart KB - General Section KB 1 is repealed, along with section BB 10, due to the insertion of the new definitions of “allowable rebates”, “surplus rebates” and “refundable rebates” . These terms are inserted to clarify which rebates may be refunded. The effect of former sections KB 1 and BB 10 meant that only KF 1 & 2 rebates could be refunded. This effect is now reflected in the way the core provisions link “allowable rebates”, “surplus rebates” and “refund- able rebates”. In addition because the Family Support tax credit is effectively treated as a refundable rebate it has been included within the meaning of the term “refundable rebate”. Subpart KC - Individual rebates The rebate provisions in Subpart KC were subject to section BB 10, which limited the amount of rebate to the amount of tax payable by the taxpayer. As section BB 10 is replaced by the core provision concepts of “allowable rebates”, “refundable rebates” and “surplus rebates” (see section BC 8), the words “subject to section BB 10” are omitted in this Part. Section KC 1 (Low income rebate) is an example of a change from “assessable income” to “net income” in this Part, on the basis that rebates are calculated on the basis of net income. Section KC 1 is also amended by inserting a formula which provides that a taxpayer who is entitled to the low income rebate will calculate the amount of that rebate by excluding from gross income any interest, dividends, royalties, rents, beneficiary income or taxable distributions. Also excluded are the corresponding allowable deductions. Under the core provisions, the transitional tax allow- ance is not a refundable rebate. Therefore it is unneces- sary to retain the criteria of paragraph (b) within the definition of eligible person as the core provisions ensure that a person with no taxable income cannot obtain any benefit from the transitional tax allowance. Subpart KD - Family Support Section KD 1 (Determination of net income) has been amended to clarify that the Family Support tax credit is based on net income or net loss as calculated under the core provisions, but subject to the specified adjustments within section KD 1. The purpose of section KD 1 (1)(f) is to ensure that if a person carries on more than one business, each business is treated separately so that there is no offsetting of losses made in one business against the income of another business. The term “assessable income” in sections KD 1 (4), KD 2 and in the definition of “specified income” in section OB 1 has been replaced with “net income”. Section KD 4 (Allowance of credit of tax in end of year assessment) has been amended to reflect the fact that the Family Support tax credit is a “refundable rebate’” under the core provisions. Section BC 10 (1) of the core provisions states that any surplus refundable rebates must be refunded to the taxpayer, subject to section KD 4. Rebates (including Family Support credits) are set off against the income tax liability of the taxpayer under section BC 8 (2) of the core provisions. Accord- ingly, section KD 4 (1) is repealed as redundant. The requirement that the taxpayer provide prescribed information and make an application to the Commis- sioner to apply an allowable Family Support tax credit against income tax payable is inserted in section 41 of the Tax Administration Act 1994 (Annual returns by persons who receive a Family Support credit of tax). The issue of whether the Family Support tax credit should be renamed the “Family Support rebate” will be addressed during the rewrite of Part K. Section KD 4 (4) gives the Commissioner the power to recover excess family support credits that are paid out to taxpayers and to treat them as income tax payable. The words “under this section” were removed as the set-off Consequential amendments to Part J - Surcharges Sections in this Part which refer to income from a particular source have been changed to “gross income derived” from that source. Section JB 1 (New Zealand superannuitant surcharge provisions) is amended to ensure that the imposition of the New Zealand superannuitant surcharge liability is made in accordance with the core provisions. The amendments to specified exemption provisions (Section JB 4) mean that in certain cases the New Zealand superannuation is not treated as gross income in some parameters of the calculations. This ensures that the specified exemption is correctly calculated in a manner which is consistent with the core provisions. Section JB 3 (3) (Determination of “other income”) gives the Commissioner power to treat payments received by a superannuitant as received in a different income year in certain circumstances. The allocations formerly applied on a gross basis, so the references to “income” in this subsection have been changed to “gross income”. of credits and refund is authorised by core provisions. Nevertheless, a reference to sections KD 2 and KD 3 was added to section KD 4 (4) for clarification. The reference in section KD 5 (2) (Credit of tax by instalments) to “a complete statement of the assessable income (if any) that is expected to be derived” has been changed to a reference to the net income that is ex- pected to be “attributable”. Under the core provisions, gross income is “derived”, and allowable deductions are incurred. The word “attributable” was chosen because net income is not, by definition, “derived”. Section KD 8 provides that the Family Support tax credit is not gross income. This section has not been repealed as it is necessary to ensure that Family Support credits that take on the characteristics of “income”, namely that they are regular receipts and are treated by the recipient as income, are not treated as “gross income”. Consequential amendments have been made to section KF 1 (2) and (3) to ensure that the savings provision in section KZ 3 is consistent with the core provisions. Consequential amendments to the remaining subsec- tions in section KF 1 and to section KF 2 are not necessary given their repeal. Under the global/gross approach, credits are “set off” or “credited against” the income tax liability of a taxpayer, rather than in payment of income tax that is “payable” or that a taxpayer may be “liable for”. Changes in Part L reflect this new approach. There is no concept in the core provisions of an income tax liability arising in respect of a particular source of income. This creates a potential conflict with Part L, which refers to credits in respect of tax payable on income from a particular source or of a particular nature. For the purposes of determining credit limita- tions, taxpayers, in claiming a credit, may, therefore, be required to calculate the amount that would be their income tax liability for an income year, if their only gross income was the income for which the credit is claimed. This result is then fed back into the credit limitation rule. Subpart LB - Imputation credits - shareholders and imputation system The definition of quantity ‘c’ in section LB 1 (4) (Determination of amount of credit in certain cases) has been changed to the “gross income jointly derived by the partners of the partnership for the income year”. This ensures consistency with both the core provisions and the consequential amendments made to section HD 1. Section LB 2 (Credit of tax for imputation credit) has been substantially redrafted so that any imputation credits available to a taxpayer are credited against the income tax liability of that taxpayer, calculated in accordance with core provisions. Any excess imputation credits are converted into a net loss for the year which is then available for offset against net income in a suc- ceeding income year. Subpart LC - Foreign tax Section LC 1 (Credits in respect of tax paid in a country or territory outside New Zealand) has been amended by providing generally that persons subject to the section are able to credit foreign tax credits against their New continued on page 28 Consequential amendments to Part L - Credits Zealand income tax liability. The words “subject to this section” in former LC 1 (1) have been removed as the limitation on the maximum foreign tax credits granted is now contained in section LC 2 (see below). The new subsection LC 1 (4) provides for the calcula- tion of the maximum foreign tax credit in respect of an interest in a foreign investment fund using the formula in section LC 14. Section LC 2 (Maximum credits) is amended so that it is explicit that the maximum amount of foreign tax credit allowed shall be the amount calculated under section LC 14 (Ascertainment of New Zealand income tax liability on foreign source income). The cross- reference to section LC 14 retains the existing source by source basis for calculating foreign tax credits in a manner consistent with the core provisions. Sections LC 4 (Foreign tax credits - controlled foreign companies) and LC 5 (Group of companies controlled foreign tax credits) have been substantially redrafted to make them consistent with the core provisions. The effect of the rewording is to carry out a “side calcula- tion” of a taxpayer’s income tax liability as if the only gross income derived by the taxpayer were attributed foreign income in respect of the controlled foreign companies in question, and to calculate the credit limitation by reference to that amount. These changes are necessary because, as mentioned above, there is no concept in the core provisions of an “income tax liability” in respect of a particular source of income. In section LC 6 (Election in respect of foreign tax in dividend), a reference to “assessable income” has been retained since the double tax agreements which apply to section LC 6 make specific reference to “assessable income”, and a continued use of the term is considered necessary. The new section LC 14 provides a prescriptive approach to determining the maximum amount of tax credit that may be credited against the NZ income tax liability. It also incorporates a policy change which ensures that group tax losses do not reduce a taxpayer’s entitlement to a foreign tax credit. The general approach in section LC 14 to determining the maximum foreign tax credit examines the ratio of foreign sourced “net” income (foreign sourced gross income less applicable allowable deductions) to the net income of the taxpayer. However, where the taxpayer has losses, this general approach can give rise to distorted results and a secondary approach is necessary. The secondary approach fixes the maximum amount of credit by reference to the ratio of the tax credits for any single type or class of foreign sourced gross income calculated under the general approach to the sum of those tax credits for all types and classes.. Section LC 16 (Foreign tax credits of consolidated group members) has been amended by inserting a cross- reference to section LC 4, enabling redundant wording to be deleted. The addition of the “side calculation” used generally in this Subpart is also necessary in section LC 16 (2). Sections LD 1 (Tax deductions to be credited against tax assessed) and LD 3 (Resident withholding tax deduc- tions to be credited against income tax assessed) contain ordering rules by which tax deductions are credited against an employee’s income tax liability. A new paragraph (d) has been inserted in subsection (2) of each section since, under section BB 2 of the core provisions, a person’s income tax liability (dealt with by an amended paragraph (c)) is distinct from the person’s liability to pay provisional tax (now dealt with under paragraph (d)). The changes are not intended to alter existing policy or practice. Amendments are made to section LD 2 (Non-resident withholding tax - credit allowed) so that credits allowed for non-resident withholding tax are credited against the income tax liability of the taxpayer in a manner consist- ent with the core provisions. Similarly, section LD 7 (Provisional tax to be credited against income tax liability) is amended so that any provisional tax paid is credited against income tax liability. Section LD 6 (Allowance for provisional tax paid by agent) has been amended so that any provisional tax paid on behalf of a principal by an agent is credited to the principal’s account. Changes are made to section LD 9 (Refund to non- resident or exempt shareholders) to follow changes in the core provisions and in Subpart CB, relating to the treatment of exempt income. Subpart LE - Non-resident investors Sections LE 3 (10) and LE 3 (11) address the situation where an LE 3 holding company offsets losses and reduces its terminal tax below supplementary dividends received. These provisions ensured that the effect of the offset of losses was countered by setting a minimum terminal tax liability before taking into account Foreign Investor Tax credits and provisional tax. In effect, the result of these two provisions was that to the extent a supplementary dividend derived by an LE 3 holding company remained undistributed (generally due to the effect of loss offsets), the LE 3 holding company was required to pay to the Commissioner the undistributed amount as income tax. Under the global/gross approach, it is inappropriate to set a minimum terminal tax liability outside core provisions. Therefore sections LE 3 (10) and LE 3 (11) have been replaced by a new section LE 3 (10). This change, combined with the new section IF 7 (Offsetting supplementary dividend against net income) and the amendments to section LC 14, achieve the policy objective by restricting the amount of net loss which may be offset against net income in any income year. This approach would ensure that any undistributed supplementary dividend is repaid to the Commissioner as income tax. Consequential amendments have been made to other subsections of section LE 3 to render it consistent with core provision terminology. Section LF 7 (Interest paid in conduit financing ar- rangements) has been amended so that interest paid in conduit financing arrangements is now an “allowable deduction” in the calculation of “net income”. from page 27 Consequential amendments to Part M - Tax payments Subpart MB - Provisional tax Section MB 1 (Application of provisional tax rules) has been removed as the application of the provisional tax rules is covered by section BB 2 of the core provisions. Provisional tax is a separate obligation from an income tax liability in the core provisions. Part M previously incorporated provisional tax with general references to income tax. Where appropriate, the two concepts have been separated as part of the consequential changes (see sections MD 4, ME 9, ME 13 and ME 19, for example). Changes have also been made to Subpart MB in recog- nition of the fact that provisional tax will be credited against the income tax liability of the taxpayer rather than against the income derived by the taxpayer. In section MB 2 (5), life insurers are required to distin- guish between provisional tax paid in respect of the life insurance base income and the policyholder base income. This is because provisional tax paid on the policyholder base is attributable only to benefits accru- ing to the policyholder, whereas a life insurer can attribute provisional tax paid on the life insurance base to either the life insurance base or the policyholder base. For this reason, it remains necessary to distinguish provisional tax payments attributable to the policyholder base from other payments of provisional tax. This is achieved by requiring life insurers to identify the amount of provisional tax payable in respect of the policyholder base. The term “policyholder base” rather than the term “policyholder base income tax liability” is used because it is not possible to require taxpayers to state, at the time of payment, the extent to which provisional tax represents the policyholder base income tax liability as this liability is not known until after all provisional tax is required to be paid. Changes are made to section MB 10 (Offset of further income tax) to make the section consistent with the rewritten section ME 9 (Further tax payable where end of year debit balance). The amendments to these sections reflect the core provisions approach to treating provisional tax obligations as distinct from income tax obligations. Section MB 12 (Application of other provisions to provisional tax) illustrates a change consequential to the terminology used in section BB 1 of the core provisions. As income tax is now “imposed” many references to “tax levied” have been changed to “tax imposed”. Subpart MC - Terminal tax Section MC 1 (1) (Assessment and payment of terminal tax) is repealed as part of a general removal of all references to “general assessment”. Changes made to the remainder of section MC 1 and MC 2 (Payment of tax) use the term “terminal tax” to specify when the tax is due and payable. Subpart MD - Refunds Section MD 4 is amended to provide consistency with the distinction drawn in the core provisions between income tax obligations and provisional tax obligations. Section ME 1 (2), which outlines the types of companies that are not allowed to establish imputation credit accounts, is amended to make the terminology consist- ent with the core provisions. Section ME 4 (Credits arising to imputation credit account) outlines a number of situations where a credit does not arise to an imputation credit account for income tax paid. This section and section ME 5 (Debits arising to imputation credit account) have been signifi- cantly reworded to make them consistent with core provisions. For example, a hypothetical calculation of an income tax liability in section ME 4 (1) (a)(iv) to exclude the income tax attributable to the period before a company becomes an imputation credit account company. Sections ME 9 and ME 13 relate to further income tax payable when an imputation credit account is in debit for companies and consolidated groups. They have been amended to provide that any further income tax paid under those sections may be credited against any income tax liability that arises or any instalment of provisional tax that is payable in accordance with section MB 10. The amendments to sections ME 9 and ME 13 reflect that any amount of further income tax paid may be credited against either income tax or provisional tax obligations. This change is to provide consistency with the distinction in the core provisions between provi- sional tax obligations and income tax obligations. Sections MF 8, MF 10 and MF 13 have been signifi- cantly amended to make them consistent with the core provisions. For example, a taxpayer’s income tax liability is calculated before any foreign tax credits and rebates are deducted. In addition, changes have been made to sections MF 4 and MF 5 to ensure that the legislation relating to the BETA account of a company is consistent with the new provisions on the BETA account of a consolidated group. Consequential amendments to Part N - Withholding taxes and taxes on the income of others Subpart NF - Resident withholding tax In section NF 9 (Certificates of exemption), the $2 million resident withholding tax exemption certificate threshold is expressed as an annual gross income figure in paragraph (g) of subsection (1) and later subsections. As section CB 4 (1) (k), which relates to the exemption for non-profit bodies, is being changed to a deductibility provision in the form of section DJ 17, necessary consequential changes are made to paragraph (j) of section NF 9 (1). Subpart NG - Non-resident withholding tax Under section NG 3 (Non-resident withholding tax to be final tax in certain cases), the former reference to non- resident withholding income subject to non-resident withholding tax as a final tax being excluded from assessable income is removed. Instead, consistently with section BC 3 of the core provisions (Taxpayer with schedular gross income), section NG 3 specifies the method for calculating the income tax liability of a person with income subject to final non-resident withholding tax as the sum of the: continued on page 30 from page 29 •non-resident withholding tax in respect of that non- resident withholding income; and •the amount that would be the person’s income tax liability if the person had not derived that non- resident withholding income. The removal of the reference to the income being excluded from assessable income has necessitated two changes: •the insertion of a new subsection (2) providing that the taxpayer is not entitled to a credit against income tax liability for any imputation credit attached to the dividend; and •a prohibition on deductions in section BD 2 (2) for expenditure incurred in deriving non-resident with- holding income subject to final NRWT. Neither of these provisions is intended to change the law. The removal of the reference to non-resident withhold- ing income, to which section NG 3 relates, not being included in assessable income has also highlighted an issue about the applicability of the general anti-avoid- ance provision as now contained in sections BG 1 and GB 1. There was an argument that section NG 3 was, before the enactment of core provisions, not subject to the Commissioner’s general anti-avoidance powers because section GB 1 only gave the Commissioner power to adjust the “assessable income” of a taxpayer. The change in wording in section NG 3 removes any ambiguity that may have existed in relation to the applicability of the general anti-avoidance provision to income, to which section NG 3 applies. Accordingly, the general anti-avoidance rule applies to non-resident withholding income. The removal of the words “shall not be included in the assessable income” does not in the Inland Revenue Department’s view, represent a departure from its existing policy. Section NG 4 (Non-resident withholding tax to be minimum tax in certain cases) has been amended so that it provides a method for calculating a global/gross income tax liability for persons with non-resident withholding income for which non-resident withholding tax is not a final tax. The formula is the greater of: •the sum of: –all non-resident withholding tax for which the person is liable; and –the amount that would be the person’s income tax liability if the person had not derived any non-resident withholding income •the amount that would but for the application of the section be the income tax liability of the person. Consequential amendments to Part O - Definitions and related matters Subpart OB - General definitions A considerable number of new definitions have been added to section OB 1, and a large number of previously existing definitions amended for consistency with the core provisions. Some of the new definitions do no more than refer to the section in the core provisions that describe the substance of the relevant items. For example, “net income” means met income for an income year deter- mined under section BC 6. The more significant new or amended definitions have been discussed above under the relevant Parts. Other definitions to note are: Applicable basic tax rate This is a new definition which is used in the core provisions relating to the calculation of a taxpayer’s income tax liability. The definition has the effect of apportioning the relevant tax rate on a pro rata basis when a return of income covers a period greater or less than 12 months. Eligible company/qualifying amalgamation Reference to companies whose income is exempt under section CB 10 is added to paragraph (b). This ensures that companies whose sole income is from dividends which are subject to dividend withholding payment, and inter-corporate dividends, are not excluded from the consolidation/amalgamation regimes. This was the intention of those regimes. “Qualifying company” - section OB 3 In paragraph (d)(i) a reference to “assessable income” is changed to “gross income”. The change reflects the original policy intent of the legislation to treat the $10,000 limitation in respect of foreign non-dividend income as a gross amount. The definition of “foreign non-dividend income” has been amended accordingly. Consequential amendments to Part Y - Amendments, repeals, savings and transitional provisions As also mentioned above, the former section AA 1 (2) has been retained as section YB 4 (3), to clarify that the re-ordering of the 1976 Act, and minor wording changes effected by the Income Tax Act 1994 (as enacted on 23 December 1994) are not intended to affect the interpretation of the Act. This section will continue to apply to provisions that have not been amended by legislation subsequent to the enactment of the 1994 Act. In the case of income years preceding the 1997-98 income year, the 1994 Act (or the 1976 Act as the case may be) will apply. Accordingly, it has not been neces- sary to “save” the old terminology for prior income years. The new section YB 4 (4) provides that the changes in style and language carried out by the Taxation Core Provisions Act 1996 are to be applied to the interpreta- tion of those provisions of the 1976 Act which continue to have application by virtue of section YB 4 (1). For example in considering the application of section 232B of the 1976 Act to a disposal of property in the 1998 income year, the term assessable income would be read as being the core provisions term “net income”. Consequential amendments to the Tax Administration Act 1994 The consequential amendments made to the Tax Administration Act 1994 in essence follow the concepts and terminology in the new core provisions. For exam- ple, as described in the section on general consequential changes, the new terminology of “gross income”, “net income”, “annual gross income”, “annual allowable deductions” and “taxable income” have all been adopted in the Tax Administration Act as appropriate. The meaning of these terms are outlined in detail earlier in the TIB in the core provisions discussion. Some sections required certain entities to file returns. Amendments have been made to ensure that the annual return relates to the taxable income of the entity for that income year (see section 57, for example, dealing with the filing requirements for Maori authorities). Section 42 Significant amendments have been made to section 42 (Returns by partners, co-trustees and joint venturers) to make it consistent with core provisions and case law relating to the taxation of partnerships. A partnership is not a taxpayer and so is unable to derive gross income or claim deductions for expenditure incurred by the partnership business. The amendments clarify that each partner derives their share of gross income of the partnership and each partner separately claims their share of the allowable deductions relating to the part- nership business. Accordingly, the partners are required to make a joint return of income including “the gross income jointly derived from the firm ... and a summary of the allowable deductions of each partner that relate to the gross income.” (See also the comment under section HD 1.) Section 92 Section 92 (Commissioner to make assessments, determinations of net loss, and other determinations) is amended to clarify that the Commissioner issues a single assessment in respect of a taxpayer’s taxable income, income tax liability and the tax payable by the taxpayer. Further, subsection (3) refers to the Commis- sioner making a determination of “net loss” instead of “loss”. Section 129 Section 129 (Determination of objection not to affect other matters) has been redrafted to omit terminology that is inconsistent with the core provisions. The redrafted provision is not intended to change the application of the section. It now provides that the determination of the objection on one matter does not affect the right of the Commissioner to make or amend assessments on any other matter. Binding rulings A private or product ruling issued under section 91E or 91F of the Tax Administration Act 1994 before the passing of the Taxation (Core Provisions) Act may cease to apply on the application of the core provisions because of changes made by the latter Act. Such a ruling is to be called a “terminated ruling”. In its consideration of the proposed legislation, the Finance and Expenditure Select Committee recommended that a special process be established for rulings affected by the changes in the Taxation (Core Provisions) Act. As a result, the Commissioner will: •reissue a terminated ruling, to the same effect as, and for the remainder of the period in, the terminated ruling, if the core provisions legislation does not substantially alter the way the tax law applies in the ruling (any substantial changes made to the tax law other than those noted in this TIB will be reported to the Government); •issue a new ruling if the terminated ruling cannot be reissued and the taxpayer requests a new ruling. Taxpayers will not be charged for these rulings and a ruling will be issued on the basis of the taxpayer’s original application. (See section 3 of the Core Provi- sions Act). Comparative tables of old and new provisions The following pages contain comparative tables of the Taxation (Core Provisions) Act 1996, the Income Tax Act 1994, and the Income Tax Act 1976. The tables show which sections of the previous tax Acts correspond to the provisions of the new Act, and vice versa. The sections included are those that reorder, renumber, or repeal the 1994 legislation. Changes to the Income Tax Act 1994 Corresponding Correspondingprovision in Provision inprovision inIncome Tax Core ProvisionsIncome TaxAct 1976 or Act 1996Act 1994IRD Act 1974 A 1A 11 AA 1new AA 2BB 3 (a)242(a) BB 3 (b)242(b) AA 3new AA 4 (1)AA 3– AA 4 (2)AA 2 (1)– BA 1new– BB 1BB 138(1), (2) BB 2 (1)new BB 2 (2)MB 1376(1) BB 2 (3)new BB 2 (4)new BB 3new BC 1new BC 2new BC 3new BC 4new BC 5new BC 6new BC 7new BC 8 (1)new BC 8 (2)new BC 8 (3)BB 1057(1) BC 8 (4)new BC 8 (5)new BC 8 (6)new BC 9new BC 10new BD 1(1)new BD 1 (2)(a)new BD 1 (2)(b)new BD 1 (2)(c)BB 3(c)242(c) BD 2 (1)(a)new BD 2 (1)(b)(i)BB 7(a)104(a) BD 2 (1)(b)(ii)BB 7(b)104(b) BD 2 (1)(b)(iii)new BD 2 (2)(a)BB 8(b)106(1)(j) BD 2 (2)(b)BB 8(c)106(1)(k) BD 2 (2)(c)DE 1(1)105(2) Corresponding Correspondingprovision in Provision inprovision inIncome Tax Core ProvisionsIncome TaxAct 1976 or Act 1996Act 1994IRD Act 1974 BD 2 (2)(d)new BD 2 (2)(e)BB 8(a)106(1)(a) BD 2 (2)(f)new BD 3new BD 4 (1)new BD 4 (2)new BD 4 (3)new BD 4 (4)BB 8(d)106(1)(o) BE 1new BF 1new BG 1BB 999(2) BH 1 (1)BB 11 (1)294(1) BH 1 (2)BB 11 (2)294(2) BH 1 (3)BB 11 (5)292(2) CB 1CB 1 CB 1 (1)(a)CB 1 (1)(a)61(14) CB 1 (1)(c)CB 1 (1)(d)61(52) s10(3) repealsCB 4 (1)(k)61(34) CB 4 (1)(k) s24(8) repealsCD1(5)67(7) CD 1 (5) s24(11) repealsCD 1 (8), (9)67(9A), (10) CD 1 (8),(9) CD 2 replacesCD 265(2)(h) CD 3BB 4(a)65 (2)(a) excl proviso CD 4BB 4(c)65 (2)(e) excl proviso CD 5BB 4 (d)65(2)(l) CE 4BB 578(1)-(3) CH 3BB 4(b)65(2)(b) s48 repealsCI 9336R CI 9– s58 repealsCM 1204A CM 1– CM 3 replacesCM 3204 B s60 repealsCM 4 (1), (2)204E(1), (2) CM 4 s65 repealsCM 9204J CM 9– CM 10 replacesCM 10 (1)-(4)204C(1)-(4) Corresponding Correspondingprovision in Provision inprovision inIncome Tax Core ProvisionsIncome TaxAct 1976 or Act 1996Act 1994IRD Act 1974 s67 repealsCM 11204K CM 11– CM 18new CN 1 (1A)new CN 2 (2A),(2B)new CN 3 (1A)new CN 4 (2) replacesCM 4 (2)209(3) DE 1 replacesDE (1),(2)105(2),(3) DI 4new DI 5new DI 6new DJ 12Anew DJ 13CD 1 (5),(8)67(7), (9A) DJ 14new DJ 15CE 3 (2)65(1)(b)(i) and (c) DJ 16CB 4 (1)(k)61(34) DK 3 replacesDK 3205F DK 3Anew DK 3B (1) replacesCM 10 (1)204C(1) DK 3B (2)CM 10 (2)204C(2) DK 3B (3)CM 10 (3)204C(3) DK 3CCM 4204E(1),(2) DK 3DCM 12204N DK 3ECM 11204K DN 1DN 1 DN 1 (1)DN 1 (2)216(2) DN 1 (2)DN 1 (4)216(5) DN 1 (3)DN 1 (5)216(6) DN 1 (4)DN 1 (6)216(7) DN 1 (5)DN 1 (7)216(8) DN 1 (6)DN 1 (8)216(9) DN 1 (7)DN 1 (9)216(10) DN 1 (8)DN 1 (10)216(11) DN 1 (9)DN 1 (11)216(12) DN 1 (10)DN 1 (12)216(13) DN 1 (11)DN 1 (13)216(14) DN 1 (12)DN 1 (14)216(15) DN 1 (13)DN 1 (15)216(15A) (relettered) DN 1 (14)DN 1 (16)216(15B) DN 1 (15)DN 1 (17)216(17) DN 1 (16)DN 1 (18)216(21) DN 1 (17)DN 1 (19)216(22)(b) DN 4DN 4 DN 4 (1)DN 4 (3)220(4) DN 4 (2)new DN 4 (3)new DN 4 (4)DN 4 (5)new Corresponding Correspondingprovision in Provision inprovision inIncome Tax Core ProvisionsIncome TaxAct 1976 or Act 1996Act 1994IRD Act 1974 DN 4 (5)DN 4 (6)220(7) DN 4 (6)DN 4 (7)220(8) DN 4 (7)DN 4 (8)220(9) DN 5DN 5 DN 5 (1)DN 5 (3)new DN 5 (2)DN 5 (4)221(5) DP 1 (1) replacesIE 3 (1)245M(1) DP 1 (2)new DP 1 (3)new DP 2 (1) replacesIE 4 (2)245RJ(2) DP 2 (2) replacesIE 4 (2)245RJ(2) DP 2 (3)new DP 2 (4)IE 4 (9)245RJ(9) DP 3 (1)IE 4 (3)245RJ(3) DP 3 (2)new EC 1 (4)new EC 1 (5)EC 1 (3)76(3) EF 2new EG 19 (11)new EJ 1 (2)new EN 2 (3A)new EN 4 (3)new s204 repeals FB 1FB 1 (1), (2)(3), (4) s205 repealsFB 2 (1B) FB 2 (1B) GC 14 renumbersGC 14227(5) GC 14 (2)new HE 2 (1A)new HH 3 (6)new HH 4 replacesHH 4228 HH 4 (3A), (3B)new HH 5 (2) replacesHH 5 (2)228A(2) s283 repealsHI 2235 HI 2– s293 repealsHK 15 (1) - (3)279(1) - (3) HK 15 (1)-(3) s303 repealsIB 1 (1), (2)20(1), (2) IB 1 s303 repealsIB 2221(4) IB 2– s303 repealsIB 3222 IB 3– s303 repealsIB 416(6) IB 4– s303 repealsIC 1 (1), (2)357(1), (2) IC 1 s303 repealsIC 2358 IC 2– s303 repeals IC 3IC 3 (1)359(1) IC 3 (2)(a)359(2)(a)(ii) IC 3 (2)(b)359(2)(b) Corresponding Correspondingprovision in Provision inprovision inIncome Tax Core ProvisionsIncome TaxAct 1976 or Act 1996Act 1994IRD Act 1974 s303 repealsID 1329 ID 1– s303 repealsID 2330 ID 2– s303repealsID 3(1) - (4)331(1) - (4) ID 3 s303 repealsID 4 (1) - (6)332(1) - (6) ID 4 s303 repealsID 5333 ID 5– s303 repealsID 6335 ID 6– s303 repealsID 7336 (relettered) ID 7– IE 1 (2)IE 1 (3)188(3) IE 1 (3)IE 1 (4),(5)188(4),(5) IE 1 (4)IE 1 (6)188(6) IE 2 (5A)new IE 2 (6) replacesIE 2 (6),(7)188A(7),(7A) IE 2 (7)IE 2 (8)188A(8) IE 2 (8)IE 2 (9)188A(1) - definitions 188A(2)(b) - definition IE 3 (1)new IE 3 (2) replacesIE 3 (2)245M(2) IE 3 (3)new IE 3 (4)IE 3 (6)245M(7) IE 3 (5)new IE 4 (1)new IE 4 (2) replacesIE 4 (2)245RJ(2) IE 4 (3)new IE 4 (4)IE 4 (3)245RJ(3) IE 4 (5)IE 4 (10)245RJ(10) IE 4 (6)new IF 3 replacesIF 3245M(4) IF 7new IG 4 replacesIG 4 (1), (2)245N(1), (2) Corresponding Correspondingprovision in Provision inprovision inIncome Tax Core ProvisionsIncome TaxAct 1976 or Act 1996Act 1994IRD Act 1974 IG 5 (1) replacesIG 5 (2)245RK(2) IG 5 (2) replacesIG 5 (1)245RK(1) IG 5 (4)new IG 10new II 1 replacesII 1205D II 2II 2 (1)(1A)(2)205C(1), (2) II 3II 2 (1A)new IZ 1new IZ 2new IZ 3new IZ 4new IZ 5new IZ 6new IZ 7new s309 repeals KB 1KB 157(2) (relettered) KC 1 (4)new s317 repealsKD 4(1)374F(1) KD 4 (1) KZ 3 (2)new KZ 3 (3)new KZ 3 (4)KZ 3 (2)new LC 1 (3A)new LC 14 replacesLC 14 (1), (2)306(1), (2) LE 2 replacesLE 2 s354 repealsMB 1376(1) MB 1 s360(1) repealsMC 1 (1)390(1) MC 1 (1) MC 1 (2) replaces(MC 1 (2)390(2) s386(4) repealsMF 5 (7)394ZZQ(8) MF 5 (7) s389(3) repealsMF 10 (6) MF 10 (6) NG 3 replacesNG 3317 YB 4 (3),(4)new Changes to the Income Tax Act 1976 or the Inland Revenue Department Act 1974 Provision inCorrespondingCorresponding Income Taxprovision inprovision in Act 1976 orIncome TaxCore Provisions IRD Act 1974Act 1994Act 1996 1A 1A 1 16(6)IB 4repealed 20(1),(2)IB 1 (1),(2)repealed 38(1),(2)BB 1BB 1 50D (1), (2), (3)KC 1 (1),(2),(3)KC 1 (1),(2),(3) 57(1)BB 10BC 8(3) 57(2) (relettered)KB 1repealed 61(14)CB 1 (1)(a)CB 1 (1)(a) 61(46)CB 1 (1)(b)CB 1 (1)(b) 61(52)CB 1 (1)(d)CB 1 (1)(c) 61(34)CB 4 (1)(k)DJ 16 65(1)(b)(i) and (c)CE 3 (2)DJ 15 65(2)(a) excl provisoBB 4 (a)CD 3 65(2)(b)BB 4 (b)CH 3 65(2)(e) excl provisoBB 4 (c)CD 4 65(2)(h)CD 2CD 2 65(2)(l)BB 4 (d)CD 5 67(7)CD 1 (5)DJ 13 67(9A)CD 1 (8)DJ 13 67(10)(9)repealed 78(1)-(3)BB 5CE 4 99(2)BB 9BG 1 102(3),(4)FB 1 (1),(2)repealed 104(a)BB 7 (a)BD 2 (1)(b)(i) 104(b)BB 7 (b)BD 2 (1)(b)(ii) 105(2),(3)DE 1 (1),(2)BD 2 (2)(c), DE 1 106(1)(a)BB 8 (a)BD 2 (2)(e) 106(1)(j)BB 8 (b)BD 2 (2)(a) 106(1)(k)BB 8 (c)BD 2 (2)(b) 106(1)(o)BB 8 (d)BD 4 (4) 188(1)IE 1 (1)IE 1 (1) 188(3)IE 1 (3)IE 1 (2) 188(4),(5)IE 1 (4),(5)IE 1 (3) 188(6)IE 1 (6)IE 1 (4) 188(7)-(10)IF 1 (1)-(4)IF 1 (1)-(4) 188(12),(13)IF 1 (5),(6)IF 1 (5),(6) 188AA(1)IF 2IF 2 188A(3)IE 2 (1)IE 2 (1) 188A(4)IE 2 (2)IE 2 (2) 188A(5)IE 2 (3)IE 2 (3) 188A(6)IE 2 (4)IE 2 (4) 188A(6A)IE 2 (5)IE 2 (5) 188A(7),(7A)IE 2 (6),(7)IE 2 (6) (replaced) 188A(8)IE 2 (8)IE 2 (7) Provision inCorrespondingCorresponding Income Taxprovision inprovision in Act 1976 orIncome TaxCore Provisions IRD Act 1974Act 1994Act 1996 188A(1)IE 2(9)IE 2(8) - definitions 188A(2)(b) - definitions 188C(1)(a)-(c)IH 1 (1)(a)-(c)IH 1 (1)(a)-(c) 188C(1)(d)(iv)IH 1 (1)(d)IH 1 (1)(d) 188C(2)(a)-(e)IH 1 (2)(a)-(e)IH 1 (2)(a)-(e) 188C(2)(f)(iii),(iv)IH 1 (2)(f)(i),(ii)IH 1 (2)(f)(i),(ii) 191(1)IG 1 (1)IG 1 (1) 191(2)IG 1 (5)IG 1 (5) 191(3)-(5)IG 1 (2)-(4)IG 1 (2)-(4) 191A(1)-(5)IG 2 (1)-(5)IG 2 (1)-(5) 191A(6) - definitionIG 2 (11)IG 2 (11) 191A(7A)IG 2 (6)IG 2 (6) 191A(8)-(11)IG 2 (7)-(10)IG 2 (7)-(10) 191B(1),(2)IG 3IG 3 191O (1), (1A), (2) -(7)IG 6 (1)-(8)IG 6 (1)-(8) 191P(2)(b),(c)IG 7 (1)(a),(b)IG 7 (1)(a),(b) 191P(3)(a)IG 7 (2)(a)IG 7 (2)(a) 191P(3)(b)(ii)(iii)IG 7 (2)(b)(i),(ii)IG 7 (2)(b)(i),(ii) 191P(3)(d),(e)IG 7 (2)(c),(d)IG 7 (2)(c),(d) 191P(3)(f)-(h)IG 7 (2)(e)-(g)IG 7 (2)(e)-(g) 191P(4),(5)IG 7 (3),(4)IG 7 (3),(4) 191P(6)(a),(b)IG 7 (5)(a),(b)IG 7 (5)(a),(b) 191P(6)(c)(i)(B)IG 7 (5)(c)(i)IG 7 (5)(c)(i) 191P(6)(c)(ii)IG 7 (5)(c)(ii)IG 7 (5)(c)(ii) 191P(6)(d)IG 7 (5)(d)IG 7 (5)(d) 191WD(19)IF 4IF 4 191WD(20)IF 5IF 5 191WD(21)IF 6IF 6 191WD(22)IG 8IG 8 191WD(23)IG 9IG 9 191VC(1)-(3)MF 10 (1)-(3)MF 10 (1)-(3) 204ACM 1repealed 204BCM3CM 3 (replaced) 204C(1)-(4)CM 10 (1)-(4)CM 10 (replaced) 204E(1),(2)CM 4 (1),(2)DK 3C 204JCM 9repealed 204KCM 11DK 3E 205C(1),(2)II 2 (2),(1),(1A),(2)II 2 205DII 1II 1 (replaced) 205FDK 3DK 3 (replaced) 209(3)CN 4 (2)CN 4 (2) (replaced) Provision inCorrespondingCorresponding Income Taxprovision inprovision in Act 1976 orIncome TaxCore Provisions IRD Act 1974Act 1994Act 1996 214B(7)IH 2 (1)IH 2 (1) 214B(25) (in part)IH 2 (2)IH 2 (2) 214G(2)IH 3IH 3 216(2)DN 1 (2)DN 1 (1) 216(5)DN 1 (4)DN 1 (2) 216(6)DN 1 (5)DN 1 (3) 216(7)DN 1 (6)DN 1 (4) 216(8)DN 1 (7)DN 1 (5) 216(9)DN 1 (8)DN 1 (6) 216(10)DN 1 (9)DN 1 (7) 216(11)DN 1 (10)DN 1 (8) 216(12)DN 1 (11)DN 1 (9) 216(13)DN 1 (12)DN 1 (10) 216(14)DN 1 (13)DN 1 (11) 216(15)DN 1 (14)DN 1 (12) 216(15A) (relettered)DN 1 (15)DN 1 (13) 216(15B)DN 1 (16)DN 1 (14) 216(16)IH 4 (1)IH 4 (1) 216(17)DN 1 (17)DN 1 (15) 216(19),(20)IH 4 (2),(3)IH 4 (2),(3) 216(21)DN 1 (18)DN 1 (16) 216(22)(b)DN 1 (19)DN 1 (17) 220(4)DN 4 (3)DN 4 (1) 220(6)IH 5IH 5 220(7)DN 4 (6)DN 4 (5) 220(8)DN 4 (7)DN 4 (6) 220(9)DN 4 (8)DN 4 (7) 221(4)IB 2repealed 221(5)DN 5 (4)DN 5 (2) 228HH4HH 4 (replaced) 228A(2)HH 5 (2)HH 5 (2) (replaced) 242(a),(b)BB 3 (a),(b)AA 2 242(c)BB 3 (c)BD 1 (2)(c) 245M(2)IE 3 (2)IE 3 (2) (replaced) 245M(4)IF 3IF 3 Provision inCorrespondingCorresponding Income Taxprovision inprovision in Act 1976 orIncome TaxCore Provisions IRD Act 1974Act 1994Act 1996 245M(7)IE 3 (6)IE 3 (4) 245N(1),(2)IG 4 (1),(2)IG 4 (replaced) 245RJ(2)IE 4 (2)IE 4 (2) (replaced) 245RJ(3)IE 4 (3)IE 4 (4) 245RJ(10)IE 4 (10)IE 4 (5) 245RK(1)IG 5 (1)IG 5 (2) (replaced) 245RK(2)IG 5 (2)IG 5 (1) (replaced) 245RK(3)IG 5 (3)IG 5 (3) 279(1)-(3)HK 15 (1)-(3)repealed 292(2)BB 11 (5)BH 1 (3) 293(2)LC 1 (1)LC 1 (1) 293(2B)LC 1 (2)LC 1 (2) 293(2C)LC 1 (3)LC 1 (3) 293(3)LC 1 (4)LC 1 (4) 294(1)BB 11 (1)BH 1 (1) 294(2)BB 11 (2)BH 1 (2) 306(1),(2)LC 14 (1),(2)LC 14 (replaced) 317NG 3NG 3 (replaced) 331(1)-(4)ID 3 (1)-(4)repealed 332(1)-(6)ID 4 (1)-(6)repealed 336 (relettered)ID 7repealed 336RCI 9repealed 357(1),(2)IC 1 (1),(2)repealed 359(1)IC 3 (1)repealed 359(2)(a)(ii)IC 3 (2)(a)repealed 359(2)(b)IC 3 (2)(b)repealed 374F(1)KD 4 (1)repealed 376(1)MB 1BB 2 (2) 390(1)MC 1 (1)repealed 390(2)MC 1 (2)MC 1 (2) 390(3)MC 1 (3)MC 1 (3) 394ZZQ(3) (3A), (4) -(7)MF 5 (1)-(6)MF 5 (1)-(6) 394ZZQ(8)MF 5 (7)repealed Changes to definitions DefinitionSourceLocation allowable deductionnewOB 1 allowable rebatesnewOB 1 annual allowable deductionsnewOB 1 annual gross incomenewOB 1 applicable basic tax ratenewOB 1 applicable surchargesnewOB 1 assessable incomereplacedOB 1 assesable income from forestryrepealed assessable income from miningrepealed attributed foreign net lossnewOB 1 available net lossnewOB 1 beneficiary incomereplacedOB 1 convertible creditnewOB 1 determination of lossrepealed determination of loss carried forwardrepealed determination of net lossnewTAA 92(3) determination of net loss carried forwardnewTAA 92(4) foreign expenditurenewEP 1 (11) foreign investment fund net lossnewOB 1 foreign sourced amountnewOB 1 gross incomenewOB 1 gross income from forestrynewOB 1 gross income from life insurancenewOB 1 gross income form miningnewOB 1 gross proceedsnewEM 3 (3) income tax liabilitynewOB 1 mining outgoing excessnewOB 1 mortality resultnewOB 1 net gainnewEM 3 (3) net incomenewOB 1 net lossnewOB 1 net mining lossnewOB 1 New Zealand residentnewOB 1 non-filing taxpayernewOB 1 DefinitionSourceLocation non-refundable creditnewOB 1 non-residentnewOB 1 non-resident general insurernewOB 1 notional income tax liabilitynewLC 14 (4) partnership gross incomenewHC 1 (12) partnership net incomenewHC 1 (12) policyholder basenewOB 1 policyholder base calculationnewOB 1 policyholder base income tax liabilitynewOB 1 policyholder incomenewOB 1 policyholder net lossnewOB 1 TAA 3 refundable creditnewOB 1 refundable rebatenewOB 1 return of income or return of the taxpayer’s incomenewOB 1 schedular gross incomenewOB 1 schedular gross income subject to final withholdingnewOB 1 schedular income tax liabilitynewOB 1 schedular taxable incomenewOB 1 specified activity net incomenewIE 2 (8) specified activity net lossnewIE 2 (8) surplus rebatesnewOB 1 surplus refundable creditsnewOB 1 tax avoidance arrangementnewOB 1 tax deductionnewOB 1 taxable incomenewOB 1 terminal taxnewOB 1 timing regimenewOB 1 trustee incomereplacedOB 1 unadjusted income tax liabilitynewOB 1 underwriting incomerepealed underwriting lossnewOB 1 underwriting resultnewOB 1 value of breeding stocknewEM 3 (3) windfall creditnewMZ 1 (3) Changes to the Tax Administration Act 1994 Provision in TaxCorresponding Administrationprovision in Income Tax Act 1994Act 1976 or IRD Act 1974 41(1)new 92Anew 120E(4)new 120EAnew 120R(2)new 141(12A)new