TAX INFORMATION BULLETIN VOLUME TWO, NO. 5 DECEMBER 1990 CONTENTS Do you have any ideas for Accrual Determinations?2 Determination E6: Persons not required to comply with Section 104A of the Income Tax Act 19764 Loss of Earnings or Profits Insurance4 Foreign Investment Fund Regime - Recent Determinations made by The Commissioner5 GST Treatment of Interest Charged on Overdue Accounts7 Due Dates Reminder8 ISSN 0114-7161 2 From The Commissioner... Dear Subscriber, This is the last Tax Information Bulletin for 1990. We hope the new format has found favour with you. We intend to go on improving it, and look forward to any suggestions you may have. With best wishes for Christmas and 1991. Yours sincerely David Henry Commissioner of Inland Revenue Do You Have Any Ideas For Accrual Determinations? Background Section 64E of the Income Tax Act 1976 gives the Commissioner power to issue binding determina- tions for the purposes of sections 64B to 64M of the Act (usually referred to as the accrual regime). Broadly speaking, these determinations set out the methods for accounting for income and expenditure arising from various types of financial arrangement. One of the recomendations in the Tax Simplification Committee report was that the Commissioner “should call for submissions which would identify types of financial arrangements requiring determinations, and suggested ways these should be dealt with”. In response to that recommendation, we would like to hear your ideas on the subject. Please remember that the Commissioner only has power to issue determinations in accordance with the provisions of the Act; he can’t approve a method of accounting for a class of financial arrangements which conflicts with the provisions of sections 64B to 64M. For example, the provisions of sections 64B to 64M require that financial arrangements be accounted for separately, so the Commissioner can’t issue a determination which allows income and expendi- ture from several arrangements to be netted off against each other. 3 Suggestions If you have any suggestions at all about - a) Determinations already issued, b) General Determinations that could be issued, c) Specific determinations that could be issued to cover matters of concern to you, then we would like to hear them. Please complete the form on page 9. (This form is purely for your convenience; you do not have to use it.) Please forward your suggestions to: Manager (Technical Policy) Head Office Inland Revenue Department PO Box 2198 WELLINGTON Specific Determinations As well as making determinations of general applica- tion, as has been the case to date, the Commissioner has power to issue determinations relating to specific financial arrangements in response to applications from taxpayers. The procedure for applying for such determinations is set out in The Income Tax Act (Determinations) Regulations 1987. The attached form gives the opportunity to suggest to the Commissioner the type of determination tax- payers require without having to comply with the details of the Regulations. Determinations as at 1 November 1990 These are the determinations which have been made up to the present time. Some of these determinations apply to a wide range of arrangements. For example Determination G3 provides a Yield to Maturity Method to be used for calculating the income and expenditure of any finan- cial arrangement where the cash flows are known in advance (eg Government Stock). Other determina- tions apply only to one type of financial arrangement. For example Determination G14 deals only with forward contracts for foreign exchange and com- modities. G1AApportionment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis G2Requirement as to Precision G3Yield to Maturity Method G4Unit Trusts with Repurchase Obligations G5Mandatory Conversion Convertible Notes G6CForeign Currency Rates G7BNew Zealand Futures and Options Markets G9AFinancial Arrangements that are Denomi- nated in a Currency or Commodity other than New Zealand Dollars G10B Present Value Calculations G11A Accrual Income and Expenditure using Pres- ent Value Based Yield to Maturity Method G12Accounting for a Financial Arrangements in the Absence of a Determination G13A Prices or Yields G14Forward Contracts for Foreign Exchange and Commodities G15Exemption from Section 64C for Small Debt- ors G16A Discounted Value of Amounts payable in Relation to Trade Credits Denominated in New Zealand Currency G17A Discounted Value of Amounts Payable in Relation to Deferred Property Settlements Denominated in New Zealand Currency G18International Futures and Options Markets G19Exchange Traded Option Contracts G20Discounted Value of Amounts Payable in Relation to Trade Credits Denominated in a Foreign Currency G21Discounted Value of Amounts Payable in Relation to Deferred Property Settlements Denominated in a Foreign Currency G22Optional Conversion Convertible Notes De- nominated in New Zealand Dollars Convert- ible at the Option of the Holder G23Specified Rate NBDeterminations containing a letter in their title (eg Determination G1A) have rescinded earlier de- terminations which covered broadly the same sub- ject matter. Similarly Determination G8 is not shown in the list above as it was rescinded by Determination G9. 4 Loss of Earnings or Profits Insurance This item explains the difference for tax pur- poses between a sickness/accident insurance policy and a loss of earnings or profits insurance policy. Background Inland Revenue has been asked to rule on the deductibility of premiums and assessability of benefits of certain sickness or accident policies. Comment In general terms benefits paid pursuant to an insurance policy will be assessable income when they are paid in an income form i.e., periodic payments. However, Section 61(40) exempts payments from being assessable if three criteria are met. The benefit must:- a) be in respect of incapacity for work; b) be under a policy of personal sickness or accident insurance; c) not be calculated according to loss of earn- ings or profits A policy of personal sickness or accident insur- ance is not defined for the purposes of section 61, but is regarded as being a policy of insurance under the terms of which the benefits payable are in respect of personal accident disease or sickness. Therefore, if a payment is made pursuant to a personal sickness or accident policy in respect of incapacity for work, that payment will not be assessable for income tax purposes. The excep- tion to this is if the benefit is calculated according to loss of earnings or profits. For a policy to be regarded as a loss of earnings or profits policy, the benefit payable under the policy must be solely related to the taxpayer’s prior income and must not be limited in other terms. For example, a policy which provided for a benefit of the lesser of the insured’s prior income or $500 per week would not be regarded as a loss of earnings or profits policy. There will usually be strong indications as to whether a policy is a loss of earnings or profits policy or not. One example would be whether the policy requires that the insured supply evi- dence of loss of earnings, in addition to evidence of disablement or incapacity. An insurance contract does not need to restore the total loss of earnings or profits suffered for the benefits to be taxable. What must be deter- mined is whether or not the benefit is calculated according to the actual loss. For example, bene- fits under a policy providing for payment of 80% of lost earnings would be taxable. Having decided on whether the benefits are assessable, the question of whether the pre- mium payments are deductible is easily an- swered. If the benefits are assessable then the premiums are deductible. This is so whether the taxpayer is an employee or self employed. Determination E6: Persons Not Required To Comply With Section 104A of the Income Tax Act 1976 Determination E6 determines the extent to which people are not required to comply with section 104A of the Income Tax Act 1976, for the income year commencing 1 April 1990. It differs from Determination E5 only in the size of the thresh- olds which determine whether compliance with section 104A of the act is required for various categories of expenditure. Those thresholds have been adjusted upwards to account for the effects of inflation since Determination E5 was signed. The determination was made pursuant to sec- tion 104A(5) of the Act. The Commissioner signed it on the 14 November 1990. The full determination is printed in the appendix to this Tax Information Bulletin. 5 Foreign Investment Fund Regime Recent Determinations made by the Commissioner Introduction The Commissioner made four determinations on 6 November 1990 and six determinations on 15 November 1990 under the Foreign Invest- ment Fund (FIF) regime, pursuant to section 245S(1) of the Income Tax Act 1976. The determinations are outlined below, together with the rights and obligations of affected tax- payers. The determinations are reproduced in full in the New Zealand Gazette publications of 15th and 22nd November 1990. A brief explanation of the FIF regime is con- tained in TIB Volume Two, No.4, released in November 1990. More detailed information is provided in the IR 275 booklet entitled “Interna- tional Tax Guide”. The FIF regime is part of the International Tax legislation effective from 1 April 1988. Outline of Determinations made FIF5:Bermuda International Bond Fund Lim- ited FIF6:Guinness Flight International Fund Lim- ited FIF7:RBC International Bond Fund Limited FIF8:Vanbrugh Currency Fund Limited FIF9: Guinness Flight Global Strategy Fund Limited FIF10: Barclays Australian Mineral Fund FIF11: Barclays Australian Equity Fund FIF12: The M & G Island Fund FIF13: MIM Britannia Pioneer Markets Fund Limited FIF14: Wardley Private Capital Trust Determinations FIF5, FIF6, FIF7, FIF8, FIF9 and FIF10 These determine that as the distributions excep- tion criteria in the FIF regime are met, rights held in the respective foreign entity (e.g. by way of shares or units), do not constitute an interest in a Foreign Investment Fund in relation to the foreign entity’s accounting year specified in the table below. For the purposes of this item, these foreign entities are referred to as “Non-FIFs”. Determinations FIF11, FIF12, FIF13 and FIF 14 These determine that as none of the exception criteria in the FIF regime are met, rights held in the respective foreign entity (e.g. by way of shares or units), do constitute an interest in a Foreign Investment Fund in relation to the for- eign entity’s accounting year specified in the table below. For the purposes of this item, these foreign entities are referred to as “FIFs”. Effect of Determinations Non-FIF’s These determinations confirm that New Zea- land resident investors in these foreign entities are not liable under the FIF regime, for income tax on the change in value of any shares or units held over their 1989 and/or 1990 income year. However, New Zealand investors will continue as normal to be liable for income tax on any distributions received from the respective for- eign entity. FIF’s These determinations confirm that under the FIF regime, New Zealand resident investors in these foreign entities are liable for income tax on the change in value of any shares or units held over their 1989 and/or 1990 income year. This is in addition to any distributions received. Which income year is affected by these determi- nations will depend on the balance date of the taxpayer. This is outlined in the table on page 6. 6 Example Assume a New Zealand investor in Barclays Australian Mineral Fund (FIF10) has a balance date of 30 June 1989. In this example, the inves- tor's balance date falls between 31 October 1988 and 30 September 1989. Accordingly the “Non- FIF” determination applies to that investor’s 1989 income year. For the majority of investors, i.e. those with a 31 March balance date, only their 1989 income year is affected by the determinations. Note that for all other income years, the FIF regime will apply to these ten foreign entities, as it does for any foreign entity generally, i.e. rights in the foreign entity will constitute an interest in a FIF, unless any of the exception criteria from the FIF regime are met in those years. Amended Assessments Required If you have already sent your 1989 and/or 1990 Tax Return to the Department without includ- ing your FIF income, you should: complete Parts A and B of the IR 4H form, “Interest in a Foreign Investment Fund - Disclosure Schedule & Worksheet.” and; send the completed IR 4H form(s) to your local Inland Revenue Office with a letter attached requesting your 1989 and/or 1990 return to be reassessed. When we get the completed IR 4H form and letter, we will prepare and issue an amended 1989 and/or 1990 assessment for any further income tax payable. DeterminationDateFor. EntityTaxpayer’s Income YearTaxpayer’s PublishedAccountingending on or betweenIncome Year NumberStatusin GazetteYear endedandAffected FIF5Non-FIF15 Nov 199030 June 198830 June 198830 Sept 19881988 1 Oct 198829 June 19891989 FIF6Non-FIF15 Nov 199031 Mar 198931 Mar 198930 Sept 19891989 1 Oct 198930 Mar 19901990 FIF7Non-FIF15 Nov 19901 Nov 19881 Nov 198830 Sept 19891989 1 Oct 198931 Oct 19891990 FIF8Non-FIF15 Nov 199024 Apr 198824 Apr 198830 Sept 19881988 1 Oct 198823 Apr 19891989 FIF9Non-FIF22 Nov 199031 Dec 198831 Dec 198830 Sept 19891989 1 Oct 198930 Dec 19891990 FIF10Non-FIF22 Nov 199031 Oct 198831 Oct 198830 Sept 19891989 1 Oct 198930 Oct 19891990 FIF11FIF22 Nov 199030 June 198830 June 198830 Sept 1988 1989\* 1 Oct 198829 June 19891989 FIF12FIF22 Nov 199029 Sept 198829 Sept 198830 Sept 1988 1989\* 1 Oct 198828 Sept 19891989 FIF13FIF22 Nov 199031 Mar 198931 Mar 198930 Sept 19891989 1 Oct 198930 Mar 19901990 FIF14FIF22 Nov 199031 Jan 198931 Jan 198930 Sept 19891989 1 Oct 198930 Jan 19901990 \* The transitional provision contained at section 245Y(4) of the Act deems any FIF income that would otherwise be required to be included in the 1988 income year to be derived in the 1989 income year. 7 Please note that if you have calculated 1990 FIF income and had previously opted to estimate your 1991 provisional tax, you may need to re- estimate your 1991 provisional tax liability. Interests held in other Foreign Entities You should follow the procedures outlined in this item where your obligations relating to interests held in other FIF’s have not been fulfilled. Rights of Affected Taxpayers Any person holding rights in any of the ten foreign entities referred to in this item (or the foreign entity itself), may formally object to the relevant determination. Any objection must be in writing, stating the grounds of objection. It must be delivered to the Commissioner within one month from the date the relevant determi- nation was published in the Gazette. Any such objection should be directed to the following address: International Tax Central Unit Inland Revenue Department P. O. Box 895 Wellington GST Treatment of Interest Charged on Overdue Accounts 1 NZBLC and Patrikios Holdings Limited v United Fisheries Limited 1986 1 NZBLC. These cases found that where there is an agree- ment to pay interest rather than pay cash by a prescribed date, that amount of interest is not an amount payable as a result of default for the purposes of Section 3(3)(b)(ii) of the Credit Con- tracts Act. In the Wrightson NMA case the agreement to pay interest was reached after there had been default in payment while in the Patrikios Holdings case it was a condition of the contract of supply that interest would be pay- able if the amount owing was not paid within seven days. Ruling When there is an agreement that allows a pur- chaser to pay interest on an amount rather than pay that amount by a prescribed date then a credit contract will exist and no GST will be payable on the interest charged. This is to be contrasted with the situation where an amount is charged by way of penalty where payment is not made by a prescribed date. In this case a credit contract will not be in existence and GST will be payable on any amount charged by way of penalty. This item deals with the GST treatment of inter- est charged by a supplier on overdue accounts. Background Frequently, a supplier of goods or services charges interest on amounts not paid by a par- ticular date. Whether this interest is subject to GST depends on whether the contract which the goods and services are supplied under qualifies as a credit contract. If it does qualify as such then the provision of credit is deemed to be a financial service, and the interest charged is not subject to GST by virtue of Section 3(1)(f) of the Goods and Services Tax Act 1985. Section 3(3)(b)(ii) of the Credit Contracts Act 1981 specifically excludes “any reasonable amount payable as a result of a default under the contract” when determining whether there is the provision of credit under a credit contract. Comment The question of whether a contract which im- poses interest where payment is not made by a prescribed date is a credit contract has been considered by the High Court in two cases. These are Wrightson NMA Limited v Mead (1984) 8 Due Dates Reminder December 1990 7First instalment of 1991 Provisional Tax due for taxpayers with August balance dates. Second instalment of 1991 Provisional Tax due for taxpayers with April balance dates. Third instalment of 1991 Provisional Tax due for taxpayers with December balance dates. 1989 Terminal Tax due for taxpayers with January balance dates. 14 Dividend PAYE deducted during Novem- ber 1990 due. Interest PAYE deducted during November due for monthly payers. Non-Resident Withholding Tax deducted during November 1990 due. 20 PAYE deductions for the first 15 days of December 1990 due - “Large” employers. Tax deductions for November 1990 due - “Small” employers. January 1991 5PAYE deductions for last 16 days of Decem- ber 1990 due - “Large” employers. 7First instalment of 1991 Provisional Tax due for taxpayers with September balance dates. Second instalment of 1991 Provisional Tax due for taxpayers with May balance dates. Third instalment of 1991 Provisional Tax due for taxpayers with January balance dates. 1989 Terminal Tax due for taxpayers with February balance dates. 14 Dividend PAYE deducted during December 1990 due. Interest PAYE deducted during December due for monthly payers. Non-Resident Withholding Tax deducted during December 1990 due. 15 GST Return and payment for period ended 30 November 1990 due. 20 PAYE deductions for the first 15 days of January 1991 due - “Large” employers. PAYE deductions for December 1990 due - “Small” employers. FBT Return and payment for quarter ended 31 December 1990 due. 9 SUBMISSION ON ACCRUAL DETERMINATIONS 1. Financial Arrangements which require Determinations Type of ArrangementSuggested Treatment 2. Problems with existing Determinations DeterminationProblem and suggested solution Your name and address (This is optional, but is requested in case we need to discuss your suggestion with you or seek further details of proposed method etc.) TAX INFORMATION BULLETIN THIS IS AN INLAND REVENUE DEPARTMENT SERVICE TO PEOPLE WITH AN INTEREST IN NEW ZEALAND TAXATION. VOLUME TWO No. 5D E C E M B E R 1 9 9 0