CONTENTS Get your TIB sooner on the internet3 This monthís opportunity to comment4 Binding rulings Product Ruling ñ BR PRD 02/205 Product Ruling ñ BR PRD 02/217 New legislation Student loan scheme ñ Repayment and interest write-off thresholds for 2003ñ0411 Legislation and determinations General depreciation determination DEP 48óprints (including limited edition prints), paintings and drawings12 Legal decisions ñ case notes Legal fees partially incurred for principal purpose, no arrangement in place, income not returned, shortfall penalties for evasion and lack of reasonable care14 TRA 19/2002 Tax avoidance correctly addressed and Commissioner's assessment confirmed15 Dandelion Investments Limited v CIR Mortgagee sales17 Christchurch Readymix Concrete Ltd v Rob Mitchell Builder Ltd (in liquidation) Regular features Due dates reminder19 Your chance to comment on draft taxation items before they are finalised21 AX INFORMATION BULLETIN This is an Inland Revenue service to people with an interest in New Zealand taxation ISSN 0114ñ7161 Vol 15, No 1 January 2003 This TIB has no appendix 2 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) 3 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) GET YOUR TIB SOONER ON THE INTERNET This Tax Information Bulletin is also available on the internet in PDF format. Our website is at: www.ird.govt.nz It has other Inland Revenue information that you may find useful, including any draft binding rulings and interpretation statements that are available. If you find that you prefer to get the TIB from our website and no longer need a paper copy, please let me know so we can take you off our mailing list. You can do this by completing the form at the back of this TIB, or by emailing us at IRDTIB@datamail.co.nz with your name and details. 4 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) THIS MONTHíS OPPORTUNITY FOR YOU TO COMMENT Inland Revenue produces a number of statements and rulings aimed at explaining how taxation law affects taxpayers and their agents. Because we are keen to produce items that accurately and fairly reflect taxation legislation, and are useful in practical situations, your input into the processóas perhaps a user of that legislationóis highly valued. The following draft item is available for review/comment this month, having a deadline of 14 February 2003. Ref.Draft typeDescription ED0037Standard practice statementIncome equalisation deposits and refunds Please see page 21 for details on how to obtain a copy. The following draft items are available for review/comment this month, having a deadline of 28 February 2003 Ref.Draft typeDescription COR0050Statement of policy withdrawalTime for new companies to make QC and revised interpretationelections ówhere EOT arrangements with tax agents exist XPB0007Draft public rulingTertiary student association fees Please see page 21 for details on how to obtain copies of these. 5 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) BINDING RULINGS This section of the TIB contains binding rulings that the Commissioner of Inland Revenue has issued recently. The Commissioner can issue binding rulings in certain situations. Inland Revenue is bound to follow such a ruling if a taxpayer to whom the ruling applies calculates tax liability based on it. For full details of how binding rulings work, see our information booklet Adjudication & Rulings, a guide to Binding Rulings (IR 715) or the article on page 1 of Tax Information Bulletin Vol 6, No 12 (May 1995) or Vol 7, No 2 (August 1995). You can download these publications free from our website at www.ird.govt.nz PRODUCT RULING ñ BR PRD 02/20 This is a product ruling made under section 91F of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Name of the Person who applied for the Ruling This Ruling has been applied for by PSIS Limited (ìPSISî). Taxation Laws All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 1994, unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of sections CD 5, CE 1(1)(a), CE 1(1)(b), the definition of ìdividendsî in section CF 2(1), and the definition of ìinterestî in section OB 1. This Ruling does not consider how (if at all) section HF 1 applies to or affects the Arrangement. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies The Arrangement is that PSIS will charge account holders monthly transaction fees, subject to terms and conditions which state that account holders will be exempt from transaction fees where they meet certain stated criteria. Further details of the Arrangement are set out in the paragraphs below. 1.PSIS operates as a financial services organisation, offering depositors interest bearing accounts and borrowers interest bearing loans. 2.In January 1996, PSIS introduced transaction fees because it had small or low activity deposit accounts whose transaction and maintenance costs exceeded the benefit or advantage that PSIS gained from these accounts. 3.The fees were introduced to discourage account holders from undertaking multiple small transactions as the processing of these transactions was a significant cost to PSIS on an annualised basis. Account holders who undertake a certain level of business with PSIS (referred to as ìvalued customersî) are not liable for these fees. This policy is in line with a number of PSISís competitors, being the major trading banks. 4.Under PSISís company constitution there is a requirement that all account holders subscribe for a single share in PSIS. Accordingly, all account holders are shareholders of PSIS. 5.Presently, PSIS applies transaction fees to the following transactions (set out in the Fees Brochure, dated July 2002): Transaction type AT M -withdrawal -balance enquiry -declined withdrawal Bill payment -electronic -telephone banking -internet banking EFTPOS -purchase/withdrawal -decline purchase/withdrawal Cash withdrawal Direct debit External automatic payment Personal cheque withdrawal Transfer withdrawal 6 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) 6.However, the following categories of account holders are exempt from transaction fees: (a) account holders who maintain deposit account balances at minimum monthly levels (where the balance is held in one account or more of any account types). The minimum levels are: ïCurrent account(s)$500 ïCurrent account(s) with personal cheque facility$1,000 ïSavings account(s)$2,000 ïTerm deposit(s) and bond account(s)$5,000 ïCapital note(s)$2,500 ïLoan(s) (excludes Creditline and Overdraft balances and limits, see Fees Brochure Notes, no. 2)$50,000 The transaction fee exemptions apply to one or more account types associated with one customer/membership number (Fees Brochure Notes, no 1). For the purposes of the fee exemption, a month runs from the 26 th day of a calendar month to the 25 th day of the following calendar month (Fees Brochure Notes, no. 3), or (b) account holders who are 65 years or older (from the month following the 65 th birthday); or (c) account holders who have their New Zealand Superannuation Retirement Income or Veterans pension credited, in full, to a PSIS account; or (d) account holders under 18 years of age who elect to have restricted account use as determined by PSIS (i.e. deposits, cash and cheque withdrawals, ATM and EFTPOS facilities). Fees will be charged from the month following the account holders 18 th birthday; (e) account holders who are full-time tertiary students, 18 years or older undertaking a course with a minimum duration of one year (the customer must present their current student identification card to qualify and continue to present a current student identification card at the beginning of each academic year to renew the exemption (see Fees Brochure Notes, no. 4)). 7.PSIS keeps a running monthly total of prima facie transaction charges. No charges are made until the 25th of each month. At this stage, the decision as to whether account holders meet the criteria for an exemption is made. Account holders that do not meet the criteria for an exemption from transaction fees are charged monthly in arrears on the 25th of each month. 8.Where an account holder meets the criteria for an exemption set out above for a given month, the fees that are applicable to the transactions undertaken are not charged. 9.There are no other collateral contracts, agreements, terms, or conditions, written or otherwise, that have a bearing on the conclusions reached in this ruling. Conditions stipulated by the Commissioner This Ruling is made subject to the following conditions: a)the current commercial rate of interest is paid by PSIS in respect of all its accounts, regardless of whether any benefit or advantage is given to particular account holders in terms of an exemption from transaction fees, and b)the criteria for the exemption from transaction fees are not dependent on the account holderís status as a shareholder of PSIS. How the Taxation Laws apply to the Arrangement Subject in all respects to any assumption or condition stated above, and the qualification in respect of section HF 1, under the heading ìTaxation Lawsî, the Taxation Laws apply to the Arrangement as follows: ïThe benefit of being exempt from transaction fees is not gross income of those account holders under section CD 5. ïSuch benefits are not interest under section CE 1(1)(a) or (b). ïSuch benefits are not dividends under section CF 2(1). The period or income year for which this Ruling applies This Ruling will apply for the period 1 April 2002 to 31 March 2007. This Ruling is signed by me on the 31st day of October 2002. Martin Smith General Manager (Adjudication & Rulings) 7 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) PRODUCT RULING ñ BR PRD 02/21 This is a product ruling made under section 91F of the Tax Administration Act 1994. Name of the Person who applied for the Ruling This Ruling has been applied for by Fletcher Challenge Forests Limited. Taxation Laws All legislative references are to the Income Tax Act 1994 unless otherwise stated. This Ruling applies in respect of: Section CD 3; Section CD 4; Section CD 5. The Arrangement to which this Ruling applies The Arrangement is the consolidation of every five existing ordinary and preference shares of Fletcher Challenge Forests Ltd (ìFCFî) into one such ordinary and preference share respectively pursuant to the authorisation conferred by clause 2.12 of the Constitution of FCF and: (i)implemented by a resolution passed by the Board of FCF on 13 November 2002; and (ii) a consequential amendment to FCFís Constitution being approved by a special resolution passed at the annual meeting of shareholders of FCF on 13 November. Further details of the Arrangement are set out in the paragraphs below. 1.FCF has the following two classes of share on issue: ï929,507,897 ordinary shares; and ï1,859,015,794 preference shares. The ordinary shares were issued both before and after 1 July 1994, the commencement date of the Companies Act 1993, and the preference shares were issued and placed over the period December 2000 to March 2001. 2.Currently the available subscribed capital of the ordinary shares totals $979,362,685 (or $1.0536 per share). As at 1 July 1994, the commencement date of the Companies Act 1993, that available subscribed capital was $489,871,903. At present the available subscribed capital of the preference shares total is $487,253,948 (or $0.2621 per share). 3.FCF has re-registered under the Companies Act 1993. The terms of the preference shares (set out in clauses 2.2 and 2.3 of the Constitution of FCF) are as follows: 2.2Rights of Existing Preference Shares Subject to clause 2.3, each Preference Share existing at the date of adoption of this Constitution confers on the holders, in addition to the rights set out elsewhere in this Constitution and the Act (except where such rights are negated, altered or added by this Constitution) the same rights, and ranks equally with, the Ordinary Shares and holders of Preference Shares will vote with the holders of Ordinary Shares on all matters except on a vote relating to a liquidation of the Company, in which case a separate vote of the holders of Preference Shares will be required. 2.3Rights of Shares in the Event of Liquidation In addition to the rights set out in clause 2.1 and, in the event of liquidation of the Company, clause 2.2 (a) the Preference Shares rank ahead (to the amount of NZ$0.25 per Preference Share) of the Ordinary Shares. (b) the Ordinary Shares will be entitled to the next NZ$0.25 per Ordinary Share, and (c) thereafter, holders of Preference Shares and Ordinary Shares will share equally in any remaining surplus. On 15 December 2005 (the fifth anniversary of the first allotment of the preference shares as a class) the preference rights on liquidation attached to the preference shares will lapse and the preference shares will automatically convert to ordinary shares: clause 2.4 of the Constitution. 4.The ordinary and preference shares of FCF are listed on the New Zealand Stock Exchange (ìthe Stock Exchangeî) and the Australian Stock Exchange. The ordinary shares and the preference shares are also listed on the New York Stock Exchange (ìthe NYSEî) in the US where they are listed and traded in the form of American Depository Receipts (ìADRsî). Each ADR represents 10 ordinary or preference shares of FCF, conferring on the holder the appropriate dividend, voting and other shareholder entitlements commensurate with the underlying shares and administered through the depositary of the ADR programme. 5.It is a condition of listing on the NYSE that shares must have a minimum share price of $US1 over a 30-day trading period. The requirement is applicable to the ADRs. The trading range of the shares of FCF in recent times has been such that there has been a breach of this requirement. On 22 January 2002 the NYSE notified FCF of the breach and required FCF to take steps to cure the deficiency or be subject to suspension or delisting procedures. 8 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) 6.The board of FCF proposes to consolidate the shares of the company in order to ensure compliance with listing requirements of the NYSE. The depositary of the ADR programme will undertake a consequential consolidation of the ADRs such that the ADR:share ratio remains 1:10. FCF considers that with fewer shares on issue, and the consequential consolidation of the ADRs, there should be compliance with the requirement that the ADR share price must not fall below $US1 per share. A further reason for the consolidation is that the current share price gives rise to large percentage swings for each one cent of price movement and is not market efficient because swings in the share price create too big a hurdle for many buyers and sellers, essentially creating illiquidity. 7.Under clause 2.12 of its Constitution, the board of FCF has the power to consolidate and divide or subdivide, all or any of its shares (whether of one or more classes). ìShareî is defined in the Annexure to the Constitution as follows: an Ordinary Share or a Preference Share as the case may be 8.The board proposes to pass a resolution which will have the effect that all existing ordinary shares and all existing preference shares of FCF will be consolidated. The draft of the directorsí resolution (including the preamble) reads as follows: Noted: Subject to shareholder approval of the consequential amendment to the Companyís constitution, the Board proposes to consolidate the ordinary and preference shares of the Company on a five-for-one basis and, consistent with New Zealand market practice, fractional entitlements following the consolidation will be rounded up to the nearest whole number. The consolidation is intended primarily to ensure that the Companyís American Depositary Receipt (ìADRî) programme complies with the New York Stock Exchange quantitative continuous listing standard that requires the average closing price of the Companyís American Depositary Shares (ìADSsî) to be not less than US$1.00 over a consecutive 30-day trading period. The share consolidation, taken together with the consequential consolidation of the ADSs, should result in an increase in the market price of the ADSs to a level that remedies the breach of the New York Stock Exchangeís quantitative listing standard. In consolidating the ordinary and preference shares, the ordinary ADSs and Series A ADSs ratios of 1 ordinary ADS or Series A ADS for every 10 underlying securities will remain unchanged. The effect of the consolidation is therefore to require a five for one consolidation of the ordinary ADSs and Series A ADSs. Consistent with United States market practice and in line with the terms of the deposit agreement governing the Companyís ADS programme in similar circumstances, Citibank, N.A. (as depositary) has advised that it will round down any fractional entitlements to an ordinary ADS or Series A ADS following the consolidation of the ordinary ADSs and Series A ADSs to the nearest whole number. Citibank, N.A. will sell the underlying securities represented by those fractional entitlements, and the proceeds paid to the relevant holder. Citibank, N.A., as holder of the Companyís shares that underlie the ADR programme, will have those shares consolidated in the same manner as each other shareholder in the Company. If approved by shareholders at the Companyís annual shareholdersí meeting, following the consolidation, clause 2.3 of the constitution of the Company will be amended to maintain the current entitlements of the preference shareholders on liquidation of the Company. Resolved: 1. Subject to the approval by special resolution of the amendments to clause 2.3 of the Companyís constitution, pursuant to the power conferred on the Board by clause 2.12 of the constitution of the Company, with effect from 5.00 pm (New Zealand time) on \[29\] November 2002 (the Record Time): (a)All existing ordinary and preference shares of the Company are consolidated on a five-for-one basis such that every five ordinary shares and every five preference shares in the Company registered in the name of a shareholder at the Record Time will be consolidated into one ordinary or preference share in the Company respectively, with the intent that: (i)all existing rights, privileges and restrictions attaching to the existing ordinary and preference shares of the Company continue in existence and remain unaltered; (ii)each of the shares shall remain fully paid and the amount of subscribed capital attributable to each ordinary and preference share shall remain the same; and (iii) the consolidation is merely a reformatting of all existing ordinary and preference shares and is not a cancellation of existing shares followed by a new issue of shares. (b)If, in effecting the consolidation referred to in paragraph (a) above, a holder of ordinary shares or preference shares in the Company does not have a number of ordinary shares or preference shares exactly divisible by five, in calculating the number of shares held by such holder following consolidation, a fraction of a share will be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 2. That any one of the Chief Executive, the Chief Financial Officer or the Company Secretary be authorised to execute and deliver on behalf of the 9 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) Company (whether before or after the date of these resolutions) any requests, notices or other communications, and to take any such action on behalf of the Company as may be contemplated by, or necessary or expedient under or in connection with, the consolidation approved in resolution 1, including the giving of instructions to the Companyís share registrar to record the consequential changes to the Companyís share register. 9.The Board has considered the substance of the consolidation. It is intended that this matter will be part of the business at a meeting of the board on 13 November 2002 and at the annual general meeting of shareholders, which is also to be held on that date. 10. The objective of the consolidation is that, as from \[29 November 2002\], every five ordinary shares and every five preference shares presently held by a shareholder will be consolidated into one such ordinary share or preference share, as the case may be. In respect of the holders of ADRs the number of ADRs on issue will be consolidated on a one for five basis to enable the American Depository Receipt ratio of ten shares in the company per ADR to remain unchanged. 11. If a holder of ordinary or preference shares does not have a number of ordinary shares or preference shares exactly divisible by five, in calculating the number of shares to be held by such a holder following the consolidation, a fraction of a share will be rounded up to the nearest whole number. On the basis of the share register as at 31 July 2002 and assuming a share price of 22 cents for both classes of shares and an average rounding of 0.5 of a share for each shareholder with a shareholding not divisible by five, the rounded-up fractions of post-consolidation shares would result in an additional post-consolidation: ï24,228 ordinary shares; and ï12,078 preference shares. In such circumstances the total dollar value of the rounding to shareholders would be $19,967 (36,306 x $1.10 x 50%). This represents 0.00325% of FCFís current market value. On the basis that the pre-consolidation shares convert post-consolidation into 185,901,579 ordinary shares and 371,803,158 preference shares the percentage change in shareholding as a result of rounding up would be: 0.00261% for ordinary shares and 0.00085% for preference shares (total 0.00130%). An affected shareholder will be conferred with an ìadditionî to shareholding ranging from 0.2 to 0.8 of a share. (In other words, as rounding up will be required only where a shareholder holds a number of shares which is not equally divisible by five, no shareholder will receive more than 0.8 of a share as a consequence of the rounding up.) FCF were advised by its financial advisors, First NZ Capital Group Ltd, to round up fractions. First NZ advised that although this would favour some shareholders over others, based on a share price of $0.25, the maximum differential between shareholders would be only $1 per shareholder. 12. Implementation of the five-for-one consolidation will require the appropriate adjustment of the 25 cent preferences. Under the existing share count a preference shareholder has a total preference of $1.25 for every five shares. If parity is to be maintained the preference needs to be consequentially adjusted to $1.25 for every share under the consolidation share count. 13. The rights associated with the preference shares are incorporated in the Constitution, which may be amended only by a special resolution passed by shareholders in general meeting. Under section 32(2) of the Companies Act the power to alter the Constitution is vested in the shareholders of FCF. 14. Therefore, in conjunction with the proposed board resolution and in order to complete the implementation of the consolidation, shareholders will be asked to pass a special resolution at the annual meeting of shareholders (on 13 November 2002) to amend the Constitution of FCF. The amendment will increase the preference in liquidation from 25 cents per share to $1.25 per share. A draft of the shareholdersí resolution reads as follows: That, with effect from the date the shares in the Company are consolidated on a one for five basis pursuant to a resolution of the Board of the Company, the constitution of the Company be amended by deleting the two references to ìNZ$0.25î in clause 2.3 and replacing them with ìNZ$1.25î. If the resolution is approved by the shareholders, the Effective Time will be 29 November 2002. 15. The directorsí resolution and the shareholdersí resolution are effectively subject to favourable binding rulings being given in respect of the consolidation. FCF desires to have certainty on its ASC position. 16. If the shareholders do not approve the proposed amendment to the Constitution or if binding rulings satisfactory to the company are not given, the Board intends, as soon as is practicable, to alter the number of the companyís shares represented by each ADR so that each ADR would represent 50 underlying shares. This should remedy the breach of the NYSE quantitative continuous listing standard. Any alteration to the number of the companyís shares represented by each ADR, using this method of consolidation, will only affect the holders of ADRs. 10 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) 17. FCF recognises that it will need to advise the various stock exchanges of the proposed consolidation. For example, the New Zealand Stock Exchange Listing Rules (the Listing Rules) require that any proposal to consolidate shares must be notified to the Stock Exchange as soon as the information is first available: section 10.8.1. In addition an appendix 7 notice concerning ìnotice of event affecting securitiesî will need to be given to the Stock Exchange no later than 10 business days prior to record date. FCF is not expecting to be required to give the Stock Exchange notice of the cancellation of securities in accordance with section 7.12.1 of the Listing Rules because no securities will be cancelled. The Australian Stock Exchange requires reciprocal notification of all matters notified to the New Zealand Stock Exchange. Condition stipulated by the Commissioner This Ruling is made subject to the following condition: ïThe resolutions passed by the Board and the shareholders of FCF are not materially different from draft resolutions set out in this ruling. How the Taxation Laws apply to the Arrangement Subject in all respects to any assumption or condition stated above, the Taxation Laws apply to the Arrangement as follows: ïThe consolidation does not result in a sale or disposition for the purpose of sections CD 3, CD 4 or CD 5. The period or income year for which this Ruling applies This Ruling will apply for the period 8 November 2002 to 31 March 2003. This Ruling is signed by me on the 8 th day of November 2002. Martin Smith General Manager (Adjudication & Rulings) 11 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) NEW LEGISLATION STUDENT LOAN SCHEME ñ REPAYMENT AND INTEREST WRITE-OFF THRESHOLDS FOR 2003-04 The student loan scheme repayment threshold, which sets the income level at which compulsory repayments begin, will increase from its current level of $15,496 to $15,964 for the 2003-04 income year. The student loan scheme interest write-off threshold, which sets the level of income that part-time or part-year students may have and still be entitled to a full interest write-off, will increase from its current level of $25,378 to $25,909 for the 2003-04 income year. The student loan scheme repayment and interest write-off thresholds are based on the amount of the domestic purposes benefit payable to a person with two or more children. The repayment threshold is aligned to the gross amount of the benefit, rounded up so that it is divisible into whole dollars on a weekly basis, and the interest write-off threshold is aligned to the amount of other income at which the benefit is fully abated. These thresholds are reviewed annually in December each year and are set on the basis of the amount that it is projected will be payable from 1 April of the following year. Student Loan Scheme (Repayment Threshold) Regulations 2002 and Student Loan Scheme (Income Amount for Full Interest Write-off) Regulations 2002 12 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) LEGISLATION AND DETERMINATIONS This section of the TIB covers items such as recent tax legislation, accrual and depreciation determinations, and livestock values. GENERAL DEPRECIATION DETERMINATION DEP48 ñ PRINTS (INCLUDING LIMITED EDITION PRINTS), PAINTINGS AND DRAWINGS A General Depreciation Determination has been issued that inserts into the industry categories ìHotels, motels, restaurants, cafÈs, taverns and takeaway barsî, ìResidential rental property chattelsî and ìShopsî, and into the asset category ìOffice equipment and furnitureî, in the appropriate alphabetical order, the following asset classes: General asset classEstimate DV banded SL equiv useful life depín ratebanded (years)(%)dep'n rate (%) Paintings and drawings,209.56.5 in either case being property which might reasonably be expected in normal circumstances to decline in value Prints (including limited101812.5 edition prints) The new depreciation determination also consequentially deletes the asset class ìPrintsî from the industry category ìHotels, motels, restaurants, cafÈs, taverns and takeaway barsî. The rate for ìPrints (including limited edition prints)î is the same as the deleted rate for prints. The reference to limited edition prints is intended to avoid any doubt. The general asset class ìPaintings and drawings, in either case being property which might reasonably be expected in normal circumstances to decline in valueî is a new introduction. It encompasses works (including painted or drawn reproductions) in a variety of media and on a variety of substrates. The qualification ìÖ, in either case being property which might reasonably be expected in normal circumstances to decline in valueî is, strictly, unnecessary in that it merely paraphrases a legislative requirement that must be satisfied in any case. However comments on the exposure draft of this determination indicated concern that ìPaintings and drawingsî (the asset class description originally proposed) would encompass much property that would not reasonably be expected in normal circumstances to decline in value when used or available for use in deriving gross income or in carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving gross income. It was suggested that the proposed description might mislead some taxpayers into claiming depreciation deductions in respect of paintings and drawings that are not depreciable property. The qualification is intended as an aid to compliance for any user of the determination (and of published tables based on it) who might not be familiar with the relevant tax law. There might be circumstances where expert advice on whether property might be expected to decline in use will be useful in deciding whether the definition of ìdepreciable propertyî is met. However in the normal course it is not reasonable to expect property to decline in value when used or available for use in deriving gross income or in carrying on a business for the purpose of deriving gross income if its value is significantly affected by: ïIts artistic qualities; or ïIts collectability due to its rarity, antiquity, or association with a person, place or event, or any other reason and these characteristics are not diminished in the use of the property. It was suggested that providing a depreciation rate for paintings and drawings will increase compliance and administrative costs, as taxpayers and the Commissioner may find it necessary to take expert advice if disputes should arise. This possibility is acknowledged. However it is a consequence of the availability of the depreciation allowance and more particularly of the annual accounting cycle in which depreciation deductions are available. The intention of the legislature would be frustrated if the Commissioner were to attempt to deny the depreciation allowance by declining to determine an annual depreciation rate for such property. The possibility of such costs was implicitly acknowledged in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 9 (September 1998), which said in relation to original paintings that ìa valuation opinion may be sought to independently and objectively satisfy the test of whether an item is depreciable property or not under section OB 1î. However it is expected that instances where expert opinion is required will be very rare if the factors referred to above are taken into account. Determination DEP48: Tax Depreciation Rates General Determination Number 48 applies to ìdepreciable propertyî other than ìexcluded depreciable propertyî for the 2002/2003 and subsequent income years. The Commissionerís views expressed in the earlier article 13 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) ìPrints and original paintingsî in Tax Information Bulletin Vol 10, No 9 (September 1998) dealt with the law, including depreciation determinations, that applied at that time. Those views do not apply for the 2002/2003 and subsequent income years. The determination is reproduced below. General Depreciation Determination DEP 48 This determination may be cited as ìDetermination DEP48: Tax Depreciation Rates General Determination Number 48î. 1.Application This determination applies to taxpayers who own the asset classes listed below. This determination applies to ìdepreciable propertyî other than ìexcluded depreciable propertyî for the 2002/2003 and subsequent income years. 2.Determination Pursuant to section EG 4 of the Income Tax Act 1994 I hereby amend Determination DEP1: Tax Depreciation Rates General Determination Number 1 (as previously amended) by: ïDeleting from the industry category ìHotels, motels, restaurants, cafÈs, taverns and takeaway barsî, the general asset class, estimated useful life, diminishing value depreciation rate and straight-line depreciation rate listed below: General asset classEstimate DV banded SL equiv useful life depín ratebanded (years)(%)dep'n rate (%) Prints101812.5 ïInserting into the industry categories ìHotels, motels, restaurants, cafÈs, taverns and takeaway barsî, ìResidential rental property chattelsî and ìShopsî, and into the asset category ìOffice equipment and furnitureî, in the appropriate alphabetical order, the general asset classes, estimated useful lives, diminishing value depreciation rates and straight-line depreciation rates listed below: General asset classEstimate DV banded SL equiv useful life depín ratebanded (years)(%)dep'n rate (%) Paintings and drawings,209.56.5 in either case being property the value of which might reasonably be expected in normal circumstances to decline in value Prints (including limited101812.5 edition prints) 3.Interpretation In this determination, unless the context otherwise requires, expressions have the same meaning as in the Income Tax Act 1994. This determination is signed by me on the 13 th day of December 2002. Martin Smith General Manager (Adjudication & Rulings) 14 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) LEGAL DECISIONS ñ CASE NOTES This section of the TIB sets out brief notes of recent tax decisions made by the Taxation Review Authority, the High Court, the Court of Appeal and the Privy Council. Weíve given full references to each case, including the citation details where it has already been reported. Details of the relevant Act and section will help you to quickly identify the legislation at issue. Short case summaries and keywords deliver the bare essentials for busy readers. The notes also outline the principal facts and grounds for the decision. Where possible, we have indicated if an appeal will be forthcoming. These case reviews do not set out Inland Revenue policy, nor do they represent our attitude to the decision. These are purely brief factual reviews of decisions for the general interest of our readers. LEGAL FEES PARTIALLY INCURRED FOR PRINCIPAL PURPOSE, NO ARRANGEMENT IN PLACE, INCOME NOT RETURNED, SHORTFALL PENALTIES FOR EVASION AND LACK OF REASONABLE CARE Case:TRA19/2002 Decision date:22 October 2002 Act:Goods and Services Tax Act 1985 Tax Administration Act 1994 Keywords:input credit, legal fees, shortfall penalties, evasion, lack of reasonable care, PAYE, income, arrangement Summary The taxpayerís challenge sought an input credit for legal fees, that shortfall penalties not be imposed, and asserted an arrangement was in place. Challenge failed for the most part: held to have failed to return income; some legal fees incurred for principal purpose of making taxable supplies, and others for defending taxpayer from a crime; evasion shortfall penalty imposed for failing to account for PAYE; and lack of reasonable care shortfall penalty imposed for failing to return income. Facts At the relevant times, the taxpayer was practising as a chartered accountant. There were five issues: 1.The taxpayer had prepared tax returns for four clients, and as a result of Police investigation, was charged under the Crimes Act 1961. The taxpayer engaged a lawyer to defend those charges. The taxpayer was convicted of all eight charges. He appealed the convictions, but the appeal was dismissed. The taxpayer claimed an input credit for the legal fees in his GST returns. 2.The taxpayer was registered as an employer with the Commissioner. Payments of PAYE were dishonoured and an investigation identified discrepancies. The Commissioner sought to impose a shortfall penalty for evasion. The taxpayer argued his cashflow problems were due to the Commissioner withholding the above GST refund claim, as well as incurring legal fees to assist clients with fraud charges, and a matrimonial severance which prevented him from accessing capital. 3.The parties had endeavoured to enter into an arrangement. The taxpayer made various payments, arguing they were made to ensure an arrangement was in place and thus enable penalties to be remitted. The Commissioner argued the proposed arrangement required all outstanding tax returns to be filed, which did not happen. 4.The taxpayer was registered for GST on an invoice basis and failed to return amounts invoiced to clients. The taxpayer argued he had written these off as bad debts, and had not actually invoiced them. 5.The Commissioner sought to impose a shortfall penalty for gross carelessness, and in the alternative, for lack of reasonable care in preparing his tax return for that period. Decision 1.Legal fees His Honour found the taxpayer had been obliged to incur at least half the legal fees for the protection of his reputation and business as a chartered accountant. His Honour did not think the fees paid to protect the taxpayerís business and/or business reputation were too indirect to be a business GST input, but also found that fees paid to defend the taxpayer from a crime cannot have the principal purpose of making taxable supplies. 15 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) 2.Evasion His Honour held a shortfall penalty for evasion (in respect of PAYE) under section 141E was payable (less 75% reduction already allowed by the CIR). His Honour found the taxpayer knew the PAYE was outstanding, had not, and did not make any attempt to pay the outstanding PAYE (other than the application of a tax credit to part of the debt), and applied the PAYE deductions for a purpose other than in payment to the Commissioner. There had been no cause beyond the taxpayerís control which led to his failure to account for PAYE. His Honour confirmed again that the amount of every tax deduction made under the PAYE rules must be held in trust by the employer for the Crown; the money is no longer that of the employer. 3.Arrangement His Honour found there was no arrangement: The Commissioner had a clear policy requiring outstanding returns to be filed before an arrangement can be entered into and to ensure that any such arrangement remains valid. The taxpayer was found to have not complied with his obligations, to have failed to meet those conditions. 4.Income not returned His Honour found the additional income had not been not returned. While sections 25 and 26 of the GST Act 1985 allow for credit notes to be issued and bad debts to be written off, the taxpayer was unable to satisfy the evidential requirements of those sections that he had done so in respect of the income not returned. Credit notes had not been issued and there were no grounds on which the Commissioner could determine credit notes were not required. His Honour reiterated that while there is no one formula for writing off a bad debt, there needs to be evidence the debts have actually been written off. 5.Lack of reasonable care Shortfall penalty for lack of reasonable care payable. His Honour found there could not be gross carelessness where an accountant, under the pressures being experienced by the taxpayer, thought he did not need to return income which he did not intend to collect and which he knew would not be recovered. However, His Honour found this amounted to not taking reasonable care and took into account that the taxpayer is an experienced accountant from whom one would expect good accounting and record keeping practices (more so than of other individuals). This decision has not been appealed. TAX AVOIDANCE CORRECTLY ADDRESSED AND COMMISSIONERíS ASSESSMENT CONFIRMED Case:Dandelion Investments Limited v CIR Decision date:5 December 2002 Act:Section 99 Income Tax Act 1976 Keywords:tax avoidance, scope of administrative law issues in proceedings at the TRA Summary Unsuccessful appeal by taxpayer. Court of Appeal affirmed the Commissionerís assessment based on application section 99. Administrative law issues on objection limited to showing assessment incorrect. Hearing before the TRA cures any procedural defects. If the assessment is correct, alleged procedural defects by the Commissioner of no importance. Scope of administrative law inquiries limited by the objection. TRA cannot enter into a quasi-judicial review ìfishing expeditionî in the guise of administrative law enquiry. Facts This was an appeal by the taxpayer for the judgment of Tompkins J at the High Court (reported (2001) 20 NZTC 17,293) which was a successful appeal by the CIR from the TRA (reported Case U11 (1999) NZTC 9,100) In the 1986 tax year the taxpayer paid interest of $570,080 on a loan to enable a subsidiary to acquire shares. By means of a circular flow of money the taxpayer received back (tax-free) some $484,000. The taxpayer claimed a deduction of $570,080. The Commissioner applied section 99 to disallow the deduction. The taxpayer objected and was successful at the TRA before Willy J on the basis of an alleged flawed process of re-assessment and on time bar (the TRA did accept the existence of a tax avoidance scheme). The Commissioner successfully appealed to the High Court. The taxpayer appealed to the Court of Appeal Decision The Court of Appeal rejected the appeal. 1.McGrath J giving judgment for the Court noted that the issue of the taxpayerís ability to object being constrained by the Commissionerís failure to prove the grounds of assessment was outside the scope of the appeal as the framing of the objection was not before the High Court on appeal and thus not before the Court of Appeal (par 53 to 54) 16 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) But he went on to consider the matter in obiter comments. On the facts it was considered the taxpayer had been able to frame an effective objection (para 59). It was considered that any defects in the Commissionerís assessment and objection processes had been cured by the extensive hearing before the TRA (para 60 to 63). 2.On the time bar issue the Court considered that Hyslop v CIR \[2001\] 2 NZLR 329 at par 20 established that it was not necessary for a taxpayer to receive a notice of assessment prior to the time bar for the assessment to be valid (para 71). The Court further rejected the suggestion that the notice (dated 26 March 1991) had been fraudulently backdated noting there was no evidence to support the allegation (para 71). 3. The Court rejected the taxpayerís reliance on the Commissionerís Policy Statement on section 99 (ìCPSî) referring to the Privy Council in OíNeil (2001) 20 NZTC 17,051 (para 73-74). The Court also rejected that the CPS raised any legitimate expectation that it would be followed saying that there was ìlimited scope for application of the principles of legitimate expectation to confine the Commissioner in the exercise of statutory duties in relation to assessment functionsî (at para 75). 4.The Court rejected the suggestion that the arrangement was not one for tax avoidance. It considered the test of arrangement in CIR v BNZI had been met (para 77). It rejected suggestions that the arrangement was a normal business transaction or that the Commissioner had failed to tax other parties to the arrangement saying of the latter that the liability to tax of other parties was ìhighly speculativeî and lacking any bearing on the question of the purpose of the arrangement. (at para 83). The Court concluded: ìin reality there was no true business purpose to be achieved by the appellant in entering into the transaction other than to obtain the benefit of a deductionÖof $570,080Ö which was to be offset by a tax free dividend receipt of $484,000î (at para 85). The Court considered this to be tax avoidance. An argument by the taxpayer that the Commissionerís use of section 99(3) to remove the deduction from the taxpayer was invalid because some other adjustment under section 99(4) had not been done was also rejected as the Court did not accept the adjustment contended for was necessary (at para 86). Finally the Court took the opportunity to remind the TRA of the scope of its jurisdiction: ìAs we have said the function of the Authority was to hear and determine the objection disallowed by the Commissioner by conducting a fresh hearing into the matters raised in the objection, in which questions of validity as well as correctness of the assessment could be considered. But the Authorityís role remained one which was concerned with the correctness of the assessment. It did not extend to conducting what was effectively a broad based judicial review of the process leading up to the Commissionerís assessment and disallowance of the objection and subsequent conduct of the proceeding before the Authorityî (para 90). A general overview of the distinction between judicial review and the statutory objection process was made (par 91 to 94) with the Court observing that the power to consider validity issues in the statutory process did not justify a ìfishing expeditionî into Department process and concluded: ìIn the course of the statutory procedure the administrative decisions of the Commissioner are challenged in a manner that enables the correct decision on the taxpayerís liability to prevail, if necessary through the appeal process. In the end, if it is determined that the taxpayer was initially assessed by a genuine exercise of judgment as to the assessable income and, ultimately, was correctly assessed, the respective principles underlying the statutory review scheme and judicial review are in harmony. Importantly, as well, the integrity of the tax system in the eyes of the public is maintainedî (at para 94). 17 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) MORTGAGEE SALES Case:Christchurch Readymix Concrete Ltd v Rob Mitchell Builder Ltd (in liquidation) Decision date:17 December 2001 Act:Goods and Services Tax Act Keywords:GST liquidation mortgagee debt agency Summary The Court held that the proceeds of the sale of property by a mortgaged registered person, which is commenced by the mortgagee and completed by a liquidator, are to be paid to the mortgagee, minus costs of sale. GST is not a cost of sale in such circumstances as section 42 of the GST Act gives it a specific ranking. Facts The liquidators of the defendant company, Rob Mitchell Builders Ltd (ìRMBî) applied to the court for directions as to the ownership of the balance of proceeds of sale of a property at Taylors Mistake Rd, Christchurch (ìthe propertyî). The Commissioner was invited by the court to be heard in the proceedings and elected to do so. RMB was a registered person carrying on business as a builder. The property was owned by RMB and accounted for in its financial records as stock. By agreement for sale and purchase dated 27 February 2002, RMB agreed to sell the property for $430,000 incl. GST. The agreement became unconditional on 2 April 2002 and a deposit was paid by the purchaser and applied for the benefit of the company. On 15 April 2002, RMB was placed in liquidation by the plaintiff (who took no part in the proceedings). The sale was settled on 1 May 2002, with the mortgagee giving a discharge of first mortgage to allow the sale to proceed. Insufficient funds were available from the settlement to repay both the first mortgagee and the GST component of the sale. The liquidators considered they had an obligation to account for GST to the CIR whereas the bank considered the entire proceeds after real estate agents costs, solicitorsí costs and rates, to be due to the bank. The GST of $47,777 was held in trust by agreement between the parties to allow settlement to proceed. The liquidators then brought these proceedings under section 284 of the Companies Act 1993. Decision The bank argued that as the agreement became unconditional and a deposit was paid prior to liquidation, the supply is deemed by the GST Act to have been made by RMB, with the liquidators merely effecting settlement. As such, the liquidators were not liable to pay GST on the sale (section 58 (1D) GST Act) and the bank was entitled to apply the entire proceeds of sale in repayment of its mortgage. The Commissioner argued that the obligation to pay GST (as opposed to when the liability arises) occurs at the end of a taxable period, in this case, the date of liquidation. As however, the matter was then in the hands of the liquidators, the supply could not continue until the liquidator so decided. Upon liquidation, a companyís secured creditors have three options under section 305 Companies Act 1993: ïrealise the property ïvalue it and claim in liquidation for the balance due, or ïsurrender it for the benefit of all creditors and claim in liquidation for the debt. The bank made no claim in liquidation and the Commissioner submitted that it had therefore realised the property by agency of the liquidator. It was submitted that, as such, the supply is deemed to be by the principal, and the bank or the liquidators were required to file a return under section 17(1) GST Act. Venning J reviewed the scheme of the GST Act carefully, noting that: ïGST is a statutory liability that accrues pursuant to the Act. ïGST is not a portion of the price, but is calculated by reference to that price. ïGST is not a sum held in trust, but is a debt due to the Crown. ïA GST debt owed by a company in liquidation has a priority set by the Seventh Schedule to the Companies Act 1993 (ìthe Seventh Scheduleî). His Honour dismissed the Commissionerís argument that, but for the liquidation, RMB would have accounted for GST to the Commissioner and only the balance of the proceeds would have been available to the bank. He noted that the bank was always entitled to full repayment and that, in practice, had the bank not provided the necessary discharge to allow the sale to proceed, settlement would not have occurred and ìthere would have been no money payable to the Commissioner for GSTî. His Honour also rejected the Commissionerís argument that the liability to pay the GST did not arise until the end of the GST period: ìAlthough the amount of tax payable for the period could not be calculated until the end of the period, the liability to pay GST in respect of the sale of the Taylors Mistake property arose on the \[deemed\] supply of the goods, which occurred on 3 April 2002.î \[prior to the liquidation\] 18 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) The crux of the Courtís decision was the finding that the liquidators were not acting as the bankís agent in completing the sale. At the point of liquidation, equity in the property had passed to the purchasers and the company was left with bare legal title and an interest in personalty. This meant that the liquidator was from that point on only responsible for the GST on supplies made after the date of liquidation (section 58(1D)) and as the supply in dispute was prior to the liquidation, it became a GST debt caught by the ranking provisions of section 42 of the GST Act. The Commissionerís argument that the GST was also a necessary disbursement of the liquidators was dismissed in like fashion. The Commissioner relied on the House of Lords decision Re Toshoku Finance UK plc (in liq) \[2002\] 1 WLR 671 (HL), as being analogous to the present matter. His Honour noted the distinguishing feature as being that the corporation tax at issue in Toshoku ìÖwas not specifically included in the relevant statutory list of claims to be paid in priority.î GST on the other hand is given a post-liquidation ranking by section 42(2)(b) in accordance with the Seventh Schedule. Having found that the sale was made by the mortgagor pre-liquidation, the section 104 LTA ìexpense occasioned by saleî argument was also dismissed as it related only to sales made by or on behalf of a mortgagee. Similarly, the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in Edgewater Motels was not relevant. 19 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) REGULAR FEATURES DUE DATES REMINDER February 2003 5Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deduction per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due ïEmployer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 7End-of-year income tax 7 February 2003, 2002 end-of-year income tax due for people and organisations with a March balance date and who do not have an agent 20Employer deductions Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deduction per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Small employers (less than $100,000 PAYE and SSCWT deductions per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or ( IR 346) form and payment due ïEmployer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 28GST and return payment due March 2003 5Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deduction per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due ïEmployer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 7Provisional tax instalments due for people and organisations with a March balance date 20Employer deductions Large employers ($100,000 or more PAYE and SSCWT deduction per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or (IR 346) form and payment due Employer deductions and employer monthly schedule Small employers (less than $100,000 PAYE and SSCWT deductions per annum) ïEmployer deductions (IR 345) or ( IR 346) form and payment due ïEmployer monthly schedule (IR 348) due 31GST and return payment due These dates are taken from Inland Revenueís Smart business tax due date calendar 2002 - 2003 20 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) 21 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) YOUR CHANCE TO COMMENT ON DRAFT TAXATION ITEMS BEFORE THEY ARE FINALISED This page shows the draft binding rulings, interpretation statements, standard practice statements and other items that we now have available for your review. You can get a copy and give us your comments in these ways. By internet: Visit www.ird.govt.nz. On the homepage, click on ìThe Rulings Unit welcomes your comment on drafts of public rulings/interpretation statements before they are finalised . . .î Below the heading ìThink about the issuesî, click on the drafts that interest you. You can return your comments by internet. By post: Tick the drafts you want below, fill in your name and address, and return this page to the address below. Weíll send you the drafts by return post. Please send any comments in writing , to the address below. We donít have facilities to deal with your comments by phone or at our other offices. Name\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Address\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ No envelope neededósimply fold, tape shut, stamp and post. The Manager (Field Liaison) Adjudication & Rulings National Office Inland Revenue Department PO Box 2198 Wellington Affix Stamp Here Draft standard practice statementComment deadline ED0037: Income equalisation deposits and refunds14 February 2003 Draft statement of policy withdrawal and revised interpretationComment deadline COR0050: Time limits for new companies to make QC electionsówhere EOT arrangements with tax agents exist28 February 2003 Draft public rulingComment deadline XPB0007: Tertiary student association fees28 February 2003 Items are not generally available once the comment deadline has passed 22 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003) 23 Inland Revenue Department Tax Information Bulletin: Vol 15, No 1 (January 2003)