1 APPENDIX TO TIB VOLUME TWO, NO. 5, DECEMBER 1990 Determination E6: Persons not required to comply with Section 104A of the Income Tax Act 1976 1. Reference This determination is made pursuant to section 104A(5) of the Income Tax Act 1976. It deter- mines the extent to which persons are not re- quired to comply with section 104A of the In- come Tax Act 1976, in respect of the income year commencing on the 1st day of April 1990. 2. Interpretation In this determination, unless the context other- wise requires- Expressions used have the same meanings as in section 2 and section 104A of the Income Tax Act 1976: Every reference to an income year shall, where a person furnishes a return of income under section 15 of the Income Tax Act 1976 for an accounting year ending with a day other than the 31st day of March, be deemed to be a refer- ence to the accounting year corresponding with that income year and, in every such case, this determination shall, with necessary modifica- tions, apply accordingly. “Audit fees” in relation to a person and an income year means fees payable by the person to a qualified person in relation to the prepara- tion of a report relating to any financial state- ment relating to the person and the income year for financial reporting purposes: “Balance date”, in relation to a person and an income year, means the last day of the person’s income year: “Expiry date”, in relation to any expenditure incurred in an income year, means - (a) Where the expenditure relates to payment for services, the date by which it is reasona- bly expected that performance of the service will be completed: (b) Where the expenditure relates to payment for, or in relation to, a chose in action - (i) For a definite period, the last day of that period: (ii) For an indefinite period, the day on which it is reasonably expected that period will end: “Financial statement” in relation to a person means - (a) A balance sheet; (b) A profit and loss account; (c) Group accounts; and includes any supporting note or statement that accompanies the financial statement; but does not include: (d) Any statement of production quality or production volume; (e) Any statement prepared in relation to the exercise of any rights in respect of which royalties are payable: “Mandatory accounting costs” in relation to a person and an income year means accrual ex- penditure incurred by the person for the pur- pose of meeting any requirement to provide accounting, statistical, operational, sociological or other information in respect of - (a) Events occurring in that income year; (b) Any state of affairs in that income year - where that information is required to be pro- vided by operation of law: “Periodic charges” means expenditure regu- larly incurred on a rated annual or more fre- quent basis, and includes local authority levies (other than rates), licences, and registrations: 2 “Qualified person” means - (a) A person qualified for appointment as an auditor of a company in terms of section 165 of the Companies Act 1955; or (b) A person similarly qualified, accordingly to the law in any other jurisdiction, for appointment as an auditor of a body corporate. 3. Determination Any person who incurs expenditure that is deductible in the income year commencing on the 1st day of April 1990 shall not be required to comply with section 104A of the Income Tax Act 1976 in respect of the expenditure and the in- come year where- (a) The expenditure is of a kind described in column (1) of the schedule hereto; and (b) The sum of all of the amounts of unexpired portion of the kind of expenditure does not exceed the amount, if any, specified in rela- tion to that expenditure in column (2) of the schedule hereto; and (c) The length of time between balance date and the subsequent expiry date of the expendi- ture does not exceed the number of months, if any, specified in relation to that expendi- ture in column (3) of the schedule hereto; and (d) In relation to expenditure on goods of any of the kinds specified in categories (d) and (k) of the schedule hereto, the goods are in the possession of the person at balance date: Provided that this determination shall not ap- ply to any expenditure to the extent that deduc- tion of the expenditure has been deferred to a subsequent income year for financial reporting purposes. Provided also that, for the purposes of this determination, any expenditure taken into ac- count in calculating the assessable income of a partnership for the purposes of section 10 of the Income Tax Act 1976, or that should properly be so taken into account, shall be treated as expen- diture incurred by that partnership and by no other person. This determination is signed by me on the 14th day of November in the year 1990. R D Adair Deputy Commissioner of Inland Revenue SCHEDULE Description of ExpenditureTotal AmountsNumber of of Unexpiredmonths PortionColumn (3) Column (2) (a) Rental for the lease of land or buildings relating to a period$23,000Six end more than one month after balance date. (b) Rental for the lease of land or buildings other than such rentalOne dealt with elsewhere in this determination. (c) Rental for the lease or bailment of livestock or bloodstock.$23,000Six (d) Purchase of consumable aids.$58,000 (e) Insurance premiums under an insurance contract where theTwelve total amount of such expenditure incurred in the income year in respect of the contract does not exceed $12,000. (f) Payment in respect of equipment service contracts or warran- ties where the consideration for the contract or warranty forms an inseparable and indeterminate part of the considera- tion for the asset or assets to which it relates. 3 (g) Payment in respect of a contract for the service or maintenanceThree of plant, equipment or machinery where the total amount of such expenditure incurred in the income year in respect of the contract does not exceed $23,000. (h) Payment for the use or maintenance of telephone and otherTwo communication equipment. (i) Services, other than those dealt with elsewhere in this deter-$12,000Six mination. (j) Periodic charges, other than those dealt with elsewhere in$12,000Twelve this determination. (k) Purchase of stationery. (l) Subscriptions for any newspaper, journal, or other periodical including the maintenance or annotation of any documentary information service. (m) Motor vehicle registration and drivers’ licence fees. (n) Subscriptions, or other fees (but excluding any payment inTwelve respect of a franchise agreement) entitling membership of any trade, professional, or other association where the amount of such expenditure incurred in the income year in respect of the association does not exceed $6,000. (o) Postal and courier services, including such expenditure for franking, private post boxes and private post bags, business reply post and freepost, and including expenditure evidenced by the possession of postal stamps. (p) Rates made and levied under Part IX of the Local Government Act 1974 to the extent of the amount invoiced on or before balance date. (q) Advance bookings for travel and hotel or motel accommoda-$12,000Six tion. (r) Advertising.$12,000Six (s) Road User Charges. (t) Audit fees. (u) Mandatory accounting costs. (v) Accrual expenditure incurred in respect of the income year (or any prior income year) that is deductible under section 165 of the Income Tax Act 1976.