1 TIB Appendix Volume Three, No. 2August 1991 Determination G24: Straight Line Method ISSN 0114-7161 2 Determination G24: Straight Line Method This determination may be cited as “Determination G24: Straight Line Method.” 1. Explanation (which does not form part of the determination) (1) Under section 64C(2A) of the Income Tax Act 1976 (“the Act”), a taxpayer may use the straight line method to account for financial arrange- ments. The method may be used when the total value of all financial arrangements issued and held by that taxpayer is less than $1,000,000 at all times during the income year. “Value” in rela- tion to a financial arrangement is: (a) For a fixed principal financial arrangement the nominal or face value of the arrangement; and (b) For a variable principal debt instrument the amount owing by or to the person. (2) This determination sets out two methods for applying the straight line method to calculate income derived or expenditure incurred. Both methods refer to Total Finance Charges. The Total Finance Charges are the amount that will be spread over the term of the arrangement. (3) Total Finance Charges include interest, any premium or discount, and fees (excluding those deductible at the commencement of the loan). Interest payable under a Variable Rate Financial Arrangement is, however, excluded from the Total Finance Charges to be apportioned be- cause it is not known in advance. (4)Method A applies only where the loan is for a fixed amount of principal with interest, if any, payable at regular intervals. All Periods Be- tween Payments must be of equal length. Method A allocates the Total Finance Charges equally to each Period in the term of the arrangement. Method B applies where the principal outstand- ing may vary, and the payments may be at irregular intervals. It allocates the Total Finance Charges to each period in the term of the ar- rangement in proportion to the principal out- standing in each Period and the length of that Period. (5) A Variable Rate Financial Arrangement is one where the interest rate is linked to an external indicator price or index. In this case the actual interest payable in respect of a Period is added to the Total Finance Charges excluding interest that have been apportioned to that Period. Note that as a result the Total Finance Charges might be negative, if the Variable Rate Financial Ar- rangement was issued at a premium. (6) For this determination to apply - (a) The amounts and due dates of all principal repayments must be known or reasonably able to be anticipated, and (b) Interest, if any, must be calculated on the principal outstanding from time to time. (7) This determination can be applied to financial arrangements denominated in a foreign cur- rency, in conjunction with Determination G9A: Financial Arrangements that are Denominated in a Currency or Commodity other than New Zealand Dollars. (8) Where a Period spans two income years, the amount of income derived or expenditure in- curred in respect of the Period is apportioned between income years on a daily basis using Determination G1A: Apportionment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis. (9) Section 64C(2B)(b) of the Act sets out the proce- dure to be followed on changing from the method previously used to account for the financial ar- rangement, to the straight line method. Exam- ple H illustrates how this procedure is applied. (10)Section 64C(2A)(c) of the Act says that a person using the straight line method must apply that method consistently to a financial arrangement until it matures, is sold, remitted or transferred unless the prior consent of the Commissioner to adopt another method is obtained. 2. Reference This determination is made pursuant to section 64E(1) of the Act. 3. Scope of Determination This determination applies where a person decides pursuant to section 64C(2A) of the Act to calculate the income or expenditure in relation to a financial arrangement using the straight line method, and the financial arrangement meets the following criteria: (1) The financial arrangement is a Variable Rate Financial Arrangement as defined in this deter- mination, or the interest rate, if any, is specified in the financial arrangement and is fixed; and 3 (2) The amounts of principal (including any fees and any premium or discount at the time of issue or acquisition) and the times or intervals at which they are to be advanced and repaid are known or can reasonably be anticipated or are able to be determined as at the first balance date after issue or acquisition; and (3) Interest, if any, is calculated on the amount of principal outstanding from time to time. 4. Principle For financial arrangements which meet the criteria of this determination, the Total Finance Charges may be apportioned over the term of the financial arrangement pro rata with the principal expected to be outstanding in each Period Between Payments and the length of that Period. In the case of Variable Rate Financial Arrangements interest payable is ex- cluded from the calculation of the Total Finance Charges; instead the actual interest payable in re- spect of a Period is added to the Total Finance Charges (excluding interest) which have been ap- portioned to that Period. In all other cases interest is included in the calculation of Total Finance Charges. 5.Interpretation (1) In this determination, unless the context other- wise requires - Expressions used have the same meaning as in the Act and where a word or expression is given a particular meaning for the purposes of sections 64B to 64M of the Act it shall have the same meaning as in the said sections 64B to 64M: “the Act” means the Income Tax Act 1976: “Period” or “Period Between Payments” means the term, commencing immediately after a pay- ment is payable or receivable and ending when the next payment is payable or receivable: Provided that if a Period exceeds one year it shall be deemed to comprise one or more Periods each of one year followed (or pre- ceded, at the option of the holder or issuer as the case may be) by a Period of less than one year: “Total Finance Charges” in relation to a financial arrangement means - (a) in respect of an issuer, the total of all amounts payable by the issuer less the total of all amounts receivable by the issuer, pursuant to the financial arrangement; (b) in respect of a holder, the total of all amounts receivable by the holder less the total of all amounts payable by the holder, pursuant to the financial arrangement; excluding amounts of interest payable or receiv- able under a Variable Rate Financial Arrange- ment: Provided that any amounts payable in rela- tion to the financial arrangement shall be reduced by the amount of item z as defined in section 64BA(2) or 64BA(3) of the Act: “Variable Rate Financial Arrangement” means a financial arrangement under which the interest rate is determined by a fixed relationship to economic, commodity, industrial or financial indices or prices, or banking rates or general commercial rates. (2) The length of all the Periods or Periods Between Payments of a financial arrangement shall be measured in time units of days, weeks, fort- nights, months, quarters, half years or years as is appropriate to the smallest Period Between Payments, provided that where such a time unit is inappropriate for only one or two Periods this fact shall be disregarded, and the length of those one or two Periods shall be measured in days and expressed as a fraction of the time units appropriate to the remaining Periods Between Payments. (3) Any reference in this determination to another determination made by the Commissioner shall be construed as including a reference to any fresh determination made by the Commissioner to vary, rescind, restrict, or extend that deter- mination. (4) For convenience, words and phrases defined in this determination are indicated by initial capi- tal letters, but the absence of a capital letter shall not alone imply that the word or phrase is used with a meaning different from that given by its definition. 6. Method (1) Method A (a) Method A may be applied to any financial arrangement where the amount of principal is fixed and interest, if any, is payable at regular intervals throughout the term of the financial arrangement, and the length of all Periods Between Payments is the same. The financial arrangement may be issued at a premium or discount and fees may be payable. 4 (b) The amount of income deemed to be derived or expenditure deemed to be incurred in a Period is an amount equal to- (i) The Total Finance Charges divided by the number of Periods in the financial ar- rangement, plus (ii) In the case of a Variable Rate Financial Arrangement the amount of interest pay- able or receivable in respect of that Period. (c) Income deemed to be derived or expenditure deemed to be incurred using this method shall be allocated to income years in accord- ance with Determination G1A: Apportion- ment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis. (2) Method B (a) Method B may be applied to any financial arrangement. It shall be used in all cases were the length of the Periods Between Payments are unequal or the amount of principal varies. (b) The amount of income deemed to be derived or expenditure deemed to be incurred in re- spect of a Period is equal to- (i) The amount calculated according to the formula- a x b x c d where - a is the Total Finance Charges payable by the issuer or receivable by the holder as the case may be; b is the length of the Period; c is the amount of principal outstanding during the Period Between Payments; d is the sum of all items e calculated in respect of every Period Between Pay- ments; and e in respect of any Period is (b x c), plus (ii) In the case of a Variable Rate Financial Arrangement the amount of interest pay- able or receivable in respect of that Period. (c) Income deemed to be derived or expenditure deemed to be incurred using this determina- tion shall be allocated to income years in accordance with Determination G1A: Appor- tionment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis. 7. Examples Method A (1) Example A (a fixed rate fixed principal borrow- ing) This is an example of a fixed rate borrowing under which the principal is fixed. On 12 February 1992 a company borrows NZ$10,000 for 5 years at a fixed interest rate of 16 per cent p.a. payable half yearly in arrears. The money is raised by issuing notes at a discount of 5 per cent. The borrower is a New Zealand taxpayer who is eligible to use the straight line method. Contingent fees of 2.5 per cent of $10,000 are payable by the borrower to the lender; there are no non-contingent fees. The Total Finance Charges payable by the bor- rower are - $ 10,000principal payable +250fees paid +8,000interest payable -9,500principal received 8,750 The length of each Period is measured in time units of half a year, and the principal outstanding is $10,000 throughout the term of the loan. There are 10 half yearly time periods over the 5 year term of the loan because interest is payable half- yearly. Therefore Method A may be used, and the ex- penditure incurred in each Period is the Total Finance Charges of $8750 divided by the number of Periods: $8,750/10 = $875 This expenditure would be spread between in- come years on a daily basis using Determination G1A: Apportionment of Income and Expendi- ture on a Daily Basis. The taxpayer has a 31 March balance date. In the first Period (12 February 1992 to 12 August 1992) 5 the expenditure calculated using the straight line method is $875. There are 182 days in the Period. Expenditure on a daily basis is therefore $875/ 182 = $4.81. In the 1992 income year expenditure incurred is: 12/2/92 - 31/3/92 48 days. 48 x $4.81 = $230.88 In the 1993 income year expenditure incurred is: 31/3/92 - 12/8/92 134 days 134 x $4.81 = $644.54 12/8/92 - 12/2/93 184 days$875.00 12/2/93 - 31/3/93 47 days 47 x $4.83\* = $227.01 $1,746.55 \* There are 181 days in the period 12 February 1993 to 12 August 1993 therefore the daily rate is $4.83. Expenditure for subsequent income years is cal- culated in the same way. Expenditure for each income year, except the year the loan matures, is shown below: 1992$ 230.88 1993$1,746.55 1994$1,749.23 1995$1,749.23 1996$1,753.10 TOTAL$7,228.99 When the arrangement matures the base price adjustment (section 64F) is used to calculate ex- penditure in the final income year (1997). The base price adjustment is calculated according to the formula: a - (b + c) a = all amounts paid = $10,000 (principal) + $250 (fees) + $8,000 (int.) = $18,250 b = acquisition price = all amounts received = $9,500 (principal) c = expenditure incurred in previous years = $7,228.99 (as calculated above) Therefore a - (b + c) = $1,521.01. This amount is deemed to be expenditure in- curred. If the holder was a New Zealand taxpayer able to use the straight line method, it would be deemed to derive income of $875 in each Period. (2) Example B (a variable rate loan) This is the same as Example A except that interest is determined according to a market indicator. e.g. the bank bill or commercial bill rate. Since the notes with a face value $10,000 were issued at a 5 per cent discount, and contingent fees of 2.5 per cent were payable by the borrower (to the lender), who is the issuer in relation to this financial arrangement, the Total Finance Charges to the borrower are - $ 10,000principal payable +250fees paid - 9,500principal received 750 Note that since the arrangement is a Variable Rate Financial Arrangement interest amounts are excluded from the calculation of the Total Finance Charges. The length of each Period is measured in time units of half a year, and the principal outstanding is $10,000 throughout. In the first period an inter- est rate of 10 per cent p.a. applied, and, interest of $500 was payable. Method A may be used to calculate the expendi- ture incurred in respect of each Period, that is - (a) $750/10 = $75 plus (b) the actual interest payable in respect of that Period. In the first six month Period the interest rate was 10 per cent p.a. so that total expenditure incurred was $75 plus actual interest of $500 which is $575. This expenditure would be allocated on a daily basis to each day in the Period using Determina- tion G1A: Apportionment of Income and Ex- penditure on a Daily Basis. If the holder was a New Zealand taxpayer able to use the straight line method, it would be deemed to derive income of similar amounts. (3) Example C (a zero coupon loan) A New Zealand company raises $5,000 by issuing 5 year notes with a face value of $10,000 at a 50 per cent discount. No interest is payable. The tax- payer is an issuer in relation to the financial arrangement. The Total Finance Charges payable by the bor- rower are - $ 10,000amount payable - 5,000amount received 5,000 6 In this case Method A may be used. The Period Between Payments is 1 year and the appropriate time unit is a year. There are 5 periods between payments. Therefore the dis- count would be allocated equally as $1,000 to each of the five periods in the term of the loan, and would then be apportioned to income years using Determination G1A: Apportionment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis. Method B (4) Example D (a reducing principal fixed interest loan) On 12 February 1992 a company borrows NZ$10,000 for 5 years. The money is raised by issuing notes at a discount of 4.5 per cent. $2,000 of the notes are to be repaid on each anniversary of the loan. Interest at 16 per cent p.a. is payable half yearly in arrears on the bal- ance of the notes outstanding during the half year. The borrower is a New Zealand company. There are no fees. The taxpayer is an issuer in relation to the financial arrangement. The length of each Period is half a year. The interest payable in the first year is $1,600. Each subsequent year this reduces by $320. The Total Finance Charges to the borrower are there- fore - $ 10,000principal payable +4,800interest payable - 9,550principal received 5,250 (i) total interest payable 1,600 + 1,280 + 960 + 640 + 320 = 4,800 Therefore a = $5,250 (‘a’ is a variable used in the formula described in Method B). The following table sets out the allocation of the Total Finance Charges, where b = 1 throughout (since there is one time unit of half a year in each Period):- Half year Principal (b x c) Expenditure Periodoutstanding cea x b x c d 110,00010,000875 210,00010,000875 38,0008,000700 48,0008,000700 56,0006,000525 66,0006,000525 74,0004,000350 84,0004,000350 92,0002,000175 102,0002,000175 Total d =60,0005,250 This expenditure would be spread using Deter- mination G1A: Apportionment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis. (Note that in practice the income in the final year would be determined using the base price adjust- ment). If the holder was a New Zealand taxpayer able to use the straight line method, it would be deemed to derive income of similar amounts. (5) Example E (a reducing principal variable rate loan) This is the same as Example D except that interest is determined according to a market indicator. The notes, with a face value of $10,000, were issued at a 4.5 per cent discount. There are no fees. The Total Finance Charges to the borrower are - $ 10,000principal payable - 9,550principal received whence a =450 Note that since the arrangement is a Variable Rate Financial Arrangement interest amounts are excluded from the calculation of the Total Finance Charges. The following table sets out the allocation of the Total Finance Charges, where ‘b’ equals one throughout (since there is one time unit of half a year in each period). The actual interest payable in the Period must be added to the amount 7 apportioned in each Period to determine total expenditure. Half year Principal (b x c) Expenditure Periodoutstanding cea x b x c d 110,00010,00075 210,00010,00075 38,0008,00060 48,0008,00060 56,0006,00045 66,0006,00045 74,0004,00030 84,0004,00030 92,0002,00015 102,0002,00015 Total d =60,000450 This expenditure would be spread using Deter- mination G1A: Apportionment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis. (Note that in practice the income in the final year would be determined using the base price adjust- ment). If the holder was a New Zealand taxpayer able to use the straight line method, it would be deemed to derive income of similar amounts. (6) Example F (a loan with different repayment periods) A New Zealand taxpayer borrows $75,000 and agrees to repay $100,000. Repayments are $30,000 at the end of year one and $70,000 at the end of year four. The taxpayer is an issuer in relation to the financial arrangement. The Total Finance Charges payable by the bor- rower are - $ 100,000 amount payable - 75,000 amount received whence a = 25,000 The length of each Period is a year therefore b = 1. The principal outstanding is $100,000 in the first (one year) Period, and $70,000 in the subsequent Periods. Hence the Total Finance Charges are allocated as follows: Period Length Principal (b x c) Expenditure (years)outstanding bcea x b x c d 11100,000100,0008,065 2170,00070,0005,645 3170,00070,0005,645 4170,00070,0005,645 Total d =310,00025,000 The expenditure incurred in each Period would be spread between income years using Determi- nation G1A: Apportionment of Income and Ex- penditure on a Daily Basis. (Note that in practice the income in the final year would be determined using the base price adjust- ment). (7) Example G (discounted Government Stock) A taxpayer buys New Zealand Government Stock on the secondary market. Details are as follows: Face value $500,000 Coupon16 per cent p.a. payable half yearly Maturity15 August 1994 Settlement1 March 1992 Price$548,978 (YTM = 11.6% pa) The taxpayer is not a cash basis holder but is eligible to use the straight line method to account for its financial arrangements, and decides to do so. The Total Finance Charges are - $ 500,000maturity value + 200,000five coupons of $40,000 - 548,978purchase price whence a = 151,022 There is a broken first Period of 167 days, fol- lowed by five half year Periods. A time unit of half years is appropriate. Since the Periods are of unequal length, Method B applies. The 167 days represents 167 x 2/365 = 0.9151 of a half year. Therefore b = 0.9151 in the first Period and b = 1 in the remaining periods as there is one time unit of half a year in each Period. 8 The following table can be constructed: Half year Principal (b x c) Expenditure Periodoutstanding cea x b x c d 1500,000 457,550 1 28,117 2 2500,000 500,000 30,726 3500,000 500,000 30,726 4500,000 500,000 30,726 5500,000 500,000 30,727 Total d =2,457,550151,022 1 e = b x c = 0.9151 x 500,000 = 457,550 2 a =151,022Total Finance Charges b =0.9151Length of Period c =500,000Principal outstanding d = 2,457,550sum of all items ‘e’ above The income derived in each Period would be spread using Determination G1A: Apportion- ment of Income and Expenditure on a Daily Basis. (Note that in practice the income in the final year would be determined using the base price adjust- ment.) (8) Example H (transition to the straight line method) This is similar to Example A, which is summa- rised as follows: An amount of $9,250 (after fees and discount) is borrowed on 12 February 1991, repayable by 10 half yearly interest payments of $800 each, plus a final payment of $10,000. The yield to maturity is 18.356 per cent. Assume the borrower is a New Zealand taxpayer with a 31 March balance date and used the yield to maturity method for the first income year. Then the expenditure deemed to be incurred in the income year ending 31 March 1991 is calcu- lated as follows: (a) Amount attributable to period 12 February - 11 August 1991: $9,250 x 18.356%/2 = $849 (b) Amount attributable to income year ending 31 March 1991: $849 x 47 days/181 days = $220 Assume that in the 1991/1992 income year the taxpayer meets the criteria for the straight line method and decides to use Method A of this determination. Then the amount of expenditure calculated in accordance with section 64C(2B)(b) is as follows: (a) From example A, the amount of expenditure that would have been deemed to be incurred under the straight line Method A up to 31 March 1992 is as follows: (i)period 12 February - 11 August 1991: $875 (ii) period 12 August - 11 February 1992: $875 (iii) period 12 February - 31 March 1992 875 x 48 days/182 days = $231 $1,981 (b) Therefore, using the formula in section 64C(2B)(b) a =0income derived using the straight line method b =$1,981 expenditure incurred using the straight line method c =0income derived in prior income years d =$220expenditure incurred in prior in- come years (c) The amount calculated in accordance with the formula is - a - b - c + d = 0 - 1,981 - 0 + 220 = -$1,761 and since this is a negative amount, it is deemed to be expenditure incurred by the borrower. This determination is signed by me on the 10th day of July in the year 1991. R D Adair Deputy Commissioner of Inland Revenue