1 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.9 - Appendix - April 1993 Appendix to Tax Information Bulletin Volume Four, No. 9: Amendments Section 1.2 Assets that cannot be depreciated (page 3) The first sentence states that to claim depreciation on an asset, it must decline in value while used or avail- able for use in your business. This is not entirely correct. It is not necessary for an asset to decline in value, but there must be a reasonable expectation that in normal circumstances it will do so. Section 1.4 GST implications (page 3) This section states that if you are registered for GST you can claim the GST component of an assetís cost price. There are circumstances where this is not so, such as when you buy an asset which you will use to make non-taxable supplies. Section 2.8 Calculating depreciation under the pool method (page 5) The example in this section refers to the pool value as $21,000. This figure is the average pool value on which pool depreciation is based. The pool value as at the end of the income year (before deducting depreciation) is $24,000. Also, the example shows an incorrect adjusted tax value. The correct value is $19,380, calculated as follows: value of pool at the end of income year$24,000 less depreciation $ 4,620 adjusted tax value of pool$19,380 Section 3.1 How rates are calculated (page 5) The correct formula is: †1† 1 - \[( residual value ) n \] cost 5.4 Computer software (page 10) Since we published this Appendix the policy on computer software has been finalised. Software expenditure incurred before 1 July 1993 is fully deductible as an expense for tax purposes. From 1 July 1993 onwards the tax treatment of ex- penditure on computer software is summarised in the six categories below. For the purposes of this policy the terms used are explained as follows: Development - the following activities are likely to be part of a development phase: ï gathering and analysis of user requirements ï system design ï detailed software specification ï programme construction ï software testing ï user or customer testing (acceptance testing) ï development of manual and training materials ï preparation of documents to describe, support, and for on-going maintenance of software product ï management review throughout the development phase (eg quality assurance) Maintenance - the following activities will generally be accepted as deductible maintenance payments: ï help desk facilities ï fixing programme bugs ï bringing performance up to the original specifi- cations of the software ï making minor changes such as increasing field sizes Pre-development - this term refers to a feasibility study of a project as part of on-going business ISSN 0114-7161 Depreciation In April 1993 we sent out the Appendix to Tax Information Bulletin Volume Four, No 9. That Appendix dealt with depreciation. Since publishing it, we've learned that it contained a number of errors. We apologise for this, and we've sent you these amendments to to correct those errors. Please cross-reference these amendments to the appropriate pages in the original Appendix. The new policy on software has been finalised since the original Appendix was printed, so we’ve included it in this supplement. A number of the rates listed in section 7.2 of the Appendix (pages 13 to 23) were incorrect, so we’ve included replacement pages for this entire section. These have the original page numbers on them for ease of reference, which is why the page numbering in this supplement apparently doesn’t follow a logical sequence. 2 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.9 - Appendix - April 1993 Software - includes all programmes or routines used to cause a computer to perform a desired task or set of tasks, and the documentation and training materials required to describe and maintain these pro- grammes. Upgrade - generally an upgrade of computer software: ï adds new features to the structure ï increases its capacity or performance ï extends the life of the software ï provides a new version of the software that has more capacity or increased performance Categories of expenditure i) Software purchases ï Cost of purchase to be capitalised and depreci- ated at 40% diminishing value or 30% straight line ï Immediate write-off available for software costing less than $200 ï Cost of maintenance may be deducted ï Cost of upgrades must be capitalised and depreciated at 40% diminishing value or 30% straight line ii) Specified lease of software ï Cost price of software to be capitalised and depreciated at 40% diminishing value or 30% straight line ï Interest component of lease payments may be deducted ï Maintenance costs may be deducted ï Cost of upgrades must be capitalised and depreciated at 40% diminishing value or 30% straight line iii)Software developed in-house for use in business ï Pre-development expenses may be deducted ï Development expenses must be capitalised until project completed and then depreciated at 40% diminishing value or 30% straight line ï Costs of unsuccessful development may be deducted ï Maintenance costs may be deducted ï Costs of upgrades must be capitalised and depreciated at 40% diminishing value or 30% straight line iv) Commissioned software ï Development costs must be capitalised until project accepted, then depreciated at 40% diminishing value or 30% straight line ï Costs of unsuccessful development may be deducted ï Maintenance costs may be deducted ï Costs of upgrades must be capitalised and depreciated at 40% diminishing value or 30% straight line v) Software leased other than under a specified lease ï Lease payments ar deductible over the term of the lease vi) Software developed for sale or licence ï Development costs deductible in year incurred ï Value of unbilled work in progress and unsold completed software must be taken into account as trading stock. The value of trading stock at balance date must be included as income in your return. Where a payment covers both maintenance and up- grades, the cost must be apportioned between the two. The cost of maintenance is deductible and the cost of upgrade must be capitalised. The appendix to TIB Volume Four, No.10 contains full details of depreciation on software. You can get a copy from any Inland Revenue office. Section 6.2 Assets acquired between 16 December 1991 and 31 March 1993 (page 11) If you are switching from the diminishing value method to the straight line method (or vice versa), to make the conversion: 1. Determine the ordinary rate (as highlighted in section 7.2) 2. Add 25% loading (also shown in section 7.2) 3. Use the chart in section 2.6 (page 4) to convert to the alternative method Example Accounting machines ordinary rate20% DV with loading25% DV convert to straight line17.5% SL Section 6.3 Shift incentive (page 12) The first example given in this section shows an incorrect conversion to the straight line rate. The correct example is: Example DV SL general plant and machinery rate 10% 7% qualifying for 2 shift incentive13% 8.5% qualifying for 3 shift incentive16% 10.5% Where an asset qualifies for the shift incentive and the 25% loading, the rate is converted after these have been incorporated. 3 IRD Tax Information Bulletin: Volume Four, No.9 - Appendix - April 1993 Example general plant & machinery rate 10% DV qualifying for 2 shift incentive13% DV add the 25% loading16.3% DV converted to straight line rate11% SL qualifying for 3 shift incentive16% DV add 25% loading20% DV converted to straight line rate13.5% SL Section 10.4 Index to asset categories (page 26) The correct heading is ìAsset Categoryî rather than ìIndustry Categoryî. The correct entry for ìReticulation systemsî is: ìReticulation systems (excluding electrical, communi- cations and gas reticulation)î Section 10.5 Economic depreciation rates Factory and other sundries (page 59) An additional asset is to be added to this category: Advertising blimps estimated useful life5 years DV Banded Depn rate33% SL Banded Depn rate24% Transportation (pages 65 & 66) Add an asterisk to this asset listed on page 65: ìAeroplanes (mechanically propelled, fixed wing, of an unladen weight exceeding 15,000kg, other than helicopters) This indicates that a residual value of 25% has been used in calculating the depreciation rate for this asset. See section 10.1 for more information about ìresidual valueî. The following are corrected descriptions for several of the motor vehicle and trailer assets listed on page 66: Motor vehicles, class NA (for transporting light goods, that have a gross vehicle mass not exceeding 3.5 tonnes) Motor vehicles, class NB (for transporting medium goods, that have a gross vehicle mass exceeding 3.5†tonnes but not exceeding 12 tonnes) Motor vehicles, class NC (for transporting heavy goods, that have a gross vehicle mass exceeding 12†tonnes) Trailers, class TC (for transporting medium goods, that have a gross vehicle mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes but not exceeding 10 tonnes) Trailers, class TD (for transporting heavy goods, that have a gross vehicle mass exceeding 10 tonnes) Trailers, classes TA and TB (for transporting very light and light goods, that have a gross vehicle mass not exceeding 3.5 tonnes) excluding Domestic type trailers Trailers, (domestic type, not exceeding 1,000kg rated carrying capacity) The abbreviations NA, NB etc are as included in the first schedule to the Miscellaneous Transport Regula- tions. Section 10.6 Alphabetical listing of assets (pages 68 & 69) Correct the key to abbreviations on page 68 as follows: ìRETCî - Reticulation systems (excluding electrical, communications and gas reticulation). Amend the alphabetical index on page 69 to include ìadvertising blimpsî with the reference to ìFACTî and page number 59.