ABOUT OUR BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION Email IRTransformation@ird.govt.nz for further information. BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION October 2021 Latest news about Inland Revenue's transformation Going live with our latest changes This month we will go live with the final phase of Inland Revenue’s Business Transformation programme. The improvements will build on the changes we’ve already introduced and will focus on bringing child support into our new system, implementing changes from The Child Support Amendment Act, upgrading to the latest version of myIR, as well as some other smaller changes. As with previous releases, we will need to temporarily closedown our services to allow for the system upgrade to take place. We will shut down our systems at 3pm on Thursday 21 October. From this time myIR secure online services and Gateway Services will be unavailable, and our offices and phone lines will be closed. All systems and services will resume from the start of business on Thursday 28 October. You can visit ird.govt.nz/service-update for more information. GST and provisional tax due date Thursday 28 October is a filing and payment deadline for many businesses, and we know there may be concern about our systems being closed in the week before this deadline. Particularly in light of the stress that the effects of COVID-19 are already placing on business. In response, Ministers have agreed (dependent on passing an Order in Council) that businesses and individuals will have more time to file and pay their GST and Provisional Tax that is currently due 28 October. Once the order passes, everyone will have until 4 November. IRD Business Transformation news Having trouble viewing this email? View Online Working for Families Tax Credits and paid parental leave payments Due to our temporary closedown, some Working for Families Tax Credits (WfFTC) and paid parental leave (PPL) payments will be paid early. Working for Families: Weekly Working for Families Tax Credit payments will be affected. The weekly payment you would normally receive on Tuesday 26 October or Wednesday 27 October will be paid early on Thursday 21 October or Friday 22 October. This means you will receive two payments in one week – Tuesday 19 October and Thursday 21 October or Wednesday 20 October and Friday 22 October. Fortnightly Working for Families Tax Credit payments are not affected. You will receive your payment on the day you normally receive them. Paid parental leave The fortnightly payment you would normally receive on Tuesday 26 October or Wednesday 27 October will be paid on Thursday 21 October, or Friday 22 October for some credit union customers. The first fortnightly payment following the upgrade will be paid on Tuesday 9 November, or Wednesday 10 November for some credit union customers. This means there will be a three-week gap between the last October payment and the first November payment. Payday filing Employment Information (EI) returns for Payday Filing that are due over the closure can be filed early. The days during the temporary shutdown will not count as working days for filing periods. Filing can be completed up to 3pm on Thursday 21 October and can be resumed from the start of business on Thursday 28 October. myIR drafts All draft requests in myIR need to be finalised and submitted by 3pm Thursday 21 October, otherwise they will be deleted as they can’t be transferred as part of the closedown process. •Pay your bill as you normally would from your bank (you won’t be able to set up direct debits to make payments or pay with your credit card within myIR). •Access general information from our IRD website, including accessing our webinars and landing pages on the October changes. Webinars Our latest webinars are designed to help you understand what’s changing in October. We have webinars on: •What’s changing in October, •Child support, •The myIR upgrade, •Navigating in myIR, •Subscriptions and correspondence in myIR, •and Alerts in myIR Also keep an eye out for our upcoming webinar on filing, viewing and amending returns in myIR. You can find our webinars at ird.govt.nz/bt-webinars. You can also visit our business transformation landing page for an overview of the October changes ird.govt.nz/business-transformation-2021. This email has been sent to as you have registered this address with Inland Revenue. Beware of tax related scams Inland Revenue will never send you an email requesting you to confirm, update or disclose confidential details through an unsecure channel such as email. You should always independently verify the source and the target URL before taking any action. If you receive a suspicious communication of this nature, do not respond to it or follow any links. Forward it to phishing@ird.govt.nz For more information about protecting your identity visit ird.govt.nz/identity-security/protect Please do not reply to this email as this inbox is not monitored. Inland Revenue, 55 Featherston Street, Wellington, New Zealand. Subscribe | Privacy | Copyright | Security | Contact us This email was sent by IRD eNewsletters, 55 Featherston Street, Pipitea, Wellington 6011, New Zealand Unsubscribe What's available during the closedown period? You’ll still be able to do a few things during the closedown period, including: