Transition and Business Integration Briefing Pack November 2020 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] •The purpose of this paper is to provide an overview of the approach to transition planning and management for the BT Programme, to inform external and internal stakeholders in regards to how the programme will be concluded at the completion of the Stage 4 plan. •The planned end date for the BT Programme is 30 June 2022, however as n oted in the Baseline 9 PGC paper, the programme activity will have in the main completed by end of December 2021, with the remaining team focussed on decommission and archiving and closure of the programme. Purpose \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Develop and or transition the processes, frameworks and methods (collectively the “ways of working”) that the BT programme has built up over the course of the transformation timeframe, to the post-BT business units. Support and ensure that all transitioning components are in place to allow business units to self- manage post BT. Form in conjunction with the FOM ( Future Operating Model team), thedetailed plan to formally close out the BT programme ensuring that an appropriate transition time is allocated and that transition risk is mitigated. The transition plan will be progressively implemented, in stages,in line with the establishment of the organisation change, the future operating model and the completion of the BT delivery plan. Background and Introduction \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Objectives •Develop and or transition the processes, frameworks and methods (collectively the “ways of wo rking”) that the BT programme has built up over the course of the transformation timeframe, to the post-BT business units. •Support and ensure that all transitioning components are in place to allow business units to s elf -manage post BT. •Form in conjunction with the FOM ( Future Operating Model team), thed etailed plan to formally close out the BT programme ensuring that an appropriate transition time is allocated and that transition risk is mitigated. •The transition plan will be progressively implemented, in stages,i n line with the establishment of the organisation change, the future operating model and the completion of the BT delivery plan. Deliverables 1.A BT Programme Transition Plan i ncluding a formal readiness and transition process.The plan will be aligned to both the BT Stage 4 delivery plan and the plan that will establish the post BT organisation and future operating model. 2.A det ailed plan to close the BT programme in line with the BT Transition Plan ( the BT resource master list reflecting transition approach at an individual level if required). 3.Includes the safe s torage and archival of all BT Programme collateral that is considered enduring.This will be the Transformation library or enduring collateral / artefacts ( Huringa ( Transformation) a section of the new HaukāingaIR site). 4.Knowledge and formal / informal responsibility transfer as part of the transition, a nd this will be executed in alignment with the well tested BT change management method. BT Transition Objectives and Deliverables \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] BT Transition Planning Approach - 5 - BT Transition planning is based around two major areas of activity that the programme currently is responsible for including: 1.Programme specific activities –activities that are specific to delivering the programme Stage 4 scope and plan, these activities are resourced to deliver the programmes agreed scope and achieve the committed outcomes. The resources that undertake these activities are required until those activities are completed, and the scope delivered. The transition approach for these resources is a scheduled “roll off” at a time aligned to the Baseline 9 plan. It is likely that some allowance will be needed for knowledge transfer where applicable. 2.Enduring services and activities –activities that the programme undertakes that will endure post BT, these services and activities are currently the responsibility of the programme however as the future operating model is forming, the activities will progressively transition to the new business units, and subject to a formal transition process including agreed knowledge and responsibility transfer, the programme will cease to provide the services or lead and or resource the activities. The BT Transition Plan will be formally documented, and progressed through the appropriate governance forums including the PGC. The transition plan will be tracked with regular progress reporting in place. At the conclusion of programme specific activities and on ceasing to be responsible for enduring services, the BT Programme will formally close \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] BT Transition Planning Scope - 6 - In scope for BT Transition planning includes strong linkages to the following newly established business groups of Corporate and Enabling Services specifically: 1.Enterprise Design and Integrity (ED&I)– for enterprise functions including strategic architecture, strategic portfolio stewardship, and governance. 2.Customer & Compliance Services Planning, Design & Delivery (CCS PD&D) – for planning, design and delivery capability, and customer experience design. This area has responsibility for START delivery in the main, together with customer experience design and START gateway services. In addition to START, responsibilities include delivery of the voice channel including responsibility for the customer contact centre systems. 3.Enterprise Services (ES) –in relation to Technology Services, Enterprise Service Delivery, change 4.Information & Intelligence Services (I&IS) Marketing and Communications, Digital Content Management –Planning Design & Delivery, and Information Sharing The BT transition and business integration team have been working with the future operating model team to map the enduring services and activities undertaken by the programme to the new business groups. This has been done to a level of detail that enables the capture of required knowledge and responsibility transfer, frameworks, processes, tools etc. Note that people transition in relation to IR employees is the responsibility of the future operating model team. Transition of programme fixed term resources, contractors and consultants is the responsibility of the BT programme. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 1. Transition Planning Approach – ED&I - 7 - Add the overview content of the interaction of BT with ED&I including portfolio management, PMO, tools, planning processes etc And also to governance And strategic architecture Should include a high level view of transition activities and potential timing.... Transition state 1 – by March 2021 Transition state 2 – by June 2021 Transition state 3 – by September 2021 ( final transition point ?) At this stage BT programme will only retain enough PMO resourcing to complete programme activities ( lean PMO). \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 2. Transition Planning Approach –CCSPD&D - 8 - Add the overview content of the interaction of BT with CCSPD&D including START planning, design and delivery, customer contact centre etc etc... And also to production support And solution architecture and design – how this will interact with the broader ED&I strategic architecture Should include a high level view of transition activities and potential timing... Transition state 1 – by March 2021 Transition state 2 – by June 2021 Transition state 3 – by November 2021 Final Transition state 4 – by January 2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] 4. Transition Planning Approach –II&S - 9 - Most of this has already happened – WWW fully transitioned,, DIP transitioned etc Final Transition – by end of June 2021 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] a.Criticalityto the programme or to IR operations (operations could be disrupted) b.Complexityof transition – scale of knowledge transfer, current capability, technology c.Capacityt o transition – constraints due to current programme delivery and/or business work programme d.Timingof transition – constraints due to decommissioning, vendor off-boarding, delivery of work programme completed. Transition prioritisation criteria and approach A numerical impact rating is then assigned to categorise the capability, service or system into the following groups: •Group A H igh Priority (rating of 9 to 12) •Group B M edium Priority(rating of 5 to 8) •Group C Low Priority (r ating of 4 to 1) •Group D Already transitioned/in progress ( no numerical rating) The BT change impact rating scale has been adapted for the Transition Plan. Enduring capabilities, services and systems are catagorised using the criteria below and assigned a RAG rating. A more detailed view is included in the appendix Assuming that there are no mitigations in place at the time of prioritisation, each item is assessed on the following criteria: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] •Transition Checkpoint Milestone:by December 2020,Release 4 closed out,the business peak cycle concluded, the Election outcome is known, and any change impacts identified, the programme is be well progressed with the first release of START delivery for Stage 4.ESS Release 3 concluded and a decision made on payroll. Areas of the programme identified for transition that have completed the planned process, knowledge and responsibility transfer will be transitioned to business as usual. •Transition Checkpoint Milestone:b y June 2021, the first release of START delivery for Stage 4 will be completed,the second release of START delivery will be well progressed, The Intel Led Workstream will have concluded and completely transitioned to BAU, the majority of the technical changes for TLO would have completed with the exception of the Contact Centre migration.Decommission will is progressing and ESS will be well progressed on the completion of the final release.All technology processes, knowledge and responsibilities will be transitioned to business as usualincluding all environment services, testing services and other similar capabilities. •Transition Checkpoint Milestone :b y December 2021,the second and final START releases of Stage 4 will be completed and early life support in progress.At this point FIRST will no longer be processing and the decommission process can commence.The programme close down plan will commence in October 2021, with the majority of resources departing the programme around this timeframe, unless they are required for final support, decommissioning, transition support or ESS completion.All finalprocesses, knowledge and responsibilities will have been transitioned to BAU. •Transition Checkpoint Milestone:b y March 2022,the final transition activities and decommissioning is in progress,the ESS Workstream is concluded and \[Information redacted\] decommissioning is commenced.Physical decommission of the \[Information redacted\] Data Centres willoccur in this timeframe and is a progressive process. •Transition Checkpoint Milestone :b y June 2022Programme closure and archiving activities are completed and the formal and final reporting is completed. The \[Information redacted\] Data Centres are closed and physical decommission well progressed,there may be final destruction activities requiring oversight by a BAU team. A final Post-Implementation Review (PIR) may be progressed in early 2022. Transition and Business Integration High Level Plan Dates - 11- 1 2 3 4 5 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] •The mapping of these elements will need to be validated by primary stakeholders both within BT and the business and will provide input into the Transition Roadmap. •The Roadmap will include agreed start d ates and appropriate checkpoints (as per the Transition Readiness Framework) to ensure that we allow enough time for the knowledge and responsibility transfer to bed in to our Future Operating Model. Transition Roadmap •Transition and Business Integration have used the following documents to identify a number of enduring elements that will need to transition from BT to the business: -Business Transformation Programme Transition Planning (for input into Baseline 9), and -Future Operating Model – p acks and information provided by FOM team •Mapping exercises have been held in conjunction with members of the Future Operating M odel Team to align enduring elements with the areas of the business which will take responsibility for the frameworks, processes, models tools and knowledge that currently sit w i t h B T. EXAMPLE \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] a.Criticalityto the programme or IR operations could be disrupted b.Complexityof transition – scale of knowledge transfer, current capability, technology c.Capacityt o transition – constraints due to current programme delivery and/or business work programme d.Timingof transition – constraints due to decommissioning, vendor off- boarding, delivery of work programme completed. Prioritisation criteria and approach - 13 Enduring capabilities, services and systems are catagorised using the BT change impact methodology. Assuming that there are no mitigations in place at the time of prioritisation, each item is assessed on the following criteria: Example \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Knowledge Transfer Approach - 14 Knowledge transfer forms part of the overall change management approach set out in the Transition Plan and runs through the course of the period of Transition. The Knowledge Transfer Approach sets out the process for transition by identifying, organising, transferring, and measuring the movement of knowledge into a repository called Huringa which houses the library created specifically in SharePoint to capture all the enduring artefacts that the business will need to continue to operate successfully post BT. Further detail can be foundhere. Identify - where we are currently •Knowledge Transfer Approach is developed and tested through s everal pilot groups. •Processes created for engaging with BT to facilitate the knowledge transfer in alignment with Information and Knowledge Management principles. Obtain and organise •Knowledge Transfer Approach agreed and built into Transition Roadmap for enduring elements. •Engagement with BT areas to transition begins, workshops and interviews set up to facilitate the transfer of explicit and tacit knowledge into the Huringa library. Transfer, measure and evaluate •Transfer of knowledge continues and tracked as part of Transition Readiness checkpoints. •Post-transfer support established. •Lessons learnt are captured and fed back to the organisation as part of the overarching Information and Knowledge Management principles. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Transition Readiness Framework - 15 •The purpose of the Transition Readiness Approach will be to allow primary stakeholders to contribute to readiness assessment and decision making as enduring capabilities, services and systems transition from the programme to the business. Stakeholders will be identified as part of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan. •The BT Readiness Framework approach will be used to provide the structure and purpose for readiness checklists, assessments and reports used atkey checkpoints leading up to and during transition.It will enable the assessment of progress and readiness of enduring capabilities, services and systems transition by tranche. •Readiness will be assessed at each of the checkpoints against a specific set of criteria, with residual risk visible throughout. •Criteria (or questions) will be specific to each transition and will collectively reflect the readiness of our organisation, Programme and where appropriate, external stakeholders. The cumulative impact of Stage 4, FOM, other business activity and environmental conditions will also be taken into consideration. •Each subsequent Transition Readiness assessment will allow for exception reporting via an executive summary to be tailored for organisation, BT programme and external stakeholders. •The IR Enterprise Risk Framework and RAG status definitions will be used to provide a consistent, familiar and standardreference. A Transition Readiness Framework is required as part of the overall Transition Plan to assess and report readiness to transition accountability/responsibility \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Huringa ( Transformation enduring library) •Huringa is a new SharePoint library created to capture all the enduring artefacts to be transitioned from the BT Programme to the business. These artefacts will enable the business to continue to operate successfully post BT. •Huringa is distinct from Te Uma ngaHou – the Business Transformation SharePoint site which will be closed out at the end of the Programme.Huringa will remain after BT has closed down. •T&BI will work across BT to determine what needs to be captured for tr ansitioning to the business. Collateral will be carefully managed so that only the enduring items that IR needs to be self-sufficient going forward will be placed there in a logical and easy to access approach. Approach •Workshops will be held with BT workstreams to introduce Huringa, set e xpectations, walk through examples and to help identify what will be enduring. •Guidance documentation has also been developed to help our BT people d etermine what needs to be transitioned and how to move those artefacts into Huringa. •A Teams space will be set up for additional support and to drive e ngagement with communications, quick surveys, FAQ’s, stand ups, workshop recordings and presentations. Timeline •A pilot of Huringa and this transition approach is being planned for during t he week of 9-13 November with the Digital Experience, Non-Production Environments, BT testing and Cloud Services workstreams. • •H uringa will be launched to wider IR early next year in February allowing everyone to open and view artefacts and see the transition progress. Key features •A single register containing (or linking to) a ll the key collateral that the programme has collected and curated since inception. •Only final artefacts will be stored in H uringa. Documents still owned and being used by BT will be “linked” within Huringa until they are ready to be handed over. •Each item will be tagged with: - Short description/narrative - Transition status - Change size - Decomposition of the enduring s ervices in the new organisation - Related phase of change - Related system - BT workstream and BT owner - Business person responsible and acco untable •Will be “integrated” with the new internal website, Haukāinga. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Stakeholder Engagement and Communications Transition and Business Integration will engage and communicate with mainly two audiences within BT and the business: -Those who will help T &BI achieve its goals, and -Those who will con tribute to and be interested in the transition of enduring processes into the business. Stakeholders and audiences are broadly categorised using the Satisfy, Manage, Inform and Engage framework to identify the level and style of engagement required for each group. Communication and engagement with wider IR audiences will be done in collaboration with the Future Operating Model team and will be fully aligned with these activities. Further detail on engagement and communications can be found in the Transition and Business Integration Stakeholder Engagement and Communications Plan. Manage •PLT (Programme Leadership Team) •SLT/ELT – (Alignment) •Targeting PGC – 10 Dec •BT Workstream leads •Selected business level 3’s •Optimisation – pilot transition? •Business integration Engage •Future Operating Model programme •FCOM + IWM •CCS – strategy/roadmaps •Pou Whirinaki •Workforce planning •Strategy w/force planning •Business case team Inform •BT Programme – updates on planning & approach •Policy Satisfy In Confidence – Highly Protected 18 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Appendix A - \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Appendix - Business Group/Unit Transition Snapshot - 19- Enduring Element Priority Recipient Business Segment RACI Transfer % Contingen t Workforce TimingComms & Engagement Knowledge transfer HuringaReadiness Assessment Post- Integratio n Support Business DesignCCS-BMed early 2021 Business Architecture ED&IMed Technical DesignESMed Technical Architecture ED&IMed early 2021 Technical Architecture – START/Gateway CCS-BMed early 2021 TestingServices– Automation ESMed DigitalCustomer Experience (excluding testing) CCS-BMed early 2021 Digital Customer Experience - Practice II&SMed early 2021 Digital Ecosystem Services (excluding testing - APIs onboarding) CCS-BJune 2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Business Group/Unit Transition Snapshot - 20- Enduring Element Priority Recipient Business Segment RACI Transfer % Contingen t Workforce TimingComms & Engagement Knowledge transfer HuringaReadiness Assessment Post- Integratio n Support Production Support CCS-BJune 2022 Enterprise Change and Release Management – Prioritisation and Change Delivery Planning ED&IMedium – currently in transition Enterprise Change and Release Management – Business Deployment Services CCS-BMedium Oracle Cloud Suite ESHigh HR and Payroll Solution ESJune 2022 ContentII&SMedium START reportingCCS-BMedium Operational Risk - Practice ED&ILow \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Business Group/Unit Transition Snapshot - 21- Enduring Element Priority Recipient Business Segment RACI Transfer % Contingen t Workforce TimingComms & Engagement Knowledge transfer HuringaReadiness Assessment Post- Integratio n Support External CommsII&SMedium Business Case Team ESMedium Product Ownership ED&IMedium Testing ServicesESJune 2022 Business Testers ESJune 2022 Account Management CCS-BJune 2022 Non-Production environment (New Services Platforms) ESJune 2022 Cloud ServicesESJune 2022 Ātea Support Services ESJanuary 2021 Data and Intelligence Services Management II&SDecember 2020 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Business Group/Unit Transition Snapshot - 22- Enduring Element Priority Recipient Business Segment RACI Transfer % Contingen t Workforce TimingComms & Engagement Knowledge transfer HuringaReadiness Assessment Post- Integratio n Support Information Management and Knowledge II&SDecember 2020 Portfolio and Programme Management (PMO) ED&IEarly 2021 Enterprise Change and Release Mgmt – Technical Deployment Services ESMedium – currently in transition Design Authority - Business ED&IMedium Design Authority – Technical ED&IJune 2022 Change Management ED&IMedium START including Gateway and Authentic Web Services CCS-BJune 2022 CommunicationsII&SMedium Core Voice Platform CCS-BJune 2022 \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Business Group/Unit Transition Snapshot - 23- Enduring Element Priority Recipient Business Segment RACI Transfer % Contingen t Workforce TimingComms & Engagement Knowledge transfer HuringaReadiness Assessment Post- Integratio n Support SPK2IR and Voice Biometrics CCS-BJune 2022 Development Tools ESDecember 2021 Process Modelling ESDecember 2021 PM Tools ED&IJune 2022 Intelligent Info Hub II&SMedium START - FCR CCS-BJune 2022 Training – general ESMedium Confluence (WIKI) ED&IJune 2022 START AnalyticsCCS-B Training – START environment CCS-BLow \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Transition and Business Integration – Timeline Overview DRAFT - 24- Timeline Jul-Sep20Oct-Dec20Jan-Mar21Apr-Jun21Jul-Sep21Oct-Dec21Jan-Mar22Apr-Jun22 Transition Planning & Monitoring Knowledge Transfer Responsibility Transfer Support Period Close Down Activities BT Close out Plan Continue Knowledge Transfer Support period aligned to establishment of organisation change Ensure support is aligned to responsibility transfer plan (refer He Kotuitui) Continue with support requirements ( as needed basis) Complete any final responsibility transfer and support Finalise BT planned activities Commence formal close down activities BT Programme Transition Plan implementation Transition Planning Knowledge transfer approach and plan – and commence Close out completed 1 2 34 Complete Knowledge Transfer and ensure all collateral is available to business teams Plan aligned to transition BT ends 5 Roll off remaining BT resources as per the closure plan BT Closure Plan