ABOUT BT | PUBLICATIONS | CURRENT PROGRESS Email IRTransformation@ird.govt.nz for further information. BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION February 2020 Latest news about Inland Revenue's transformation Our services will be unavailable Our Business Transformation programme is well under-way. We’re transforming our systems to make it simpler for New Zealanders to pay their taxes and receive their entitlements. This includes improvements to myIR, student loans, KiwiSaver and more. In April, our next set of changes come into effect. In order to make these changes our key services will be unavailable between 3pm Thursday 9 April and 8am Thursday 16 April. During this time our phone lines and offices will be closed, and you will not be able to access myIR or e-File. Resident Withholding Tax exemption register We have introduced a new online RWT exemption register that lists the IRD numbers of all customers who are exempt from having RWT deducted from the interest and dividends they receive. Currently we issue successful applicants with a certificate of exemption from RWT. This process will remain in place until 31 March 2020. From 1 April, payers of investment income (e.g. payers of interest and dividends) will access the register to confirm which of their customers have RWT exempt status. They will no longer ask for or accept physical certificates of exemption. The register: is automatically populated by Inland Revenue identifies customers only by their IRD number can be searched by exemption status, IRD number and when the information was last updated is updated overnight every business day (Monday to Friday) – so it provides near real time information. IRD Business Transformation news Having trouble viewing this email? View Online Payers can use the register now to verify if a customer has an exemption, or to check the exemption status (e.g. cancelled, revoked or end-dated (expired)). ​​​​​​​ If a customer has an exemption under an Act that is not administered by Inland Revenue, they may need to apply to us to be included on the register. If you are a charity registered with Charities Services you do not need to apply for RWT exempt status. We will automatically put you on the register. You can find out more and access the register at www.ird.govt.nz/rwt-exemption Moving away from cheques From 1 March we will stop accepting payment by cheque, including cheques dated after 1 March 2020. There are several payment methods offered by us and the banks, including: Online through your bank Online in myIR Automatic payment authority form (IR586) Cash or Eftpos at Westpac (From 1 July 2020, all payments at Westpac must be accompanied by a barcode) We encourage you to speak with your bank or a tax professional to help you find the best payment method for you. For more information on these payment methods visit www.ird.govt.nz/cheques We are also in the process of introducing a new phone payment option, which will allow customers to make payments 24/7 using our SPK2IR phone service. We will provide more information closer to the time, but we are aiming for this option to be available from mid-April. If you have already spoken with your bank and/or tax professional and are unable to use another payment method, please contact us to discuss your options. Research and Development Tax Incentive - website The Research and Development Tax Incentive (RDTI) supports Government’s target to increase New Zealand’s R&D expenditure to 2% of GDP by 2027. In February a new RDTI website was introduced to help businesses understand the benefits of undertaking R&D and to encourage more businesses to invest in it. Designed for busy business-decision-makers, the website features an easy-to-follow introductory guide to RDTI eligibility and a step-by-step overview of how to apply. The RDTI is jointly administered by Inland Revenue and Callaghan Innovation, and information on the new website has been developed collaboratively by both agencies with support from MBIE. Learn more at www.rdti.govt.nz Tax technical beta site available in late March As part of our work to build a new and improved Tax Technical website, we’re making a beta, or test version available ahead of the first published release. We’re planning to make the beta site available in late March, accessible via the existing Tax Technical section of the Inland Revenue website. We’re keen to get your thoughts and feedback on the new look and feel, features and layout of the Tax Technical site and we encourage you to visit the beta version when it’s available. You will be able to provide comments while on the site using the feedback button on each beta page. Feedback we receive during this time will help us to improve the site before the first release. Upcoming seminars As we mentioned in our previous issue, we are running seminars to help employers, tax agents and bookkeepers prepare for the changes coming in April.  The seminars will be held around the country and the link to register will be available on our website on the following dates:  Employers – link available 2 March 2020 Tax agents and bookkeepers – link available 9 March 2020  Join our final webinars We are running two final webinars before we go live with our next round of changes in April. Both sessions will be focused on helping you prepare for the upcoming changes. The session on 4 March 2020 at 2:30pm to 3:30pm is aimed at tax agents and bookkeepers. The final session is aimed at employers and not-for-profit organisations, and will take place on 18 March 2020 from 2:30pm to 3:30pm. Register by clicking the links above, or visit www.ird.govt.nz/webinars Subscribe | Privacy | Copyright | Security | Contact us