High Level Transition Plan Transition and Business Integration July 2020 Draft Deliverable Outline \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Scope and overview -2- The BT Programme Transition Plan describes the enduringframeworks, processes, models tools and knowledge that the programmehas developed since inception. The plan shows when, how and towhom they will be transitioned andwill align to theestablishment of the operating model changes being delivered byHeKōtutui. The plan will also incorporate the transition ofenduring services that BT are currently responsible for which willbe specifically covered in the responsibilities transition componentof the plan. The BT Programme Transition Plan will provide the following: •An inventory of all enduring components that IR will need to be self-sufficient when the BT programme closes. •Impact assessment describing the current state of enduring components and providing analysis on the future state of the transfer to recipient BAU teams. •Knowledge transfer plan (for tacit knowledge). •Alignment between BT transition planning and HeKōtutui organisational changes. •Stakeholder engagement and communications plan. •Transition Readiness framework and approach for reporting progress on transition (RAG/Harvey Balls). •A mechanism to identify any gaps in supporting components that IR will need post BT (Pou Whirinaki model?). \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Change approach 3- Develop Approach Build Awareness & Understanding Prepare & Deliver Integrate •Confirming enduring capabilities,services and systems for transition •Mapping activities to confirm the RACI at a high level and aligned with the FOM •Share transition scope/overview •Prioritisation approach agreed and roadmap developed •Change management and knowledge transfer approach agreed •Develop stakeholder engagement plan •Develop communications plan •First cut of transition readiness criteria •Engagement with primary stakeholders – PLT and level 3 leaders •Deep dive/workshops with prioritised BT teams •Impact Assessment of the work being transitioned to BAU teams •Change management and knowledge transfer plan is agreed •Communications activities to impacted teams and wider IR commence •Transition Readiness criteria/checkpoints are established •Detailed RACI is agreed and aligned with the FOM. •Build the enduring inventory (documents, deliverables, frameworks, processes) •Change Management Implementation commences •Knowledge transfer commences & is documented •Engagement with BT and Business stakeholders responsible/accountable for work •Communications to impacted teams and wider IR •Demand/Workforce Planning (where required if there are impacts to CCS) •Continue to populate the enduring inventory (documents, deliverables, frameworks, processes) •Transition Readiness & Progress Assessment reporting •Transition Readiness & Progress Assessment reporting •Communications to impacted teams and wider IR •Transition completion report •Post Integration support •Knowledge transfer completed sufficiently By December 2020 January to June 2021January to June 2021 July 2021 to June 2022 •The transition plan will use and adapt the BT change methodology and will adopt the “pull” model of change management. •The change approach will also ensure that plans are derived and delivered in partnership with the business and in alignment with He Kōtuitui and the Future Operating Model (FOM). \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Transition schedule, tasks and activities 4- Draft \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] a.Criticalityto the programme or IR operations could be disrupted b.Complexityof transition – scale of knowledge transfer, current capability, technology c.Capacityt o transition – constraints due to current programme delivery and/or business work programme d.Timingof transition – constraints due to decommissioning, vendor off-boarding, delivery of work programme completed. Prioritisation criteria and approach - 5 - A numerical impact rating is then assigned to categorise the capability, service or system into the following groups: •Group A High Priority (rating of 9 to 12) •Group B Medium Priority(rating of 5 to 8 •Group C Low Priority (rating of 4 to 1 •Group D Already transitioned/in progress (no numerical rating) The BT change impact rating scale has been adapted for the Transition Plan. Enduring capabilities, services and systems are catagorised using the criteria below and assigned a RAG rating. Assuming that there are no mitigations in place at the time of prioritisation, each item is assessed on the following criteria: \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Change groups - 6 - - - Business Design & Architecture - Technical Architectureand Design - Digital Customer Experience (excl testing) - Digital Ecosystem Services (excl testing - API's and includes onboarding) - Production Support – issues management/break fix across primary services e.g START, Atea - Enterprise Change and Release Management – Prioritisation and change delivery planning Group A High Priority \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Change groups 7- - START including Gateway and Authenticated Web - Account Management - Non-Production Environments (NSPs) - Speak2IR and voice biometrics -Ātea Support Services - Data and Intelligence Services Management - Information Management and Knowledge - Portfolio and Programme Management (PMO) - Change Management and Communications - Enterprise Change and Release Management - Business/Technical Deployment Services - Design Authority (Business and Technical) Group B Medium Priority - Core Voice Platform - Dev & Test tools - Process Modelling - PM Tools - START –FCR - Testing Services - Business Testers - Cloud Services \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Change groups 8- - Currently no items in this catagory Group C Low Priority \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Change groups 9- - Public Website - Data and Intelligence Platform - STAX - Windows 10/Office 365 - IT Service Management (SNOW) - Call recording - Digital Forensics - Intelligent Info Hub - Paper Records Management - Lightweight Application Platform Group D Already transitioned/ in progress \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Knowledge Transfer Approach - 10 Identify knowledge that needs to be gathered Obtain and organize outputsExecute the transferMeasure and evaluate the knowledge transferred -Where is the knowledge coming from? An individual or business unit? -Who will be the recipient of the knowledge? Has the individual or business unit already been identified as part of mapping exercise? -What needs to be transferred i.e. relationship management, process? -Risk of not transferring the knowledge: i.e. if an individual, would anyone know how to do what they do if they left? -Are there any dependencies on this knowledge? -When does the knowledge need to transfer? -The individual/business unit we are collecting knowledge from -The critical tasks/relationships/processe s this individual/business oversees and their importance level -The availability of this information (i.e., does anyone else in the organization know or have access to it?) – tacit and/or explicit? Is it as simple as saving documents into SharePoint or does it require one on one conversation? -The impact level of others not having this information causes -The resources that are needed to share the information with others -Formally as part of Transition plan. -Business and Programme working together for hands on elements (adapt Key User approach). -Build into Transition Readiness approach with checkpoints during and after knowledge transfer. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Transition Readiness Approach - 11 •The purpose of the Transition Readiness Approach will be to allow primary stakeholders to contribute to readiness assessment and decision making as enduring capabilities, services and systems transition from the programme to the business. Stakeholders will be identified as part of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan. •The BT Readiness Framework approach will be used to provide the structure and purpose for readiness checklists, assessments and reports used atkey checkpoints leading up to and during transition.It will enable the assessment of progress and readiness of enduring capabilities, services and systems transition by tranche. •Readiness will be assessed at each of the checkpoints against a specific set of criteria, with residual risk visible throughout. •Criteria (or questions) will be specific to each transition and will collectively reflect the readiness of our organisation, Programme and where appropriate, external stakeholders. The cumulative impact of Stage 4, He Kōtuitui, other business activity and environmental conditions will also be taken into consideration. •Each subsequent Transition Readiness assessment will allow for exception reporting via an executive summary to be tailored for organisation, BT programme and external stakeholders.The IR Enterprise Risk Framework and RAG status definitions will be used to provide a consistent, familiar and standardreference. •As readiness is considered an enduring process, we will also look to work with the business to embed the framework into IR’s change model. \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] Appendix – Mapping Spreadsheet/Priority Assessment - 12 Placeholder slide \[IN CONFIDENCE RELEASE EXTERNAL\] •We know that when it comes to transition to BAU, there will be varying levels of maturity across the frameworks, processes, models tools and knowledge which need to endure beyond BT with some areas already actively transitioning (e.g. Data and Intelligence Platform, STAX) and others that are yet to transition. •We are very conscious of the fact that we don't want to be too prescriptive when it comes to t he processes/methodology we use for transition. In order to have consistency (and a baseline for building the transition plan), minimum requirements will be establishedfor the collection, analysis, documentationand transfer ofprocesses, services, tools and knowledge. Proposed minimum requirements: •Current state of the process, service, tool or knowledge •Any crucial artefacts I.e. process maps, existing stakeholder relationships,e xisting knowledge receptacles •Primary stakeholders (including RACI) formally as a stakeholder engagement plan- to overlay the impactassessment and transition readinessassessment •Future state of the process, service, tool or knowledge (where it will sit in BAU and who w ill own it) •Transition readinessc riteria- including Pou Whirinakisupport where required •Communications plan – b oth internal and external where required. This willbe sequenced with He Kotuituiand Future Operating Model communications plans. Minimum requirements of transition 3-