ABOUT BT | PUBLICATIONS | CURRENT PROGRESS Email IRTransformation@ird.govt.nz for further information. BUSINESS TRANSFORMATION September 2020 Latest news about Inland Revenue's transformation The final phase of IR's Business Transformation We’re on the home stretch! Inland Revenue is now in its final phase of business transformation. Over the last four years we’ve been making it simpler, open and more certain for New Zealanders to pay their taxes and receive their entitlements. We’ve gradually moved our tax and social policy products to a new tax administration system and made changes to policy, legislation, business processes as well as the design and structure of our organisation. In April this year we brought in the latest changes - almost entirely remotely, during the COVID level 4 lock down. We migrated the back-end processing of PAYE, student loans and KiwiSaver into our new system, further improved online services and web channels and implemented improvements to Working for Families. At the same time, we were managing a number of COVID-19 relief initiatives where the resilience and agility of the new system proved invaluable. For example, it took just 10 days from when the Government confirmed its intentions to establish the Small Business Cashflow (Loan) Scheme until the Scheme was launched. Transformation the final phase We’re calling our final phase Stage 4 and it’s a little bit different from our other releases. Previously, our major releases have aligned with the beginning of the tax year in April. Given the impacts of COVID-19, a single large release in April 2021 isn’t possible so the changes are being implemented progressively. These changes will include moving all remaining tax and social policy products into our new system (including child support, paid parental leave, foreign trusts and duties) and upgrading myIR to a new version (Version 12): The first changes, including paid parental leave, will go live on 1 March 2021 The second release, including child support and the myIR upgrade, is planned for October 2021 IRD Business Transformation news Having trouble viewing this email? View Online We’ll also bring in a series of other, mostly smaller, changes throughout Stage 4. Many of the Stage 4 changes will only impact specific, and sometimes very small, groups of customers. We’ll connect with these customers to ensure they understand how the changes may impact them and will continue to provide everyone else with an overview. Legislation Some changes will include legislation change and our proposed policy changes won’t be finalised until the legislation is passed. Transition We remain committed to completing our transformation as quickly as possible and this is currently planned for early 2022. This includes transitioning the programme's knowledge, practices and processes to the business which will progressively take over the controls as the programme winds down and decommissioning the old systems. We’ll tell you more about this, and what it means for you, during Stage 4. Small Business Cashflow Scheme notifications Since May this year, we’ve helped more than 96,250 small to medium sized businesses ease their COVID-19 related financial pressures, with a one-off business loan. With key loan milestones quite a way off for many, we’re aware that some businesses may be worried about being caught off-guard and missing payments or owing additional interest. To ease this burden and provide peace of mind, we’ve built notifications into our system. This means that we’ll automatically notify Small Business Cashflow (Loan) Scheme (SBCS) borrowers ahead of key events. These could include interest starting to accrue if the loan hasn’t been repaid in full within the first year, or when regular loan instalment payments are about to start. Customers with myIR will receive these notifications in their myIR account, while those without a myIR account will receive a letter. The deadline for applications for the SBCS close at the end of the year. More information, including who is eligible and how to apply, is available from our website: https://www.ird.govt.nz/covid-19/business- and-organisations/small-business-cash-flow-loan Subscribe | Privacy | Copyright | Security | Contact us