Trust Perceptions Trust in the tax system and Inland Revenue Organisation: Inland Revenue Date: 5 November 2019 Disclaimer 2 The views, opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the views of Inland Revenue. Inland Revenue has made every effort to ensure that the information contained in this report is reliable, but does not guaranteeits accuracy or completeness and does not accept any liability for any errors. The information and opinions contained in this report are not intended to be used as a basis for commercial decisions and InlandRevenue accepts no liability for any decisions made in reliance on them. Crown copyright ©. This paper by Inland Revenue is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 New Zealand Licence. Please note that the Inland Revenue emblem and logo may not be used in any way which infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act 1981orwould infringe such provision if the relevant use occurred within New Zealand. Attribution should be in written form and not by reproduction of this emblem. If you publish, distribute or otherwise disseminate this work to the public without adapting it, the following attribution to Inland Revenue should be used: "Source: Inland Revenue and licensed by Inland Revenue for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution3.0 New Zealand Licence." If you adapt this work in any way or include it in a wider collection, and publish, distribute or otherwisedisseminate that adaptation or collection to the public, the following style of attribution to Inland Revenue should be used: "This work is \[based on/includes\] Inland Revenue's research and evaluation activities which \[is/are\] licensed by Inland Revenue for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 New Zealand Licence." ISBN: 978-0 -478-41849-1 Background to the research How we did the research Executive Summary To what extent do people trust the New Zealand tax system and Inland Revenue? Who trusts the tax system and Inland Revenue? What are the drivers of trust? What can Inland Revenue do to improve trust? 4 5 11 16 23 34 48 Contents 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3 Page number Appendix 67 4 Background to the research New Zealand’s tax system is based on the voluntary compliance of individuals and businesses. This means public perceptions of the integrity of this system are critical to its success. A number of studies have indicated that trust in the tax system is a key driver of voluntary compliance 1 . 1 InlandRevenuethereforewantstobetterunderstandtrustinthetaxsystem andInlandRevenuewithinaNewZealandcontext;inparticular,whatdrives trustinthetaxsystemandInlandRevenue,andthewaysinwhichInland Revenuecouldfostertrustovertime. The research objectives include the following: Identify the key factors that influence customers’ overall trust in Inland Revenue and New Zealand’s tax system; Determine which of these can be influenced by Inland Revenue’s actions; Understand how Inland Revenue’s communications and behaviours build or erode customers’ trust and identify tangible next steps and actions. Method overview Qualitative approach Quantitative approach 6 7 8-9 How we did the research 5 Reporting 10 Page number 2 6 Method overview Theresearchincludedthreestages,assetoutbelow. 2 Environmental scan: Theenvironmentalscanconsistedof a literaturereviewofresearchonthe determinantsoftrust. Thepurpose oftheenvironmentalscanwasto ensurethecurrentresearchbuilton whatisalreadyknownonthe subject. Qualitative phaseQuantitative phase: Thefocusofthequantitativecomponent wastodeterminethekeydriversoftrustin InlandRevenueandthetaxsystem,andthe extenttowhichperceptionsoftrustcould beinfluencedbyInlandRevenue. Italso soughttoidentifyhowInlandRevenuecould maintainandbuildtrustlevels. Qualitativeresearchwasusedtogainanin- depthunderstandingofhowtrustcanbe earned,re-earnedandlost. Findingsfromthe qualitativeresearchhelpedtoshapethe quantitativequestionnairebyidentifying potentialdriversoftrust. Italsoprovidedus withgreatercontextforthequantitative researchfindings. (dyads / triads and focus groups): 7 Qualitative approach A series of dyads and triads were undertaken with a mix of individual and business customers. Each dyad/triad consisted of a semi-structured discussion (up to 90 minutes) with two or three participants from a family or business network. A mix of gender, age, and ethnicity, and individuals with varying levels of trust in Inland Revenue, were included in the overall sample, which is displayed to the right. 2.1 Because most New Zealanders don’t interact with Inland Revenue on a regular basis, we ensured that all triads/dyads had interacted with Inland Revenue at least once in the past 12 months. Five of the dyad/triad groups had interacted with Inland Revenue in at least three different ways during the same period. Qualitative summary Following this initial phase of fieldwork, two focus groups were conducted in Auckland: one comprised of individuals with low levels of trust in Inland Revenue, and the other with people with a ‘high trust’ relationship 2 . Participants were a mix of individual and business customers who had taken part in the dyads/triads. Individuals Māori Pacific peoples Asian migrants 2 - 4 4 - 3 - - 1 - - - - 1 - - 3 4 4 4 AucklandWellingtonWhangāreiNew Plymouth Total number of dyads /triads BUSINESS SME – decision makers 3- 1 -4 INDIVIDUALS Customer group Total1331192 Quantitative approach The quantitative phase of the research was carried out online. Inland Revenue provided Colmar Brunton with contact details for 42,259 individual and business customers. Inland Revenue sent an email to all potential participants, informing them of the survey and giving them the option to opt-out. Those who chose to opt- out of the survey were then removed from the sample, along with those who had recently been invited to complete an Inland Revenue survey through Colmar Brunton 3 . This left us with a total sample of 40,815. Online survey summary All 40,815 were sent an email inviting them to complete the survey, we received 567 bounce-back emails. A targeted reminder was sent to those who did not initially respond. Respondents were not incentivised to take part in the online survey. The final response rate achieved was 9.4%. A total of 3,768 respondents completed the survey (2763 individuals and 1,005 businesses). A sample size of 3,768 has a maximum margin of error of +/- 1.6%. Surveying took place between 31 January 2019 and Monday 11 February 2019. The median duration for the quantitative survey was 14 minutes. 2.2 8 Quantitative approach Weighting The sample was weighted to ensure the final profile was representative of the population of interest. The weighting process was applied to correct for any disproportionality introduced through the sampling process, as well as response bias. Individuals data were weighted by type of social policy, and age within gender. Business data were weighted by business type. At the total level (i.e. individuals and business responses combined) the data were weighted by sample type. 2.2 Path analysis One of the key outputs of this research was a path analysis model. A path model shows the directional relationships between a set of variables, and the relative strength of these relationships. It is used to determine what variables are driving a single outcome variable (e.g. trust in the tax system), and the relative importance each of these variables have when it comes to influencing the outcome variable. 9 10 Reporting Thisreportdetailsthefindingsfromboththe qualitativeandquantitativeresearchcomponents. Itsummarisesthefindingsoverallandwhere possiblemakessubgroupcomparisons. Asfewdifferenceswereobservedbetweenthe surveyresponsesforindividualsandbusiness customersduringtheanalysisphase,resultshave onlybeensplitoutbythesetwogroupswhere relevant. Aseparatepathanalysisforeachgroup hasbeencarriedout. Anysub-groupdifferencesnotedinthereportare statisticallysignificantatthe95%confidencelevel, unlessstatedotherwise.Thismeansweare95% confidentthatthedifferenceis genuine,ratherthan a ‘chance’resultthatcanoccurfromsurveyinga sampleofthepopulation. 2.3 Qualitativeresearchisusedtogainanunderstandingofwhy peoplefeelandactthewaytheydo. Qualitativeresearchdiffers fromquantitativeresearchinthatitprovidesin-depth informationabouthowindividualsseetheworld. Whilesamplesizesforthequalitativeresearcharenot statisticallyrepresentative,carehasbeentakentoensurea range ofindividualandbusinesscustomerswereincludedinthe research(seesection2.1 forsampledetails). Becausequalitative researchcannotbequantified,wehaveusedtermssuchas ‘some’or‘many’inthereporttoprovideanindicationofhow prevalentanideais. Interpreting the qualitative research To what extent do customers trust the tax system and Inland Revenue? What are the drivers of trust? How to improve trust 12 13 14-15 Executive Summary 11 Page number 3 12 To what extent do customers trust the tax system and Inland Revenue? Trust in the tax system is similar to trust in other public systems, while trust i n Inland Revenue compares favourably against a range of high-profile public and private sector o rganisations. 3.1 Overall, 52% of customers trust the tax system, and 58% trust Inland Revenue\*. While trust in Inland Revenue is slightly higher than trust in the tax system, the two are very highly correlated, suggesting most customers do n ot distinguish between the two. Findingsfromthe qualitativeresearch indicatetrustishigherforInland Revenuebecauseit isa tangibleentity (i.e.individualscaninteractwithsystems andprocesses,andformrelationships withInlandRevenuestaff), whereasthe taxsystemis morenebulous. Theresearchfoundthat cultureandethnicityare criticalin pullingapart thosewhoaremoreorless trustingofthetaxsystem andInlandRevenue. 52% 58%\* Trust the tax system Trust Inland Revenue Qualitative research revealed that Asian migrants compare their experience with the New Zealand tax system and Inland Revenue, to previous experiences with the tax system in their country of origin. Both Inland Revenue and the tax system are generally viewed more favourably. There is a perception that the use of tax monies is more visible and transparent within New Zealand. Inland Revenue’s streamlined processes and proactive attitude towards tax returns are two things which contribute to this. Qualitative research findings suggest that lower trust levels are largely to do with a wider distrust of government institutions and feelings of marginalisation. There is an expectation that negative experiences will be repeated, meaning Māori feel they always need to be on guard when dealing with government more generally (including the tax system). Migrants (particularly Asian migrants) are more trusting. Māori (particularly those with close ties to their iwi/hapū) are less trusting. \* This figure differs from IR’ s 2019 Annual Report. This is because the figure in this report is based on the OECD-recommended measurement (o n a scale of zero to ten, responses of 7-10 are considered to be trusting). 13 What are the drivers of trust? 3.2 For both individuals and business customers, there are two main pathways to building trust in Inland Revenue; a functional pathway, and a relationship-based pathway. The main difference between the individual and business models is that, for business customers, easily completing tasks on the Inland Revenue website is one of the drivers of trust. This likely reflects greater levels of interaction with Inland Revenue and the website for business customers. As there are no substantial differences between the two models other than this, a similar strategy will likely work for both customer groups when it comes to building trust. What this suggests is that building trust requires a two- pronged approach. At a functional level, Inland Revenue needs to foster perceptions of being straight-forward, reliable and capable. At the same time, it needs to build a relationship with customers by demonstrating that it is a caring organisation which treats the customer as an equal - working with people to come up with a solution that works for all parties. The two pathways reflect different elements of customer experience. That is, making it easy for customers to interact with the organisation, and building a lasting relationship. Drivers of trust differ to some extent for Māori. For Māori, perceptions of Inland Revenue being accountable to the people have greater influence on trust, as do perceptions of Inland Revenue being on the side of the taxpayer. To build trust in Inland Revenue among Māori the focus should be on improving these perceptions in particular. 14 Amongindividuals, perceptionsof InlandRevenuebeingontheside of thetaxpayerandhavingahuman touchhavebeenidentifiedas priorityareasforimprovement. Agreementwiththesestatements is low,howevertheirrelative importance to buildingtrustis high. Amongbothindividualandbusiness customers,perceptionsofInlandRevenueas being reliableandtrustingcustomerstodo therightthingaremostimportantforInland Revenuetomaintain. Agreementwiththese statements ishigh,asis their importance to buildingtrust. Thismeansthatif agreement withthesestatementsfalls,so toowill overalltrustlevels. Similarpriorityareashavebeenidentified for businesses, howevermoreimportant tobusinessesareperceptionsofdealing witheveryonefairly.Thequalitative researchrevealedthatthereisa perceptionamongstbusiness customers thatsome businessesgetan‘easier deal’ thanotherswithinthetaxsystem. How to improve trust 3.3 Building the relationship between customers and Inland Revenue Thetouchpointswhichofferthe mostopportunityforimprovement areconsistentacrossindividualsand business. Theyinclude: These touchpoints occur the most frequently and have a negative impact on trust in Inland Revenue. For individuals and business customers there is an opportunity to improve trust by increasing exposure to advertising and communications. Those who have seen positive advertising or marketing communications are considerably more likely to trust Inland Revenue, than those who haven’t seen anything. However, relatively few recall seeing or hearing anything. For Māori in particular there is an opportunity for Inland Revenue to demonstrate that it is an understanding organisation that is willing to work with customers in coming up with solutions. Those who had experienced one of the following were more likely to trust Inland Revenue than those who had not: 15 How to improve trust 3.3 Improving the customer experience Call waiting times, Ease of dealing with Inland Revenue, Taking an empathetic approach when dealing with customers, Ease of completing a tax return Consistent messaging. Giving customers time to rectify mistakes Arranging an affordable payment plan for money owed Enabling customers to pay back money owed in a manageable timeframe. Trust in Inland Revenue and the tax system Trust in Inland Revenue and the tax system – individuals and businesses How trust in the tax system compares to other public systems 17-19 20 21 To what extent do people trust the New Zealand tax system and Inland Revenue? 16 Page number 4 How trust in Inland Revenue compares to other organisations 22 17 Trust in Inland Revenue and the tax system 4.1 How much do you personally trust the following in New Zealand? Thesurveyasksrespondentstoindicatehowmuch theytrusttheNewZealandtaxsystem,andInland Revenueonaneleven-pointscalerangingfrom zero‘notatall’to10‘completely’. Thisis consistent withtheOECDapproachtomeasuringtrust. On itsscaletheOECDclassifiessomeonewhoscores betweensevenandtenastrusting. Someonewho scoresbetweenzeroandthreeisconsidered distrustful,whilesomeonewhoscoresbetween fourandsixis seenasindifferentorneutral. Fifty-twopercentofcustomers 4 trustthetax system,andonly12%donot. TrustinInland Revenueisslightlyhigher,with58%ofcustomers indicatingtheytrusttheorganisation. The tax system Q 10% 12% 32% 36% 58% 52% Inland Revenue Distrust (rating 0 to3)Neutral (rating 4to 6)Trust (rating 7 to10) Base size: All respondents (n=3,768). Excludes unsure and prefer not to say responses. There is a very strong correlation between trust in the tax system, and trust in Inland Revenue (r=.83) 5 , suggesting that many customers do not distinguish between the two. This means that if trust in Inland Revenue improves, you can expect to see a similar level of improvement in trust in the tax system. 18 Trust in Inland Revenue and the tax system 4.1 Male, 26-35 years, Asian migrant, individual Qualitativeinsightsexplainboththeproximityof therelationshipandtherelativelyhigherlevelof trustplacedinInlandRevenueversusthetax system. Insummary,customersoftenseethemas two‘sidesofthesamecoin’,whilethosewhodo makea distinctionaremorelikelytoempathise withInlandRevenueasboththeadministrator, andhumanfaceofthetaxsystem. Thequalitativeresearchrevealsthatsome customersdonotdifferentiatebetweenthetax systemandInlandRevenueandviewthemasa singleentity.Thiswasapparentduring discussionswhenintervieweesfounditdifficult todefinetheirrelationship,andincludedexplicit statementsindicatingthisviewpoint: “I have minimal knowledge of Inland Revenue so I would think they're the same.” Male, 26-35 years, NZ European, individual “I have never thought about the New Zealand tax system as a separate entity.” For others, Inland Revenue is perceived as the executor of the tax system. It is therefore seen to be the organisation that carries out the government’s directives as stipulated within this system – e.g. it calculates and collects taxes on its behalf. As such, while the two bodies are viewed as closely connected, Inland Revenue is perceived to have limited or no ability to operate independently: Male, 26-35 years, Asian migrant, individual “Inland Revenue are the ones who do the computing or the collecting of tax, they don't have the power to change it or make a decision on how much it is.” Female, 46-59 years, New Zealand European, business “I have just been watching Narcos Mexico, first thing that comes to mind is the government is the leader of the cartel and the tax department is the hit man, who does as they're told.” This perceived lack of autonomy could be contributing to a slightly more empathetic view of Inland Revenue, and higher trust in the organisation amongst some: 19 Trust in Inland Revenue and the tax system 4.1 Further, findings suggest that customers sometimes felt a stronger connection with Inland Revenue due to the direct and tangible relationship they have with either staff or the organisation’s systems and processes. By comparison, the tax system is viewed as a more indeterminate or unknown entity: Female, 46-59 years, New Zealand European, business “Personally, I don't think it's Inland Revenue that is ripping people off, they don't set the tax rates, it's the government...They're just doing their job, just collecting the taxes and making sure that people are paying taxes and that people aren't ripping the system off.” Male, 60+ years, New Zealand European, business “It's not something you really trust or distrust, it just is.” 20 Trust in Inland Revenue and the tax system individuals and businesses 4.2 How much do you personally trust the following in New Zealand? Therearenosignificantdifferencesintrustwhen webreaktheresultsdownbyindividualand businesscustomers(seeFigure2). Becauseofthis, resultsforindividualandbusinesscustomershave beenreportedtogetherthroughoutthereport unlessotherwisespecified. AsshowninFigure2, morethanhalfofindividuals andbusinessessaytheytrustthetaxsystemand InlandRevenue. Ofthosewhoaren’tclassifiedas trusting,mostareambivalent. Onlyoneinten distrustthetaxsystemandInlandRevenue. The tax system Q 10% 10% 31% 40% 59% 51% Inland Revenue Distrust (rating 0 to3)Neutral (rating 4to 6)Trust (rating 7 to10) Base size: Individuals (n=2,763), business (n=1,005). Excludes unsure and prefer not to say responses. The tax system 9% 12% 32% 35% 58% 53% Inland Revenue INDIVIDUALS BUSINESS Figure 2. Perceptions of trust in the tax system and Inland Revenue by business and individuals 21 How trust in the tax system compares to other public systems 4.3 Do you trust the following? Tohelpcontextualisetrustinthetaxsystem,weasked respondentstoindicatewhethertheytrusta numberofpublic systems(seeFigure3). Toelicitamoreintuitiveresponse, respondentsweregivenonlythreesecondstoprovidea yes/no answer. Becauseofthis,theresultsforthetaxsystemarenot directlycomparabletothethosepresentedonthepreviouspages (whichusea differentquestionandscale). Totaltrustincludesallthosewhogavea yesresponse,andimplicit trustistheproportionwhoprovideda fastyes(i.e. fasterthan theiraverageresponsetime). Trustinthetaxsystemisverysimilartotrustinthehealth,legal andeducationsystems– andis markedlyhigherthantrustinthe politicalsystem. TwothirdsofNewZealanderstrustthetax system,andfora thirdtheassociationbetweentrustandthetax systemis particularlystrong(ormoreintuitive). Q % Implicit trust Base size: All respondents (n=3,768). Excludes no response. 39% 36% 34% 34% 11% 66% 65% 64% 63% 32% % Total trust (explicit and implicit) The health system The legal system The tax system The education system The political system Figure 3. Trust in public systems 22 How trust in Inland Revenue compares to other organisations 4.4 Do you trust the following? WedidasimilarexercisetocontextualisetrustinInland Revenue(seeFigure4). Again,respondentswereonlygiven threesecondstoprovidea yes/noanswerandthereforethe resultsfortrustinInlandRevenuearenotcomparabletothose presentedinsection4.1. Totaltrustincludesallthosewhogaveayesresponse,and implicittrustistheproportionwhoprovideda fastyes(i.e. fasterthantheiraverageresponsetime). InlandRevenueenjoyshighlevelsoftrustrelativetotheother organisations 6 . EightypercentofNewZealandersagreethey trustInlandRevenueandforoverhalf(55%) theassociation betweentrustandInlandRevenueis strong(ormoreintuitive). Q % Implicit trust Base size: All respondents (n=3,768). Excludes no response. 64% 55% 42% 40% 18% 39% 36% 19% 22% 88% 80% 75% 68% 63% 58% 57% 57% 47% % Total trust (explicit and implicit) Organisation A Inland Revenue Organisation B Organisation C Organisation D Organisation E Organisation F Organisation G Organisation H Figure 4. Trust in organisations Section4.1 highlightsthatoverhalfofallcustomerstrustthetaxsystem(52%) andInlandRevenue(58%). TheseratingsarebasedontheOECDapproachto measuringtrust. Thissectionunpacksthedifferencesintrustlevelsbythe varioussubgroupsofinterest. Trust in the tax system – subgroup differences Differences in trust among Māori Differences in trust among Asian migrants 24-25 26-28 29-32 Who trusts the tax system and Inland Revenue? 23 Page number 5 Pacific peoples 33 24 Trust in the tax system – subgroup differences 5.1 Trust in the tax system -subgroup differences Asian migrants, and those aged 60 plus are more trusting of both Inland Revenue and the tax system (see Figure 5 and 6). Least trusting are Māori, particularly those actively involved in their iwi/hapū. Figure 5. Subgroup differences in trust in the tax system and Inland Revenue Aged 60+ (58%) Women| NZEuropean| Aged 36-59(49%) Asian (74%) Māori(30%) NZ born(45%) Māoriactively involved in iwi/ hapū(26%) 1000 Demographic groups less likely than average (52%) to trust the tax system Average trust in the taxsystem Demographic groups more likely than average (52%) to trust the tax system Men (56%)Migrants (63%)Asian migrants (78%) 52% Aged 60+ (67%) Women (54%) Asian migrants (80%) Māori (39%) Aged 36-45 (53%) Māori actively involved in iwi / hapū (32%) 1000 Demographic groups less likely than average (58%) to trust IR Average trust inthe Inland Revenue Demographic groups more likely than average (58%) to trust IR Men (63%) Migrants (68%)Asian (74%) 58% Trust in Inland Revenue - subgroup differences Figure 6. Subgroup differences in trust in the tax system and Inland Revenue NZ born (52%) Base size: All respondents (n=3,768). Excludes unsure and prefer not to say responses. Base size: All respondents (n=3,768). Excludes unsure and prefer not to say responses. 25 Trust in the tax system – subgroup differences 5.1 Trust in the tax system Those who feel they are on the margins of society and those who want spending on social welfare increased tend to be less trusting of the tax system and Inland Revenue (see Figure 7 and 8). The extent to which people trust Inland Revenue and the tax system also more broadly reflects the extent to which they are willing to trust more generally (at both an interpersonal level and a wider institutional level). Māori are over-represented on many of the factors which relate to low trust levels. Figure 7. Subgroup differences in trust in the tax system Views globalisation as good (63%) Feel too little is spent on social welfare (39%) High interpersonal trust (70%) Feel unfairly treated within society | Dissatisfied with life (31%) Low interpersonal trust (30%) Views globalisation as bad | Low institutional trust (29%) 1000 Demographic groups less likely than average (52%) to trust the tax system Average trust in the taxsystem Demographic groups more likely than average (52%) to trust the tax system Feel fairly treated within society | Feel right amount spent on social welfare (59%) High institutional trust (75%) 52% Views globalisation as good (68%) Feel too much is spent on social welfare (52%) High institutional trust (80%) Dissatisfied with life | Views globalisation as bad (38%) Feel too little is spent on social welfare (45%) Low institutional trust | Feel unfairly treated within society (37%) 1000 Demographic groups less likely than average (58%) to trust IR Average trust inthe Inland Revenue Demographic groups more likely than average (58%) to trust IR High interpersonal trust (76%) 58% Trust in Inland Revenue Figure 8. Subgroup differences in trust in Inland Revenue Base size: All respondents (n=3,768). Excludes unsure and prefer not to say responses. Base size: All respondents (n=3,768). Excludes unsure and prefer not to say responses. Feel fairly treated within society | Feel right amount spent on social welfare (65%) Low interpersonal trust (34%) 26 Differences in trust among Māori 5.2 Female, 46-59 years, Māori, Individual ForMāori,likeotherInlandRevenuecustomers, trustisbuiltovertime.Whanaungatanga– relationshipsarefundamental.Derivedfrom whānau,thefoundationalunityofMāorisociety, whanaungatangaaffirmsthecentralityofwhānau- likerelationshipsandwaysofworkingtogether thatsupporttheinterestofthe‘whānau’orthe collective. Inherentwithinwhanaungatangaarethe "rightsandresponsibilities,commitmentsand obligations,andsupportsthatarefundamentalto theeffectivefunctioningandwellbeingofthe whānauorcollectivity.” 7 Whanaungatangahasa timedimension,thatspansthepast,presentand futureandelevatestheimportanceofmaintaining goodrelationships. Goodrelationshipsallowforthe acknowledgementofobligationsandpastactsof generosityandenabletangibleexpressionsof reciprocitytobechannelled. Because for me as a Māori, they’re not doing anything for us. If anything, they are making it worse and the rates for Māori are so much worse... so many are in prisons, the health system is failing them... The qualitative research identified several factors that influence trust. Some are specific to Māori experiences of customer service and some are often linked to personal and cultural values as well as social, cultural and historical factors. Significantly lower levels of trust in the tax system among Māori reflects a wider distrust of government institutions and feelings of marginalisation. There is a sense that Māori feel they don’t get a fair deal and can be marginalized and overlooked by the political system. For Māori, historical trust issues can go back generations and influence trust in government and government agencies today. Male, 60+ years, Māori, Individual “I think Māori as a people we don't trust easily ...and it takes a long time to build relationships with Māori. It's a historical issue, we've been lied to and we paid the price...and because we lost land.” Female, 46-59 years, Māori, Individual “I have seen it in my years how Māori are treated and that is where my trust issues come from. From my tūpuna\[ancestors\] and my mum and all that generation. How they have struggled over the years, you know? It goes back decades and you just learn the history of what happened to us as people, as Māori people and how it is still happening today.” Negativegovernmentagencyexperiencescolourthepresent; andgiveriseto anexpectationthattheseexperienceswillberepeated 8 . Theseexperiences fuelnegativeperceptionsofgovernmentagenciesandmeanMāoriareoften ontheirguard,orsupersensitisedtoexperiencingmoreofthesame. 27 Differences in trust among Māori 5.2 EvenwhereMāorihavenothadnegative experiencesofInlandRevenue,thereisa senseofinevitabilitythatit’sonlya matterof timebeforetheyhaveapoorornegative customerserviceexperience. Female, 46-59 years, Māori, Individual “Experiencing racism inside government. ...It lurks there, not fully but in the back of my mind it’s always there.” “Within my whānau I’m the only one that has gone on to university and I’m quite politically minded. When you look at our history I’m sceptical about how we (Māori) will be treated in the future. History tells us, well our experience tells us that you can’t trust the system. It hasn’t always treated us fairly.” Male, 26-35 years, Māori, Individual Female, 46-59 years, Māori, Individual “I haven’t had any bad experiences with them (Inland Revenue.) I trust that they have been able to process my tax return each year and. I’ve never had any issues really. So, I have trusted them up until the time when they don’t do what they need to do.” Māoriaccepttheneedtopaytaxastheyknowitpaysfora rangeofsocialservicesand infrastructure. However,theyquestionhowtaxesarespent. Theytendtofeelthattax spendingis notdirectedtowhereit’smostneeded. 28 Differences in trust among Māori 5.2 Atthesametimethereisa sensethat thetaxationsystemfavourssome peoplemorethanothersandthatthe benefitsarenotdistributedequitably. Female, 46-59 years, Māori, Individual “Yeah, I don’t mind paying taxes if it helps all of us in New Zealand. But I do mind paying high amounts of taxes, especially if you really can’t see too much change. Over the years, I just seem to see things going on things that aren’t really helping our people. I mean, all New Zealanders really.” “Tax spending is not directed to where it’s needed. If I think about where our taxes are going and I think that they are spending it all on these new roads and planting trees and we have got people that are homeless and who are starving. Why aren’t they putting that money from the roads into getting these people into homes... So, that’s my perception of ... you know, you see all these new roads getting built and you think –we don’t need these roads, fix up the railway so we can have less traffic on the roads, or invest all that money into health or education for the future of our next generation.” Female, 46-59 years, Māori, Individual Female, 46-59 years, Māori, Individual “The tax system favours the rich and big business. For me, it is that the rich are getting richer and the poor are getting nothing.” 29 Differences in trust among Asian migrants 5.3 ThequantitativeresearchidentifiesAsianmigrantsasoneofthe mosttrustingofInlandRevenueandthetaxsystem. The qualitativeresearchprovidesinsightsastowhythesedifferences existandhowtheseviewshavebeenformed. Criticaltothisarethe comparisonstheymakewiththeircountryoforigin,ata societal levelandwhenit comestotax. Atabroadlevel,intervieweesspokeaboutdifferencesbetween theircountryoforiginandNewZealandinrelationtohowtrusting weareasa nation.Overall,theyfeelthatNewZealandersexhibit higherlevelsoftrusttowardsothers,includingthosewhoare unknowntothem. Thisisevidentintheirinteractionswith strangers,aswellasgeneralobservationsofhowpeoplebehavein publicplaces. Examplesgivenincludestrangerslendingthemitems andarelaxedattitudetoleavingpersonalitemsunattendedin publicspaces. AhighersenseofsafetywithinNewZealand communitiesis alsoseentocontributetothis. Commentsincluded: Female, 26-35 years, Asian migrant, individual “That was the first thing that I noticed here when I came, even when you are passing somebody they just smile, even if they don't know you. We never used to do that in \[home country\].” Male, 26-35 years, Asian migrant, individual “You don't really show off your phone but here you can freely use it anywhere. Like earlier we went swimming at the park we just left our belongings on the side ...and you can't do that in the \[home country\] it would be gone in five seconds.” Female, 18-25 years, Asian migrant, individual “Back home you always had to keep an eye on your belongings and pick pockets are everywhere. So here, just because the culture is safer and the environment, you don't have to be that cautious.” 30 Differences in trust among Asian migrants 5.3 ThisfindingthatAsianmigrantstendtofeelNew Zealandersaretrustworthyhasbeensubstantiatedbythe quantitativeresearch,whichfoundthatAsianmigrants havea higherthanaverageleveloftrustinNewZealanders (71%vs. 56%). It is possiblethatAsianmigrantsexperience societydifferentlytothosebornhere. Inlinewiththis,Asianmigrantsspokeabouthavinga high leveloftrustintheNewZealandgovernment,oftendueto thiscountry’sdemocraticvotingsystemandmore transparentsystemsandpoliciescomparedtotheirhome country. Somealsohighlightedalackofcorruption amongstpoliticiansascontributingtothisview: Female, 18-25 years, Asian migrant, individual “For me I'm more trusting with organisations here especially in the government, because I have done my work visa application and it was so smooth... I just felt that the whole process was unbiased, and I was granted a visa based on my qualifications and not because I know someone from the government.” Male, 26-35 years, Asian migrant, individual “In \[home country\], because we can't choose our government, so it doesn’t matter if we trust it or not.” 31 Differences in trust among Asian migrants 5.3 Similarly,whenconsideringtheNewZealandtaxsystem andInlandRevenue,intervieweesoftenmadecomparisons withtheircountryoforigin. Despitesomefeelingthattaxes are“veryhigh”inNewZealand,bothInlandRevenueand thetaxsystemaregenerallyviewedmorefavourably,and individualsindicatedthattheyhavehigherlevelsoftrust inboth. Keyfactorswhichhadcontributedtotheseviewsincludea perceptionthattheuseoftaxmoniesismorevisibleand transparentwithinNewZealand. Thisincludesspendingon publicfacilitiesandservices: Male, 26-35 years, Asian migrant, individual “Here you can see, you can go to the park and enjoy the services, clean parks and public toilets are very clean.” Male, 18-25 years, Asian migrant, individual “It's like there is no transparency in the \[home country\], you can't see where your taxes are going.” Male, 36-45 years, Asian migrant, individual “I would say the portion they take from my wages is about the same, but in \[home country\] I don't know where the tax went to. And here, I guess the benefit or return to my kids or the other public service, I know where the money goes to.” SomespokeaboutInlandRevenueproactivelyprovidingtaxrefunds, whichtheyhadneverexperiencedbefore.Ascanbeobservedinthe extractsbelow,thishadplayeda keyroleinbuildingtrustwiththe organisation: 32 Differences in trust among Asian migrants 5.3 OthershighlightedInlandRevenue’smoreopenandstreamlined processesashavingcontributedtorelativelyhightrustlevels: Female, 26-35 years, Asian migrant, individual “And the Inland Revenue gives us tax refunds. We trust it. They gave us money, that means it's honest...because back in \[home country\] we never have such a thing so it's like a bonus for us.” “My impression with the tax refund is they wouldn’t take more than what you're required to contribute so they wouldn’t take advantage of you... For them to go out of their way, and \[they\] will also put money and effort into completing all these tax refunds.” Female, 18-25 years, Asian migrant, individual Female, 26-35 years, Asian migrant, individual “Online portal, your personal financials are online and it's accurate. You don't need to \[at the\] end of the year, you don't need to worry about anything so it's easy access, interactions, easy platform.” “You can easily check what you have contributed so far, so at any time I can just log into my account and see what I have shared so far. I think that’s also one of the reasons why I trust because of the transparency.” Female, 18-25 years, Asian migrant, individual 33 Pacific peoples 5.4 How much do you personally trust the following in New Zealand? Attheoutsetoftheresearch,Pacificpeopleswere identifiedasanaudienceofinterest,duetolowerlevels oftrustobservedinpreviousworkinthisarea undertakenbyInlandRevenue.Thedifferences betweenPacificpeoplesandtheaverageforall customersarenotsignificantatthe95%confidence level(seeFigure9). Thereis,however,a significantly higherlevelofdistrustinthetaxsystemamongPacific peoples(20%vs. 12%). Because of the limited differences in trust, Pacific peoples are not a core focus of this report. The tax system Q 14% 20% 35% 36% 51% 44% Inland Revenue Distrust (rating 0 to3)Neutral (rating 4to 6)Trust (rating 7 to10) Base size: All respondents (n=3768), Pacific peoples (n=119). Excludes unsure and prefer not to say responses. The tax system 10% 12% 32% 36% 58% 52% Inland Revenue TOTAL PACIFIC PEOPLES Figure 9. Differences in trust in the tax system and Inland Revenue – Pacific peoples Thequalitativeresearchidentifiedmultipledriversoftrustwhichwerethen includedinthequantitativesurvey. Thissectionlooksattherelationships betweenallthesedriversandtheirimpactontrustinInlandRevenue,and ultimately,thetaxsystem. Useful definitions The relationship between trust in Inland Revenue and trust in the tax system Drivers of trust – individuals 35 36 37-42 What are the drivers of trust? 34 Page number 6 Drivers of trust –business 43-47 35 Useful definitions What is variance? Varianceisawaytomeasurehowfarasetof numbersarespreadoutfromthemean(oraverage), itcanrangefrom0%to100%.Ifa modelexplains 100%ofthevarianceinavariable(orsurvey question),thenithascapturedeverythingthat influencesa person’sresponseforthatvariable. 6.1 Whatisa pathmodel? Apathmodelshowsthehypothesiseddirectional relationshipsbetweena setofvariables,andtherelative strengthoftheserelationships. Itisusedtodetermine whatvariablesaredrivingasingleoutcomevariable (e.g.trustinthetaxsystem),andtherelative importanceeachofthesevariableshavewhenit comes toinfluencingtheoutcomevariable. 36 The relationship between trust in Inland Revenue and trust in the tax system Asnotedinsection4.1 thereisa verystrongrelationship betweentrustinthetaxsystem,andtrustinInland Revenue,suggestingthatmanyNewZealandersdonot distinguishbetweenthetwo. TrustinInlandRevenueexplainstwothirdsofthevariance intrustinthetaxsystem(r2=.68)(seeFigure10). This meansthatiftrustinInlandRevenueimproves,youcan expecttoseeasimilarlevelofimprovementin perceptionsoftrustinthetaxsystem. Becauseofthis,the restofthereportfocusesonthedriversoftrustinInland Revenue. 6.2 Trust in Inland Revenue explains 68% of the variance in trust in the tax system Trust in Inland RevenueTrust in the taxsystem Base size: All respondents (n=3,768). Excludes unsure and prefer not to say responses. Figure 10. Variance in trust in the tax system explained by trust in Inland Revenue 37 Drivers of trust – individuals 6.3 Variance in trust explained by the path analysis Thissectionlooksatthevariousdriversoftrustamongindividuals. Weconductedseparatepathanalysesfor individualsandbusinessbecauseweanticipatedthattheremaybea differencebetweenindividualsandbusiness duetooftheirdifferentneeds. Howeverasdetailedinsection6.4 thedifferencesweuncoveredwerelimited. WehavefocusedourpathanalysisonthefactorsInland Revenuehassomeinfluenceover. Thesefactorsaccount for22%ofthevarianceintrustinInlandRevenue(see Figure11). Factorswhichcan’tbeinfluencedbyInland Revenue(seenextsection)accountfor25%ofthevariance intrust. Thismeansthatthevariablesinthequestionnaire explainupto47%ofthevarianceintrustamong individuals. However,itisuncleartowhatextentthe explainedvarianceoverlaps,assomeofthefactorswhich can’tbeinfluencedbyInlandRevenuecouldimpactthe otherdrivers. Theremainingvarianceisduetofactors whicharenotcapturedwithinthesurvey. Variance explained by the path analysis individuals 22%25% of the variance in trust in Inland Revenue can be explained by variables Inland Revenue has some influence over. of the variance in trust in Inland Revenue can be explained by variables which can’t be influenced by Inland Revenue. Base size: All individuals (n=2,763) 1 Figure 11. Amount of variance explained by variables Inland Revenue can and cannot influence 38 Drivers of trust – individuals 6.3 Figure12showsthefactorswhichInland Revenuecannotinfluence,inrankorderof theirimpactontrustinInlandRevenue. An individual’sinclinationtotrustinstitutions andotherpeople(interpersonaltrust)has thebiggestimpact,followedbyage, perceptionsofglobalisation,andperceptions ofbeingtreatedfairlybysociety. Base size: All individuals (n=2,763) Importance of factors Inland Revenue cannot influence Ranked importance of the factors Inland Revenue cannot influence individuals Highest importance Lowest importance Institutional trust Interpersonal trust Age Perceptions of globalisation Perceptions of being treated fairly by society Ethnicity New Zealand born / migrant Perceptions of social welfare spend in New Zealand Community engagement KiwiSaver customer Gender Religion / spirituality 2 Figure 12. Ranked importance of the factors Inland Revenue cannot control – individuals 39 Drivers of trust – individuals 6.3 Figure 13 shows the relative importance of each of the drivers included in the path analysis on determining trust in Inland Revenue. Perceptions of Inland Revenue being on the side of the taxpayer, dealing with everyone fairly and being reliable are the top three drivers of trust in Inland Revenue. This means that improving these perceptions will have the biggest impact on trust in Inland Revenue. However, it’s worth noting that many of the weaker drivers feed into the stronger ones, so they should not be discounted (the path model on page 40 sets out how these relationships work). Base size: All individuals (n=2,763) Relative importance of each driver in determining trust in Inland Revenue Relative importance of each factor to building trust in Inland Revenue among individuals 14% 13% 11% 8% 8% 7% 6% 5% 5% 4% 4% 3% 3% 2% 2% 2% 2% 1% 1% IR is on my side IR deals with everyone fairly IR is reliable IR is accountable to the people IR trusts me to do the right thing IR has a human touch IR openly admits when mistakes are made IR is straightforward IR shows understanding when people make mistakes IR will address any mistakes quickly IR is flexible with people who make a mistake IR is consistent IR rarely makes mistakes IR is good at weeding out the real villains IR is understanding IR is empathetic IR is competent IR is helpful IR is kind 3 Figure 13. Relative importance of each factor to building trust in Inland Revenue 40 Drivers of trust – individuals 6.3 Thepathmodel(seeFigure14 overleaf)showshowthevariables arerelatedtooneanother. The strengthoftherelationship betweenvariablesissignifiedby thethicknessoftheline connectingthem(thethickerthe line,thestrongertherelationship). Inaddition,thearrowsindicatethe directionoftherelationship(i.e. whatimpactswhat).Thedirection oftherelationshipishypothesised andisinformedbybothdesk researchandthequalitative research. Path model -individuals Customerexperience(Inland Revenueisstraightforward)and reciprocity(InlandRevenuetrusts metodotherightthing)arethe linchpinsoftheentiremodel. The largearrowssignifythattheyare relatedtomanyofthevariablesin themodel. Improvingperceptions ofthesetwothingswillhavea positiveimpactonalltheother variablesinthemodel. Themodelshowstwomain pathwaystobuildingtrustin InlandRevenue;afunctional pathway,anda relationship-based pathway. Whatthissuggestsis that buildingtrustrequiresatwo- prongedapproach. Ata functional level,InlandRevenueneedsto fosterperceptionsofbeing straight-forward,reliableand capable. Atthesametime,it needs tobuildarelationshipwith customersbydemonstratingthat itisacaringorganisationwhich treatsthecustomerasanequal- workingwithpeople(ratherthan againstthem)tocomeupwitha solutionthatworksforallparties. . Thesetwoapproachesreflect differentelementsofcustomer experiencei.e. makingiteasyand buildingarelationship. Later,we lookatthedifferentcustomer touchpointswhichhavethe potentialtobuildanderodetrust. IR is goodat weedingout the real villains 41 Drivers of trust – individuals 6.3 Path model -individuals IR is flexible with people who makea mistake IR willaddress any mistakes quickly IR has a humantouch •Is empathetic •Is kind •Is understanding IR shows understanding when people make mistakes IR trusts me to do the right thing IR is straightforward Trust in the tax system IRrarely makes mistakes IR openly admitswhen mistakesare made IR is on myside IR is accountableto thepeople IR deals with everyone fairly IR is reliable Trust in IR IR is competent •Is consistent •Is helpful Relationship basedpathway Functionalpathway Note: The wider the line, the stronger therelationship. 42 Drivers of trust – individuals 6.3 Figure15comparestherelativeimportanceofeach factortobuildingtrustinInlandRevenueamong individualsandMāori. PerceptionsofInlandRevenue beingonthesideofthetaxpayerhaveabigger influenceontrustamongstMāori,asdoperceptions ofInlandRevenuebeingaccountabletothepeople. TobuildtrustinInlandRevenueamongstMāorithe focusshouldbeonimprovingtheseperceptionsin particular. Base size: All individuals (n=2,763); Māori (n=255). Differences in the importance of drivers in trust in Inland Revenue for Māori Relative importance of each factor to building trust in Inland Revenue Differences between Māori and all individuals 14% 13% 11% 8% 8% 7% 6% 5% 5% 4% 4% 3% 3% 2% 2% 2% 2% 1% 1% 17% 9% 9% 13% 8% 9% 6% 4% 4% 4% 4% 1% 2% 0% 3% 3% 1% 1% 1% IR is on my side IR deals with everyone fairly IR is reliable IR is accountable to the people IR trusts me to do the right thing IR has a human touch IR openly admits when mistakes are made IR is straightforward IR shows understanding when people make mistakes IR will address any mistakes quickly IR is flexible with people who make a mistake IR is consistent IR rarely makes mistakes IR is good at weeding out the real villains IR is understanding IR is empathetic IR is competent IR is helpful IR is kind 3 +3 -4 -2 +5 - +2 - -1 -1 - - -2 -1 -2 +1 +1 -1 - Difference Figure 15. Relative importance of each factor to building trust in Inland Revenue – among Individuals and Māori 43 Drivers of trust – business 6.4 Variance in trust explained by the business path model Thissectionlooksatthevariousdriversoftrustamongbusinesscustomers. Weproduceda separatepathmodelforbusinesscustomers.Thispath model(whichincludesonlythevariableswhichInlandRevenuehas someinfluenceover)explains21%ofthevarianceintrustinInland Revenue(seeFigure16). Factorswhichcan’tbeinfluencedbyInland Revenue(seenextsection)accountfor20%ofthevarianceintrust amongbusinesses. Thismeansthatthevariablesinourquestionnaireexplainupto41%of thevarianceintrustamongbusinesses. However,aspreviouslynoted,it is uncleartowhatextenttheexplained varianceoverlaps,assomeofthefactorswhichcan’tbeinfluencedby InlandRevenuecouldimpacttheotherdrivers. Theremainingvariance isduetofactorswhichwehavenotcapturedwithinthesurvey. Variance explained by the path analysis business 21%20% of the variance in trust in Inland Revenue can be explained by variables Inland Revenue has some influence over. of the variance in trust in Inland Revenue can be explained by variables which can’t be influenced by Inland Revenue. Base size: All business (n=1,005) 1 Figure 16. Amount of variance explained by variables Inland Revenue can and cannot influence 44 Drivers of trust – business 6.4 Figure17showsthefactorswhichInlandRevenue cannotinfluence,inrankorderoftheirimpactontrust inInlandRevenue. Forbusinesscustomers,aswith individuals,institutionalandinterpersonaltrust,age, ethnicityandperceptionsofbeingtreatedfairlyby societyarefactorswhichhavea greaterimpactontrust inInlandRevenue. Base size: All individuals (n=2,763) Importance of factors Inland Revenue cannot influence Ranked importance of the factors Inland Revenue cannot influence business Highest importance Lowest importance Institutional trust Interpersonal trust Age Ethnicity Perceptions of being treated fairly by society Perceptions of social welfare spend in New Zealand New Zealand born / migrant Industry 2 Figure 17. Ranked importance of the factors Inland Revenue cannot control – businesses 45 Drivers of trust – business 6.4 Figure 18 shows the relative importance of each of the drivers included in the business path analysis. As with individuals, perceptions of Inland Revenue dealing with everyone fairly, being reliable, and being on the side of the taxpayer are the top three drivers of trust in Inland Revenue. Improving these perceptions will have the biggest impact on trust in Inland Revenue among businesses. Base size: All businesses (n=1,005) Relative importance of each driver in determining trust in Inland Revenue Relative importance of each factor to building trust in Inland Revenue among business 15% 12% 11% 10% 8% 6% 5% 5% 4% 4% 4% 3% 3% 3% 2% 2% 1% 1% 1% 1% IR deals with everyone fairly IR is reliable IR is on my side IR is accountable to the people IR trusts me to do the right thing IR has a human touch IR shows understanding when people make mistakes IR openly admits when mistakes are made IR is flexible with people who make a mistake IR is consistent IR will address any mistakes quickly IR is good at weeding out the real villains IR is straightforward IR rarely makes mistakes Easily completing tasks on the IR website IR is understanding IR is competent IR is helpful IR is empathetic IR is kind 3 Figure 18. Relative importance of each factor to building trust in Inland Revenue - businesses 46 Drivers of trust – business 6.4 We produced a second path model for businesses (see Figure 19 overleaf). The path model shows the directional relationships between variables, as well as the strength of these relationships. Path model -business The path model for businesses is largely consistent with the path model for individuals. Once again, reciprocity (Inland Revenue trusts me to do the right thing), and customer experience (Inland Revenue is straightforward) are the linchpins for both. In addition, both models reveal that there is a functional pathway and a relationship- based pathway to building trust In Inland Revenue. The main difference between the two models is that, for business customers, easily completing tasks on the Inland Revenue website feeds into perceptions of being straight-forward. This likely reflects greater levels of interaction with Inland Revenue and the website for business customers. What this means for Inland Revenue, is that a similar strategy will likely work for both individuals and businesses, however, ensuring the website is easy to use, and striving to improve this, is somewhat more important to trust perceptions among business customers. IR is goodat weedingout the real villains 47 Drivers of trust – business 6.4 Path model -business IR is flexible with people who make a mistake IR willaddress any mistakes quickly IR shows understanding when people make mistakes IR trusts me to do the right thing IR is straightforward Trust in the tax system IRrarely makes mistakes IR openly admitswhen mistakesare made IR is on myside IR is accountableto thepeople IR deals with everyone fairly IR is reliable Trust in IR IR is competent •Is consistent •Is helpful Relationship basedpathway Functionalpathway Easily completing tasks on the IR website IR is kind •Is empathetic •Is understanding IR has a humantouch Note: The wider the line, the stronger therelationship. Individuals Māori Business 49-54 55-60 61-66 What can Inland Revenue do to improve trust? 48 Page number 7 49 Individuals 7.1 Perceptions of Inland Revenue ThissectionlooksatthewaysinwhichInlandRevenuecouldimprovetrustamongindividuals. Itidentifieswhichperceptions InlandRevenueshouldfocusonimproving,andwhichareimportanttomaintain. Inaddition,itidentifieswhichpositive touchpointshavethemostpotentialforbuildingtrust,andwhichnegativetouchpointsaremostdamagingtotrustperceptions. Thequalitativeresearchuncovereda numberofdifferentperceptionsof InlandRevenuewhichcouldimpacttrustintheorganisation. Tomeasure howwidelyheldtheseperceptionsare,weaskedrespondentstoindicate theextenttowhichtheyagreedwitha seriesofstatements. Figure20 showsthelevelofagreementwitheachofthesestatements(identifiedas driversoftrust),bytheirrelativeimportancetobuildingtrust. PerceptionsofInlandRevenuebeingonthesideofthetaxpayerand havingahumantouchhavebeenidentifiedaspriorityareasfor improvement.Agreementwiththesestatementsislow,howevertheir relativeimportancetobuildingtrustis high. Ontheotherhand,perceptionsofInlandRevenueasbeingreliable, trustingcustomerstodotherightthing,andbeingaccountabletothe peopleareareaswhichareimportantforInlandRevenuetomaintain. Agreementwiththesestatementsishigh,asistheirimportanceto perceptionsoftrustinInlandRevenue. Perceptions of Inland Revenue by their relative importance to building trust Individuals Base size: All individuals (n=2,763) 1 Inland Revenue trusts me to do the rightthing Inland Revenue is accountable to the people Inland Revenue is reliable 25%40%50%55%60%65%70% 45% Inland Revenue has a human touch Inland Revenue is on my side Areas to improve –high importance, low agreement Areas to maintain –high importance, high agreement Inland Revenue deals with everyone fairly Inland Revenue rarely makes mistakes Inland Revenue openly admits when mistakes are made Inland Revenue is good at weeding out the real villains 30%35%20% % agree Relative importance to building trust Inland Revenue shows understanding when people make mistakes Inland Revenue will address any mistakes quickly Inland Revenue is flexible with people who make a mistake Figure 20. Perceptions of Inland Revenue by their relative importance to building trust 50 Individuals 7.1 Touchpoints where trust can be built / eroded Participantswereaskedtoindicatewhethertheyhadexperiencedor heardofthetouchpointsshowninFigure21.Thesetouchpointswere identifiedinthequalitativeresearchasmomentswheretherewas potentialfortrusttobeearnedorlost. Thesurveyanalysishighlightsa numberofkeyareastofocusontobuild trustamongindividuals. Theseinclude: •Call waiting times, •Ease of dealing with Inland Revenue, •Taking an empathetic approach when dealing with customers, •Ease of completing a tax return, and •And consistent messaging. Thesetouchpointsoccurthemostfrequentlyandhaveanegative impactontrustinInlandRevenue.Thereis anopportunitytoimprove trustbyincreasingexposuretopositiveadvertisingorcommunications. AsshowninFigure21,individualswhohaveseena positiveadvertising ormarketingcommunicationareconsiderablymorelikelytotrust InlandRevenue,thanthosewhohavenot(anettdifferenceof21 percentagepoints). However,only8%oftheindividualsrecallhaving seenorheardpositiveadvertisingcommunications. Impact of touchpoints on trust Individuals Base size: All individuals (n=2,763) Impact on Trust in IR (difference in rating between those with experience of touchpoint and those without) Positive impact on trust Negative impact on trust Goodservice Completing a tax return moreeasily thanexpected Easilycompletingtasks on the IRwebsite Savingmoneybycompleting a taxreturnratherthan usinga third party Receivingtaxrefunds orpaymentsontime Customersableto easilyaccesstheir tax and income information Positiveadvertisingormarketing communications -50% -40% -30% -20% -10% 10% 20% 30% 0%10%40%50% Prioritiesfor imp rove me nt 20%30% 50% Opportunitiesfor greaterexposure 40% Having to wait too long to receive refunds from the IR Finding it difficult to complete a tax return Feeling like IR is too difficult to deal with Customers waiting for far too long on the phone to get through to IR IR showing a lack of empathy Receiving conflicting messages from IR staff Media stories about IR successfully prosecuting tax avoiders Customers blamed for circumstances outside their control Poor service Customers being treated like criminals unnecessarily Receiving an unexpected tax refund IR arranging an affordable payment plan for money owed IR giving customers time to rectify mistakes IR failing to protect customers’ personal data IR accessing customers’ bank accounts without their knowledge IR not doing what they say they will IR penalising customers as soon as they can Enabling customers to pay back money owed in a manageable time frame Clearly laid out tax and income information Easily finding information on the IR website % experiencing / hearing about each touchpoint Figure 21. Impact of touchpoints on trust - individuals 51 Individuals 7.1 Basic principles of building and maintaining trust Findingsfromqualitativeresearchrevealthattrustwith customersisbuiltovertimebutcaneasilybeerodedwhen customersexperiencenegativeinteractionswiththe organisation. ItisthereforeimportantthatInlandRevenue hasa thoroughunderstandingofthekeyprinciplesthatboth buildandmaintaintrustwithcustomers.Thekeyelements tothis,areoutlinedbelow. Female, 46-59 years, NZ European, business “And communication is an absolute priority... sometimes people have actually been owed tax and they don't even know. Or just even what you should be paying. \[What difference does it make?\] Because it's not like this shadowy figure that comes in the night that you know nothing about and steals your blanket and leaves you lying there in the freezing cold.” Male, 36-45 years, NZ European, individual “Previously you wouldn’t be told of changes and so you would end up thinking everything was all good and then six months later you have got a bill to pay, it's like well why couldn’t you have told me that beforehand? ... It's like they're trying to rip you off.” Forsome,thisalsoincludedtargetedmarketingcommunicationswhichseekto ‘educate’customersregardingrelevanttaxissues: Male, 26-35 years, Pacific, individual “I think education is good, a lot of people don't understand... And if it's a user-friendly way, ‘tax for dummies’ or something ... Yeah, I would trust them a little bit more. I would feel like they're doing more than just taking money, I would feel that reciprocation, like they're giving something back.” Clear and proactive communication: This includes Inland Revenue being proactive with regard to communicating customer responsibilities and obligations, any changes to systems or processes, and situations where tax monies are either owed or owing. 52 Individuals 7.1 Transparencyandeasyaccessto information:ForInlandRevenueto buildandmaintaintrustwith customers,itisimportantthatthe organisationisopenandtransparent. Forsomepeople,thisincludesbeing abletoeasilyaccessinformation online; otherswanttofeelconfident thattheorganisationisnotkeeping importantinformationfromits customers: Male, 26-35 years, NZ European, individual “It's slowly getting better ... there is more information you can get off the website and the less you have to deal with people, the ambiguity that that brings into things.” Male, 36-45 years, NZ European, individual “If all the information is there and you can see it there, nothing being hidden. It's when stuff is hidden from you or the perception that it's hidden from you, you're not given all the relevant information ... Then your brain starts thinking what is your end game? What are you trying to do? Are you just trying to make me stuff up so I'm going to owe you more money?” Basic principles of building and maintaining trust 53 Individuals 7.1 Streamlinedprocessesandsystems: Trustwithcustomersmaybeerodedif InlandRevenue’ssystemsareoverly complicatedand/orcreatebarriersin peoplebeingabletoaccess,orinteract with,theorganisationoritsservices. Male, 26-35 years, NZ European, individual “I don't think it's just the action of giving money away \[via tax refunds\] that makes someone trustworthy, it's the whole process of how they're qualifying and how they're doing it. And how hard or easy they make it.” Basic principles of building and maintaining trust Male, 36-45 years, NZ European, individual “When I was share milking I got into a little bit of trouble with Inland Revenue and I had penalties and all that sort of thing, and if you didn’t pay what you had to pay on the day you incurred 10% penalties. But when they owed you money you could be waiting months for that money and yet there is no penalties involved. So to me it's a two-way street – if you’re going to penalise me then you need to be paying me on time as well.” Female, 26-35 years, Pacific, individual “They're helpful, like they work with you, for example if you have like arrears to pay they will give you a realistic payment arrangement that suits your income that you have.” Aflexibleandempatheticapproach:Individualsfeel thatdemonstratingflexibilityandopennessto workingalongsidecustomersis keytobuildingtrust. Thisis animportantsignifierofreciprocitywithinthe relationship,andparticularlyrelevantininstances wherecustomershavefallenbehindwiththeirtax obligations: 54 Individuals 7.1 Acknowledgementofmistakes:Intheeventof mistakesbeingmadebyInlandRevenue,itis importantthattheseareacknowledgedand rectified. Thisnotonlyshowsthattheorganisation ishonestandtrustworthy,butalsodemonstrates thatitisworkingtoensurethaterrorsarenot repeated.Asevidentbelow,forsomecustomers,an apologyplaysanimportantrolewithinthis: Male, 46-59 years, NZ European, individual “If you are dealing with a company that never acknowledges that they make a mistake that means they will cover up ... at your expense. \[And if the mistake is acknowledged?\] It makes you feel that you can trust them more and I think it also may mean a difference in procedures...We should look at how we are doing things and maybe change.” Basic principles of building and maintaining trust Female, 46-59 years, NZ European, business “With the Inland Revenue there is information that you must give... Because to a lot of people it's really personal, they do need to be reliable, and that they should not be passing that on, and we need to be able to rely on that fact.” Secureandtrustworthysystems:Customersexpect thatanyinformationprovidedtoInlandRevenuewill bekeptsecure. Thisincludesprotectionagainst externalITthreats,aswellasdatanotbeingshared withotherorganisations: 55 Māori 7.2 Perceptions of Inland Revenue ThissectionlooksatthewaysinwhichInlandRevenuecouldimprovetrustamongMāori 9 . ItshowsthedifferencesinhowMāori perceiveInlandRevenueandhighlightsthoseareaswhicharemostimportanttoimprovefroma Māoriperspective. Italsodetails thetouchpointswhichhavethemostpotentialforbuildingtrustamongMāori,aswellasprioritiesforimprovement. Figure22showsthedifferenceinperceptionsofInland RevenuebetweenMāoriandallindividuals. Perceptions ofInlandRevenueasreliable,accountabletothe people,andfairaremostdifferentfromtheaverage, howeveralldifferencesnotedinthecharttotheright arestatisticallysignificant. Base size: All individuals (n=2,763); Māori (n=255) 1 Perceptions of Inland Revenue differences between all individuals and Māori 69% 62% 49% 46% 43% 40% 35% 34% 32% 32% 54% 40% 30% 28% 35% 29% 23% 24% 23% 20% IR trusts me to do the right thing IR is reliable IR is accountable to the people IR deals with everyone fairly IR will address any mistakes quickly IR shows understanding when people make mistakes IR has a human touch IR is good at weeding out the real villains IR is on my side IR openly admits when mistakes are made -15 -22 -19 -18 -8 -11 -12 -10 -9 -12 Difference differences to total individuals Figure 22. Perceptions of Inland Revenue – differences between all individuals and Māori All individualsMāori 56 Perceptions of Inland Revenue Figure23showsthelevelofagreementwithkeyperceptionsof InlandRevenue,bytheirrelativeimportancetobuildingtrustin InlandRevenueamongMāori. PerceptionsofInlandRevenueasbeingonthesideofthe taxpayerandbeingaccountabletothepeoplearethetwomost importantfactorsforbuildingtrustamongMāori(asseenin section6.3.5),howeveragreementwiththesestatementsis relativelylow. Improvingtheseperceptionswillhavethebiggest impactontrustlevelsamongMāori. Perceptionsoffairnessand ofhavingahumantouch(beingkind,understanding,and empathetic)arealsopriorityareas. Perceptions of Inland Revenue by their relative importance to building trust Māori Base size: All Māori individuals (n=255) Inland Revenue trusts me to do the rightthing Inland Revenue has a human touch Inland Revenue is on my side Areas to improve –high importance, low agreement Areas to maintain –high importance, high agreement Inland Revenue deals with everyone fairly Inland Revenue rarely makes mistakes Inland Revenue openly admits when mistakes are made % agree Relative importance to building trust Inland Revenue shows understanding when people make mistakes Inland Revenue will address any mistakes quickly Inland Revenue is flexible with people who make a mistake Māori 7.2 ThissectionlooksatthewaysinwhichInlandRevenuecouldimprovetrustamongMāori 9 . ItshowsthedifferencesinhowMāori perceiveInlandRevenueandhighlightsthoseareaswhicharemostimportanttoimprovefroma Māoriperspective. Italsodetails thetouchpointswhichhavethemostpotentialforbuildingtrustamongMāori,aswellasprioritiesforimprovement. priority areas for improvement Inland Revenue is reliable Inland Revenue is accountable to the people 15%20%25%30%40%45%50%55%35% Figure 23. Perceptions of Inland Revenue by their relative importance to building trust among Māori 57 Touchpoints where trust can be built / eroded among Māori ConsistentwithIndividuals,callwaitingtimesandeaseofdealingwith Inlandrevenuearethekeyareastofocusonwhenlookingatbuilding trustamongMāori(seeFigure24). Thesurveyanalysisidentifiedanumberofopportunitiesforgreater exposure,threeofwhicharearoundtakingamoreunderstanding approach: •Giving customers time to rectify mistakes, •Arranging an affordable payment plan for money owed, and •Enabling customers to pay back money owed in a manageable timeframe. Other opportunities include: •Greater exposure to positive advertising or marketing communications, •Ensuring people know when they receive a tax refund, •Clearly laid out tax and income information, and •Ensuring it is easy to complete tasks on the Inland Revenue website. Impact of touchpoints on trust Māori Base size: All Māori individuals (n=255) Māori 7.2 Impact on Trust in IR (difference in rating between those with experience of touchpoint and those without) Positive impact on trust Negative impact on trust 10% 20% 30% 0%10%40%50% Prioritiesfor imp rove me nt 20%30% 50% Opportunitiesfor greaterexposure % experiencing / hearing about each touchpoint Goodservice Positive advertising or marketing communications 40% 50% 60% -60% -50% -40% -30% -20% -10% Customers waiting for far too long on the phone to get through to IR Customers able to easily access their tax and income information Poorservice IR penalisingcustomers as soon as they can IR showing a lack of empathy Receiving conflicting messages from IR staff Customers blamed for circumstances outside their control Feeling like IR is too difficult to deal with Customers being treated like criminals unnecessarily Waiting too long to receive refunds IR failing to protect customers’ personal data IR accessing customers’ bank accounts without their knowledge IR not doing what they say they will Media stories about IR successfully prosecuting tax avoiders Finding it difficult to complete a tax return Saving money by completing a tax return rather than using a third party Completing a tax return more easily than expected Receiving tax refunds or payments on time Easily finding information on the IR website Clearly laid out tax and income information Easily completing tasks on the IR website Receiving an unexpected tax refund IR giving customers time to rectify mistakes IR arranging an affordable payment plan for money owed IR enabling customers to pay back money owed in a manageable time frame Figure 24. Impact of touchpoints on trust - Māori 58 Maintaining / building trust among Māori Whanaungatanga (relationships) and whakawhanaungatanga (the building of relationships) are fundamental to building trust. Whanaungatanga means taking a relational and not transactional approach. Whakawhanaungatanga and building trusted relationships means the values of honesty and integrity are to the fore and often framed within Māori cultural values such as aroha, manaakitanga, mana and wairua. In practice, this means to build trust among Māori Inland Revenue should look to do the following: Female, 46-59 years, Māori, Individual “So, when I went down there, I was expecting and prepared to be defensive. I got such a shock that they were so friendly. I could explain my situation, they listened and I didn’t feel like I was being interrogated.” Demonstrate active listening and avoid assumptions: The complexity of the system should be acknowledged and there should be no automatic assumption or negative interpretation of Māori actions or intent. They should be given adequate opportunity to explain their position so they feel they are being listened to. Māori 7.2 Male, 60+ years, Māori, Individual “What I mean, so when you ring up there's an offer of help first rather than an accusation of something.” Female, 46-59 years, Māori, Individual “And not treated with suspicion, treated at least in the first instance with genuineness around helping.” 59 EnsureMāorifeelrespectedby frontlinestaff: From a Māori perspective, this means being greeted warmly and professionally and feeling that there is a genuine ethic of care with respect to their mental, emotional and spiritual wellbeing. Male, 26-35 years, NZ European, individual “My value set are Māori values. In my role as a manager or a leader I try to model or teach them about manaaki (ethic of care) and kaitiakitanga (to look after/protect). Just all the really strong values that we need in terms of respecting people. Making sure that visitors are welcomed, no one is ignored, and there is respect for one another, and honesty... and wairua. They can walk into the business and just feel a real warmth and respect you know.” Male, 36-45 years, NZ European, individual “Well actually Māori values because you know those terms that come to mind like maanaki and aroha. How we care for people, how we mind their hinengaro (mental and emotional wellbeing) and wairua (spiritual wellbeing).” Maintaining / building trust among Māori Māori 7.2 60 Honestyandintegrity intherelationship. Male, 60+ years, Māori, Individual “Trust is when you have reassurance that, or knowledge that another person will do what they say they're going to do, and that they will be true to their word, because I always say that your word is your mana, so if you don't follow through with what you say you're going to do, then your word is not worth anything, so how can you be believed to follow through at another time. To be trusted means that you have integrity and that keeps people connected and they feel safe, and that's really important in community.” Female, 46-59, Māori, Individual “I think honesty, even if you know, if you don't like it, you need to be able to say what you think you know, being honest. And If you can’t do what you committed to, what you said you would to then, you come back to the table. Trust is hard earned but easily lost. You come back and say, I'm sorry but this is how it is, and that you know, maybe not what I thought in the first instance, and this is why I've changed my mind.” Maintaining / building trust among Māori Māori 7.2 Thetrustbuildingactionsnotedabovearenottoodissimilartothosedescribedfornon-Māori customers.However,giventhathistoricaldistrustMāorihaveof‘thesystem’andthe pervasivenessofnegativeexperiencesofgovernmentagencies,Māoriwillneedtofeelthatthey arerespectedatallpointsofengagement. Thisis particularlyimportanttomitigatepastnegative experiencesandperceptionsandtocreatethespaceforwhakawhanaungatanga– thebuildingof openandtrustedrelationships. Ensuring staff do what they say they will do and own or take responsibility for past mistakes, even when not personally their doing. A genuine apology is a crucial part of taking ownership of past mistakes. 61 Perceptions of Inland Revenue Asdescribedinsection7.1.1 todeterminetheextenttowhichvarious perceptionsofInlandRevenueareheld,weaskedrespondentsto indicatewhethertheyagreedwitha seriesofstatements. Figure25 showsthelevelofagreementwitheachofthesestatementsamong businesses(identifiedasdriversoftrust),bytheirrelativeimportance tobuildingtrust Priorityareasforimprovementforbusinessesincludepushingthe ideaofInlandRevenuebeingonthesideofthetaxpayer,being accountabletothepeople,andensuringit dealswitheveryonefairly. Agreementwiththesestatementsislow,howevertheirrelative importancetobuildingtrustis high. Ontheotherhand,perceptionsofInlandRevenueasbeingreliable andtrustingcustomerstodotherightthingareimportantforInland Revenuetomaintain. Agreementwiththesestatementsis high,asis theirimportancetobuildingtrust. Perceptions of Inland Revenue by their relative importance to building trust Business Base size: All business (n=1,005) Areas to improve –high importance, low agreement Areas to maintain –high importance, high agreement Relative importance to building trust Business 7.3 ThissectionlooksatthewaysinwhichInlandRevenuecouldimprovetrustamongbusinesses. Aswiththeprevioustwosectionsit identifieswhich perceptionsInlandRevenueshouldfocusonimproving,andwhichareimportanttomaintain. Inaddition,it identifieswhichpositivetouchpoints havethemostpotentialforbuildingtrustamongbusinesses,andwhichnegativetouchpointsaremostdamagingtotrustperceptions. 55% IR dealswith everyonefairly IR is on myside IR is accountable tothe people IR has a human touch IR shows understandingwhen people make mistakes IRopenly admitswhen mistakesare made IR is flexible with people who make a mistake IR will addressany mistakesquickly IR is good at weeding outthe realvillains IR rarelymakes mistakes 20%30%40%60%70%80%50% % agree IR trusts me to do the right thing IR is reliable Figure 25. Perceptions of Inland Revenue by their relative importance to building trust - business 62 Touchpoints where trust can be built / eroded Consistentwithindividuals,keytouchpointstoimproveuponamongbusinesses are: Impact of touchpoints on trust Business Base size: All business (n=1,005) Impact on Trust in IR (difference in rating between those with experience of touchpoint and those without) Positive impact on trust Negative impact on trust 10% 20% 30% Prioritiesfor imp rove me nt 50% Opportunitiesfor greaterexposure % experiencing / hearing about each touchpoint 40% 50% -50% -40% -30% -20% -10% Business 7.3 Thesetouchpointsoccurthemostfrequentlyandhavea negativeimpactontrust inInlandRevenue(asshowninFigure26). Aswithindividuals,thereisanopportunitytoimprovetrustbyincreasing exposuretoadvertisingandcommunications. Thosewhohaveseenpositive advertisingormarketingcommunicationsare30percentagepointsmorelikelyto trustInlandRevenue,thanthosewhohaven’tseenanything. However,relatively fewbusinessesrecallseeingorhearinganything(9%). Inaddition,mediastoriesaboutInlandRevenuesuccessfullyprosecutingtax avoidersarewellreceivedbybusinesses,butrelativelyfewhaveseenthistypeof mediacoverage(27%). Finally,thosewhohaveexperiencedorheardaboutInlandRevenuegiving customerstimetorectifymistakesaremorelikelytotrustInlandRevenue.There isanopportunityforInlandRevenuetopromoteitselfasanorganisationwhich willshowunderstandingtobusinessesthathavemadegenuinemistakesorgotten intodifficulty. •Call waitingtimes •EaseofdealingwithInlandRevenue •Easeofcompletinga taxreturn,and •Consistentmessaging. Good service Completing a taxreturn more easily Easily completing taskson the IR website Easilyfindinginformation on the than expected IR website Savingmoneybycompletinga tax returnratherthanusinga thirdparty IRarrangingan affordablepayment planformoneyowed Receivingtax refunds or paymentsontime Receivinganunexpected taxrefund Customersableto easily access their tax and income information C learlylaidout taxandincome information Enabling customers topay back money owed in a manageable timeframe Positive advertising ormarketing communications Media stories about IR successfully prosecutingtax avoiders Poor service Findingit difficultto complete a tax return FeelinglikeIRis too difficulttodealwith IRpenalising customersas soon as they can Customerswaitingforfartoo longon thephonetoget throughtoIR Customers being treated like criminals unnecessarily IR showinga lack of empathy Waitingtoolongtoreceive refunds fromIR IRfailingtoprotect customers’personal data IRnotdoing what they say theywill IR accessingcustomers’ bank accountswithout theirknowledge Customersblamedfor circumstancesoutside theircontrol Receiving conflicting messages from IR staff IR givingcustomers time to rectifymistakes 0%5%10% 15 %20 %25% 30 %35 %40 %45 %50%55% 60%65% Figure 26. Impact of touchpoints on trust - individuals 63 Maintaining / building trust among businesses Beyond the basic principles of building trust, as outlined in Section 7.1.3, qualitative interviews with business customers identified some additional considerations when building or maintaining trust with this customer group. These are outlined below. Male, 36-45 years, NZ European, business “We have got no options, we cannot reverse those charges and then you hear from someone that has got$200,000 of debt to the Inland Revenue that has 80% of it written off. Like I say, you can reverse charges in certain circumstances, but you just don't want to do it here”. An equitable approach: There is a perception amongst business customers that some businesses get an ‘easier deal’ than others within the tax system (e.g. via ‘tax breaks’). Consequently, trust may be built by demonstrating that Inland Revenue takes an even-handed and fair approach to all business customers: Business 7.3 Female, 36-45 years, NZ European, business “I wouldn’t want to be paying my taxes and then have that business down the road not paying their taxes and nobody is following up to get it, so I need to be able to trust them that they're actually doing their job and making sure that everybody is paying their taxes fully and properly”. Female, 36-45 years, NZ European, business “It feels like from what you see and read is that there are inconsistencies how things are handled with different situations, so it seems like one person can absolutely pay no tax and then suddenly it gets wiped, they go bankrupt and they start again. And then someone else on the other side is trying to pay off their tax debts for years to come, it just seems that it's potentially unfair”. 64 An approachable and non- threatening organisation: Some business customers spoke about feeling intimidated by Inland Revenue, either due to previous negative dealings with the organisation, or the perceived power imbalance in the relationship. An organisation which is approachable and accessible, and shows willing to engage with business customers, may therefore improve trust levels with this customer group. Female, 60+ years, NZ European, business “I find them quite nerve racking to deal with, I don't like ringing them, I would more often get \[husband\] to ring them because instantly you're in the wrong... I'm feeling like I'm going to get into trouble... I think it's just because they think... I get the impression that you're already in the wrong even before you state your cause, why you’re there or what you're ringing about.” Male, 36-45 years, NZ European, business “I don't feel that I can approach the IR and have the conversation like we have had tonight. I'm scared of the IR, I'm not scared of you. And in order for me to trust them I need to know that they're not out to get me, they're out to work with me... I find them unapproachable and like I said they enforce like a bully would enforce a school whereas I would trust them more if I felt that I could approach them and talk to them, work with them and that sort of stuff”. Maintaining / building trust among businesses Business 7.3 65 Consistency of information and services provided: For some business customers, inconsistent services or responses from Inland Revenue had contributed to a low level of trust in the organisation. In particular, this customer group are seeking a reliable and uniform level of service, including the dissemination of information from different staff members: Male, 46-59 years, NZ European, business “I think they can be \[fair\] but also the flip side of that it depends who you get, and I heard this from the inside source, if you get the wrong person they're going to make a totally different call which completely undermines the whole company”. Maintaining / building trust among businesses Business 7.3 Female, 36-45 years, NZ European, business “Being able to trust the government or Inland Revenue and those kinds of places that they're not going to make life too hard for you especially being a small business owner... stuff around tax that you have to pay or making it easy to actually set up and get going in a small business because it's actually quite hard. I guess what they have got in place stays in place and it doesn’t flip around too much, that it's steady”. 66 Flexibility in addressing mistakes: An important time where trust can be built or maintained with business customers is during instances where they are unable to meet tax obligations (e.g. filing income tax returns) and/or have fallen behind with tax payments. In such circumstances, they are seeking a flexible and fair response from Inland Revenue; this includes working together to develop a reasonable arrangement for redressing the situation: Male, 36-45 years, NZ European, business “My dealings with Inland Revenue in the past have been soured by just their attitude... like the rules were broken but the way they enforced them, I felt it was archaic and just bully boyish.” Maintaining / building trust among businesses Business 7.3 Female, 36-45 years, NZ European, business “I did get behind in my taxes for a couple of years and they \[IR\] were really good and helped me get it all sorted and back up and getting on top of it all ... They actually gave me time to actually sit down to work through and get what I needed to get done. They didn’t give me a too short deadline that was impossible to achieve so that was good. So, I guess that’s trusting both ways - that they trusted that I would get it done ... \[and\] I trusted that they would give me that time and they wouldn’t hound me and harass me or anything like that”. Female, 46-59 years, NZ European, business “Most people do want to pay their debt, no one wants to get penalised because if a debt keeps growing it makes more people hide and stay away even more. But I think having people approach you and make you feel it's ok, like especially if someone says hey look, I know you're in debt, but we are here to help you sort it out. That’s a great way to start”. Appendix 67 1)Kristina Murphy, ‘Trust me, I’m the taxman’: The role of trust in nurturing compliance, retrieved from: https://openresearch- repository.anu.edu.au/bitstream/1885/40637/3/UP.Murphy.trustme.pdf 2)The ‘low trust’ group had n=3 participants, and the ‘high trust’ group had n=5 participants. 3)Those who had been invited to complete an Inland Revenue study through Colmar Brunton in the last three months were removed from the sample to reduce respondent burden. 4)Results for individual and business customers have been reported together throughout the report unless otherwise specified. 5)A correlation coefficient of 1.0 is a perfect relationship. A perfect relationship occurs when respondents answer two questions in exactly the same way. 6)As this information is commercially sensitive, all organisations except for Inland Revenue have been anonymised. 7)Metge, J. (1990), cited in, Berryman, M. (2014). Evaluation indicators for school reviews: A commentary on engaging parents, whanau and communities. Background paper prepared for the review of the Education Review Office's Evaluation Indicators for School Reviews. 8)This has been echoed in other studies the research team has untaken, e.g. Wehipeihana, N. (2019). What’s working for Māori? A Kaupapa Māori perspective on the responsiveness of the Integrated Safety Response pilot to Māori: Synthesis Evaluation Report. Wellington: Ministry of Justice. 9)Includes all Māori individuals, but excludes those in the Māori business sample