Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. 1 30/04/18  Saxon Bruce    Tax Working Group Submission    Summary of recommendations:  ●Introduce capital gains tax at the same rate as income tax with no exemptions for  the family home  ●A carbon tax (or increase in price of carbon units in current emissions trading  scheme) on goods and services produced in New Zealand or imported. The tax  should be so high as to radically harm the economy in the short term and force  industry to adapt in the long term. All revenue from the tax should be  redistributed via a universal basic income to partially shelter citizens from the  harmful effects on the market.  ●Increase in company tax where profits are paid to non residents and removal of  company tax where profits are paid to New Zealand residents. Profits paid to  non-residents should be charged at the same rate as the highest New Zealand  income tax bracket.  ●Increase in top tax rate by the amount of now removed company tax (to a total of  61%, assuming top tax rate remains the same).  ●Introduce an inheritance and gift tax on cash and capital received over some large  threshold.  ●Introduce a financial transaction tax.  ●Ensure that the tax system remains simple with few exemptions      “If you want to knock Bolshevistic notions and revolutionary socialistic notions out of men,  you give them a stake in the country - something to lose, something to take a pride in” - Bill  Massey   \[1\] 2 Fairness    Tax should have two purposes. The first is to pay for the necessary functions of  government. The second is to redistribute income from richer to poorer. The second  purpose is necessary due to the way capital accumulates. As an individual’s profits  increase, so too can their investments, resulting in capital accumulating in fewer and  fewer hands, as evidenced by the growing wealth inequality in New Zealand. Profits  created by workers are kept by owners and rent seekers, who add little value to what is  produced and risk only the wealth that was collected in a similarly unfair way.    This is not a call to a planned economy. The free market provides freedoms that are  sorely missed when taken away (but are also enjoyed most by the well off). The ability  for any person to start a new business can be liberating and allows innovation to thrive.  Profit seeking individuals are a integral mechanism of the invisible hand that makes  resource allocation and distribution so efficient (when all externalities are priced in).  Freedom of economic activity is a freedom like any other.    The reason I bring up these points is because tax should be the main mechanism which  tames the free market, allowing freedom and innovation whilst ensuring fairness. As an  individual’s wealth increases, so too does the illegitimacy of their right to it. The Tax  Working Group has been asked to keep the level of tax revenue as a proportion of GDP  consistent, but I don’t think that should be the case. As an individual’s level of profits  increase, the government should tax that income at higher and higher rates. If the  government runs out of things to spend the revenue on, the income should be  transferred directly to citizens equally. The younger generation in New Zealand is  becoming more and more despondent about their ability to ‘get ahead’. Houses which  were an affordable investment for the older generation are now out of reach of most.  Resentment is increasing and New Zealand will soon have to resolve the unfairness of  the free market via increased tax revenues.    Climate Change    3 Climate change is by the far the most important issue in the world. It is a major threat to  world economy and the human species as a whole. Extreme weather conditions can lead  to famine which correlates strongly with armed conflict. Large amounts of valuable land  is under threat of going underwater which will lead to millions of migrants worldwide.  New Zealand, although a small greenhouse gas emitter by world standards, emits a large  amount for our population. We should take the initiative to be a world leader like we  have in the past to mobilise our economy towards this challenge like we did in the two  world wars.    The current emissions trading scheme has been criticised for being ineffective. The  omission of agriculture in the scheme has no sound reasoning and is the result of  political cowardice. The scheme could be salvaged by radically increasing the cost of a  carbon unit. This still leaves the problem of businesses buying dodgy credits from  overseas. A simpler option would be to replace the ETS with a simple carbon tax levied  on producers and importers. Whatever option is chosen, the price of carbon should  increase so heavily that consumers notice the effects when buying consumer goods. Well  meaning people (of which there are many) have no way of telling what goods have a  high carbon cost associated with them. I have seen people at the supermarket comparing  similar food packets to see how far the food has travelled as a measure of carbon  emissions. This is a tragic state of affairs considering that due to differences in food  production, it is sometimes the less carbon intensive method to ship goods  internationally than produce them locally. The consumer shouldn’t need to think about  things on such a level. Market mechanisms can be utilised to ensure that high carbon  goods are prohibitively expensive. This also gives people the freedom to decide that some  high carbon goods are worth paying for. If the price of carbon is high enough, the  efficiency of profit seeking businesses will create new technologies and innovations that  will far exceed the goodwill of a supermarket shopper. Businesses and consumers both  need to feel the pain of a carbon price in order to make decisions in the market which  lead to a low carbon economy.    A high carbon price will not be popular politically. If the cost of goods increases  significantly (as it should) then the brunt of the hardship will be paid for by the poor who  already cannot afford it. As such, all of the revenues collected from a carbon tax should  4 be redistributed to people evenly. The carbon tax then would then provide for a  universal basic income, which has its own benefits. Consumers will still not be as well off  as they were before, due to the great deadweight loss a high carbon price would cause.  This will need to be sold to the public as the price of becoming a carbon neutral nation,  and as important a cause as mobilising for war.    Capital gains tax    Capital gains are the main source of many people’s wealth. If income from wages is  taxed, it is fair that the profits made from capital gains are also taxed. Capital gains are  even more important to tax, as they are a major source of the growing income equality  between generations and classes in New Zealand. Capital gains should be taxed on  disposal of the asset, as a component of the individual’s income tax. There should be no  exemption for the family home. A family home is an investment like anything else, and  should be taxed accordingly. This becomes even more true as the proportion of long  term renters in New Zealand increases.    Inheritance and gift tax    In an ideal world, economic benefits would be allocated by merit and not by luck. That is  not the case when one person can be born with an inheritance to some amount of wealth  and one person will not. Having this advantage can pay dividends later in life and is one  reason why Pakeha have a much higher rate of home ownership than other ethnic  groups. An inheritance and gift tax would partially fix this injustice. Those who did  nothing to earn wealth except be born to the right family do not deserve it. Inheritance  or large gifts should be treated similarly. If someone inherits a non-liquid asset such as a  house or a farm, then inheritance tax should only be paid when the asset is sold (which  could be many years later).    Many people want the opportunity to provide for their children when they die. This is a  completely reasonable wish, and can be respected by setting the threshold before  inheritance tax applies to a large value. The purpose of the tax should be to stop capital  from being passed from generation to generation, where only the original generation  5 actually did anything to acquire the capital. Because people who inherit huge amounts of  wealth have done literally nothing to deserve it, it should be taxed at a rate as high as  possible before tax evasion or capital flight results in diminishing returns. I leave  calculating what that rate should be as a cost benefit analysis exercise for the poor  government bureaucrat reading this.    Company tax    Company tax should be abolished for profits which go to New Zealand residents and stay  the same or increase when profits go overseas.    When a company is wholly owned by New Zealand residents, it makes little difference  whether the company is taxed 28% or the profit which the residents receive as income is  taxed at 28% + their regular tax rate. One case where it does make a difference is when  the owner of the business has very little income. This could be relevant to a low income  person with some Kiwisaver investments. By abolishing company tax and instead  increasing the top income tax bracket by the same amount, small investors on low  incomes can get a leg up.    Where profits are sent overseas, they should be taxed as high as we can get away with  without causing a large amount of capital flight. Some capital flight would probably be  acceptable to many Kiwis, who resent foreigners buying property in New Zealand. This is  another example where fairness gives way to cost benefit analysis      Financial transactions tax    A small tax on financial transactions will stop resources being wasted on trying to  predict minute movements of markets. This sort of trading has little economic value to  anyone and should not have a foothold in New Zealand      Tax exemptions  6   A fair tax system should be easy to understand and the current tax system does that  pretty well. It is sometimes argued that fruits and vegetables should be exempted from  GST. If people are too poor to afford fruits and vegetables then that is a problem itself  that should be addressed. It is better to give a direct cash transfer to those who need it  and let them decide what to spend it on than to make many exemptions and loopholes in  the tax system.  It is common for small business owners to put assets into family trusts to give the  appearance of low income and make their children eligible for things like the student  allowance. This is a loophole which should be fixed.    Tax to affect behaviour    The government is in the unique position in that they can change the price of certain  goods to affect people’s behaviour. Tobacco tax revenue is much higher than the cost to  the health system in order to dissuade people from smoking. Tax incentives /  disincentives should be created when the government has the mandate to do so, as they  are the only ones with the power to do so, but they should be very careful that they don’t  overstep their boundaries. They should only disincentive behaviour when the public  overwhelmingly supports it. The current levels of tobacco tax are testing that limit.  When there is only a simple majority and not an overwhelming majority of people in  support of the government intervening to affect behaviour, then the government should  refrain from doing so in order to respect people’s freedom to live life the way they want.