Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. Name\*cYour Comments Brian Wilson NO to any form of Capital Gains Tax...unless Labour will re-imburse me for the loss on a losing sale of a house, at the same tax rate. sandy brown Yes I would like my opinions included in a submission. Annika Streefland The differentiation on capital gains should be on 3rd or more properties used for rental and commercial capital gains purposes ie not on the home AND bach. Graham Astley The practice of deducting or cancelling a persons entitlement to National Super because their partner receives a pension from overseas is effectively a tax, and a very unjust one applied to a benefit which is not means tested. But this is exactly what that is, a means test. This issue is on the cusp of blowing up and urgent reform is needed now Neil Christian Briefly, to add any new capital gains tax means that tax concessions must be given at the same time, however there already is A capital gains tax! What is the point in strangling genuine Kiwis who are saving for retirement with new C/taxes? We all know Money is its own merry goround the economy of wealth and re-distribution will happen naturally and all will benefit, but it is an economy that the government needs not strangle or meddle with, Why on earth should any political party penalizing the it's client base with more tax! Working/investing kiwis are tired of tax working groups, capital gains tax is so predictable and unfair, just because immigrants from other countries flagrantly launder money and exploit our property market dosent mean we need to introduce new suffocating taxes on all Kiwis. How about GST registering every immigrant that buys a house, and upon selling within 10yrs is required to pay a capital gains tax & the GST on the sale price. Hardworking kiwis Should not penalized for the sake of immigrants from other countries. There is a school of thought here in NZ that is fundamentally flawed, it says that tax is the answer yet when policy icreativity is so lacking ! and falling short! Why have our politicians forgotten the obvious ? Immigrants owning property for less than 10yrs need to be taxed if they sell! & not Kiwis, retiring Kiwis in NZ do not have the luxury of an extravagant retirement, our country is not wealthy so why penalize kiwis that want to take care of themselves with their own investment portfolios? a work hard, save hard and invest hard kiwi must be encouraged not discouraged, this is an ethic that should be promoted. Dave d'Abo NO just another way to fund labor's welfare projects Shaune Tappan (1) do not introduce any more taxes including land and capital gains tax. We are already taxed too highly and not seeing the benefit of our tax in certain areas like roads, hospitals etc. we also have no say in how the money is being spent, so it is certainly not a ‘fair’ system. (2) foreign home owners should be taxed more highly on land and income (rental) so that those genuinely interested in settling here would do so. We don’t need speculators. (3) tax every New Zealand citizen at the same rate if you want to be fair. People that have worked harder do not deserve to be taxed higher, and - in the same vein - people who refuse to work should not receive the benefit of not paying or paying a low rate. Everyone should play their part equally in our tax system. (4) let us vote on how government spending should occur. (5) Why should New Zealanders have to pay tourist rates in their own country? Introduce a system which allows discount if you carry a New Zealand passport. At present we cannot fully enjoy the benefits of staying in this country after taxes. (6) stop racial discrimination in our tax system. Why should Mauri or any other culture enjoy more benefits than others in our tax system? To be fair, treat everyone the same. Thank you, Shaune Roger Scott My mother owns a house but she is unable to live there and it now needs to be rented to find her health care. I think it would be unjust for her to have to pay tax if she was forced to sell it. I don't think those who inherit a family property should pay capital gains tax because it is difficult enough for young people to get on the property ladder as it is. Salaries and wages here are too low forcing young talent off shore to earn a good salary. You want to keep young talent here whether they are professional or trades people. I really think overseas investors who try to avoid tax in their own country by investing in New Zealand homes a) forces up the prices and b) should be taxed sufficiently. Need to also look closely at hawkish property developers who register as New Zealand companies to build large numbers or rentals for those who have been priced out of the market. Switzerland had quite good laws around protecting themselves from foreigners buying up property. There were designated areas where I could have bought as a non resident. No doubt the wealthy pay lawyers to find the loopholes. john McCullough immigration can not cope.The generational Kiwis have paid to set up the infrastructure that was needed ,now they are paying for the overseas workers infrastructure.There needs to be a tax put on industries that employ overseas or new arrivals to cover the extra cost on services to average kiwis, same as different tax for overseas investors move here to make capital gain on property. Same as tourism.The cost of it's development and growth is carried by the tax payer. Britta Fromow •Should the tax system exclude some goods and services from GST? Yes, fruit, veg, and unprocessed foods I also think that the tax system should be fairer to all. I can't understand why my uncle, as a farmer, can claim his private aircraft (which is bought and used as a toy) as a farm vehicle when he can easily survey his farm using his drone, tractor or farmbike. I can't understand how his family holidays in NZ and Europe are tax deductable because he drives past a paddock and says 'look at those sheep'. I can't understand why he can write off all his income (he has operated at a legitimate loss once in his lifetime) every single year so that his family has a community services card and his daughter at university gets a student allowance and hardship money from the government. This family paid for the daughter to go to an elite boarding school at over $30,000 per year. She has overseas holidays paid for, was bought a Peugeot at age 17 and a BMW at age 18. She wears only designer clothes and flats alone in Dunedin with an accommodation benefit (courtesy of the tax payer) when her parents pay for all her rent and her designer furniture, etc, while claiming a loss. How can this be a fair tax system? For the environment, I believe that water usage should be taxed, regardless of residential or industrial usage. It will force people to use greywater systems and reduce water \[1\]