Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document February 2019 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. 1 November 2018 1 NZCTU Survey on the Tax Working Group’s Interim Report In April 2018 the NZCTU commissioned UMR Research to conduct an online survey of New Zealanders about their views around taxation. We shared the results of that survey in our feedback on the Tax Working Group’s “Future of Tax” background paper in May 1 . In response to the Working Group’s Interim Report, the NZCTU has conducted a further online survey of Together.org.nz supporters to re-test our initial findings and provide specific feedback to a number of particular issues raised by the Interim Report. Most importantly, our research continues to show widespread support for an increased tax take to fund levels of social and public service in the future. Sixty-seven per cent agree the Government should increase total tax take to maintain and grow social services and support. This exactly mirrors the UMR findings in April. At the same time, 83 per cent support a different mix of new taxes with a broader range of revenue sources(in contrast the current nine- tenths of tax revenue that comes just three sources – income tax, company tax and GST). Given the discussion in the Interim Report about new revenue sources, our latest survey also provides a clear hierarchy of preferences for reducing inequality through taxation: • Ninety-three per cent support cracking down on multinational tax avoidance, with 90 per cent strongly agreeing (n=756). • Eighty-four per cent support taxing polluting businesses, including climate emissions, with 70 per cent strongly agreeing (n=760). • Eighty-four per cent support a tax free threshold on the first few thousand dollars of personal income, with 67 per cent strongly agreeing (n=757). • Seventy-six per cent support a higher tax bracket for personal incomes significantly higher than $70,000, with 54 per cent strongly agreeing (n=755). • Seventy-four per cent support extending income taxes to include capital gains in some form - excluding the family home - with 55 per cent strongly agreeing (n=760). • Seventy one per cent support a tax on wealth such as rental properties and shares, but still excluding the family home, with 51 per cent strongly agreeing (n=759). 1 See https://www.union.org.nz/kiwis-desire-for-tax-offers-hope-for-underfunded-public-services/ 249 500 11 Tax take relative to the size of the economy Keep the tax take at the same proportion of the economy. Increase tax take to maintain and grow social services and support. Did not answer. 1 November 2018 2 In relation to the integrity and administration of the tax system, our latest survey also finds extremely strong support for the Interim Report’s ideas. Ninety-four per cent agree that the Government should give Inland Revenue greater powers to track income, tax, and net wealth of high net-worth individuals, and 96 per cent agree that Inland Revenue should produce an annual tax transparency report that shows the tax paid by large multinational and domestic companies. How much do you agree with these options to use the tax system to reduce inequality? Strongly Agree Agree Neutral Disagree Strongly Disagree 507 127 80 19 24 Introduce a tax free threshold on the first few thousand dollars of income. 408 164 67 51 65 Introduce a higher tax bracket for Introduce a higher tax bracket for Introduce a higher tax bracket for Introduce a higher tax bracket for incomes higher than $70,000. incomes higher than $70,000. incomes higher than $70,000. incomes higher than $70,000. 419 145 71 51 74 Extend income taxes to include capital Extend income taxes to include capital Extend income taxes to include capital Extend income taxes to include capital gains, excluding the family home. gains, excluding the family home. gains, excluding the family home. gains, excluding the family home. 385 154 84 53 83 A tax on wealth (such as rental A tax on wealth (such as rental A tax on wealth (such as rental A tax on wealth (such as rental properties and shares). properties and shares). properties and shares). properties and shares). 682 22 153 34 Crack down on multinational tax Crack down on multinational tax Crack down on multinational tax Crack down on multinational tax avoidance. avoidance. avoidance. avoidance. 533 107 67 23 30 Tax polluting businesses, including Tax polluting businesses, including Tax polluting businesses, including Tax polluting businesses, including climate emissions. climate emissions. climate emissions. climate emissions.