Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document August 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage; Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For exampl e, a appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to sec tion In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. Website Submissions Responding to the Question: What is the purpose of tax? ANONYMOUS A.G. TALBOT AARON PURDIE AARON PURDIE ADAM RANSFIELD ADAM SCHOFIELD ADAM UJDUR ADRIAN JENKINS ALAN FALLOON ALAN MATTEUCCI ALASTAIR HOSKING ALASTAIR WHITEFORD ALEX GAMAGE ALEX HALL ALISON LAURIE ALISTAIR NEWBOULD ALLAN PARSONS ALLYSON GOFTON ALOY RAYEN AMANDA HOMEWOOD AMELIA SMITH AMRISH KHANOLKAR ANDREA SPEARS ANDREW BARTLETT ANDREW BOYCE ANDREW ELPHICK ANDREW GEORGE ANDREW LAMONT ANDREW PHILLIPS ANDREW ROBINSON ANDREW VOSSEN ANGELA B ANGELA MILLS ANGIE BENN ANN MARTIN ANN MARTIN ANNA MARIA MCLOUGHLIN ANNON ANNON ANTHONY MEEHAN ANTHONY VEITCH \[1\] 9(2)(a). ASHLEIGH MACDONALD ASTRID HARRIS B LEE BALAZS GEMESI BEN GRAHAM BEN HOFFMAN BEN STRODE-PENNY BETH LENIHAN BILL WRIGLEY BILLIE LAWSON BREANNA QUINN BRENDA WARD BRENDON BULLEN BRENT BARRETT BRETT ANDERSON CAMPBELL MCCRACKEN CARL AMMON CARL PETERSON CAROL SUMNER CAROLINE SYDDALL CAROLYN KELMAN CATHERINE BINDON CATHERINE LAMB CATHERINE OLSEN CELIA MCALPINE CHARL CHARLES TEN HOVE CHE SOFFE CHERRYL SMITH CHRIS CHRIS RAPSON CHRIS SHAW CHRIS WONG CHRIS. CAMP CHRISTINA ROBERTSON CHRISTINE LARKING CHRISTOPHER CANDY-BOLAND CHRISTOPHER LAING ANONYMOUS CLIVE ROBERTS COLIN HENDERSON COLIN SWENSON COLL HARVEY CORWIN NEWALL CORY MURRAY CRAIG DALTON CRAIG FISHER CRAIG JACKSON CRAIG SHARP DAN CARPENTER DAN GREGORY DAN YOUNG DANIEL CHORLEY DANIEL SHANAHAN DANIELA BAGOZZI DARRIEN LE COMTE DARRIEN LE COMTE DAVE JENNINGS DAVE MARR DAVE RENISON DAVID DAVID ALLARD DAVID BAILEY DAVID BLAKE DAVID BROUWERS DAVID ECCLES DAVID MARSHALL DAVID MCDOUGALL DAVID MOREL DAVID NUTSFORD DAVID WEST DEAN LEE DEIDRE BUTLER DENIS DUMAINE DENNIS CONROY DEREK WISEMAN DEVAN KESHA DIANE DYKGRAAF DICK LANE DON MURRAY DONALD ARCHER DONNA REDDEN DOUG ROBERTSON DOUG SOMMERVILLE DYLAN FLETCHER EDWARD FLETCHER EILEEN WRIGHT ELIANE GENEVIEVE LAGNAZ ELIANE GENEVIEVE LAGNAZ ELIZABETH ANDERSON-SMITH ELIZABETH DUBIN ELLEN BLAKE ELLIOTT KENNEDY EMILY BURTON EMILY SHINE EMMA KOCH ERIC TAYLOR ERIN STAGG ERWIN MEIER ERWIN WEE EVAN HULLAH FELICITY DURAND FIONA JARDEN FIONA KEELING FIONA WRIGHT FLEUR HARDMAN FRANK BRAY FRANK YOUNG FRED HAYWARD GABD GRACE GARFIELD TORO GARRY FERGUSON GARTH BARLEY GARY GRIBBEN GAVIN WEBB GEOFF DALTON GEOFF RUSSELL GEOFF WARD GEOFFREY WILLIAM HINDS GEORGE JASONSMITH GERALDINE COMBER GERARD NEEDHAM GERRIE LIGTENBERG GIOVANNA FERRARIO GLENN BISHOP GORDON CAMERON GRAEME AITKEN GRAEME GOODWIN GRANT FARRELL GRAY BARTLETT MBE GREG XAVIER GREGORY COOPER GWYN JOHN GWYN JONES HANK (HENDRIK) OPTLAND HARISH PATEL HARTWIG CLASEN HELEN MONGILLO HENRY JOHNSON HILARY STACE HOWARD SUTTON HUGH DINGWALL HUGH HARLOW HUGH LECKIE IAN MORONEY ISAAC MINOGUE ISABELLA FRANCIS IVAN RADOVANOVICH IVOR PEKSA J B JACK CRAW JACQUIE TOMLINS JADE DONALD JADE KESWICK JAMES JAMES BAIN JAMES FLOCCHINI JAMES LITCHWARK JAMES LITTLEWOOD JAMES MULLINEUX JANE MULLANEY JANE WIGLEY JASON MCCAMISH JC DC JEANETTE GARNETT JEANIE MOORE JEF WRIGHT JEFF CHRISTENSEN JEN OLSEN JENNIFER GOLDSACK JERED AITKEN JEREMY BALL JILL BEST JIM MILLER JO RANGOONI JO RICHARDSON JOANNE MCFADYEN JOANNE WAITOA JOCELYN PAPPRILL JOHN JOHN CHRISTIE JOHN LA GROU JOHN LAWSON JOHN LIVESEY JOHN THOMPSON JONATHAN CLARIDGE JONATHAN GENSIK JORDAN DOWNES JOSHUA GIDDY JOYCE SHOTBOLT JUDITH SPENCER JUDY CRUICKSHANK JULIAN HUTT JULIAN VESTY JULIAN WADE JULIE WOOLNER JUSTIN CONNOLLY KARA REID KAREN COURTIS KARIN KARLA SMITH KATARINA TE MAIHAROA KATE KENNEDY KATHERINE PARK KATHERINE TROUP KATHERYN-MARGARET PASCOE KATHY FORSTER KATIA DE LU KATRINA MILLER KATY GLENIE KATY MILLER KAY HAUGHEY KAY HAUGHEY KAY TRACEY KELLY SCREEN KELVIN BLACK KENNETH TRASS KEVIN COLLINS KIM MCGREGOR KIM STEWART KIT GOLDSBURY KRIS BALLANTYNE LARA FLAVELL LARA IRIARTE LEE NICHOLLS LES NEWMAN LEZ MORGAN LINDA SCOULLAR LINDA SORENSEN LISA RICHARDSON LIZ ALLEN LLOYD MEIKLEJOHN LORRAINE PELLS LOTTE BLAIR LOU TURNER LOUIS DYER LUCAS DAVIES LUCY HOFFMAN LUKE COPSEY LUKE SCHNEIDER LYNEKE ONDERWATER LYNN YOUNG M E MAE KIELY MALCOLM HARFIELD MALCOLM HATTAWAY MALCOLM STUART MARC SPARKS MARGARET CHRISTIE MARGARET DELBRIDGE MARGARET GWYNN MARGARET HILL MARIKA JACKSON MARILYN DAVIES MARINA DIXON MARION LEIGHTON MARK GREAVES MARK JOHNSON MARK JONES MARK LEWIS MARK METCALF MARK O'BRIEN MARK WEBSTER MARLOU SACDALAN MARTY MARY NEATE MATHEW BAYLISS MATHEW BAYLISS MATHEW TAYLOR MATT FOULKES MATT RAMA MATTHEW BAIRD MATTHEW BLAIR MATTHEW KEENS MATTHEW MILES MAX ROBITZSCH ANONYMOUS MELANIE KILFOYLE MELISSA GREENE MERETE HIPP MERV HUXFORD MICHAEL C BARNETT MICHAEL CHO MICHAEL GRANT MICHAEL HARDING MICHAEL JONGENEEL MICHAEL RILEY MICHAEL RUTLAND MICKEY WILLS MIKE CARROLL MIKE KINGSTON MIKE SCOTT MORGAN KNOESEN MURRAY COLLINGWOOD MURRAY ELLIOTT ANONYMOUS NADINE SEIDEL NAOMI POCOCK NAREN KUMAR NATHAN MACKIE NEIL BORLASE NEVILLE EVANS NEVILLE HILL NICK HOOGWERF NICK KEARNEY NICK ROCHE-KERR NIGEL JEMSON OLIVER HAILES OLIVER KROLLMANN OWEN RODDIS P H P POWE PARIS PARAHA PATRICIA JACK PATRICK LORD PATRICK MCKENNA PAUL BURNS PAUL DAIGNEAULT PAUL EADY PAUL EDWARDS PAUL HERD PAUL JACKSON PAUL KING PAUL MCGRATH PAUL MCMAHON PAUL THORNTON PAUL WING PETER AMBROSE PETER HOLMES PETER PARNHAM PETER SEDGEMAN PETER STUART PETER THOMPSON PETULA JEFFERIES PEYMAN MOMENAN PHIL ASTLEY PHILIP MUSTHER PHILIP TREMEWAN PHILLIP HART QUINTIN BROWNE R HUNT RAEWYN ALLISON-POTAE RAY MCKEOWN RAYMOND STEIN REBECCA MILLER REBEKAH STEWART REECE MOODY REU LAMONT RHEA DASENT RIC MILLS RICHARD BROWN RICHARD JAMES RICHARD KELLER RILMA SANDS ROB HENDERSON ROB HUGHES-GAMES ROB MCCAW ROBERT ANCELL ROBERT BEVAN SMITH ROBERT CORMACK ROBERT LLOYD ROBERT LLOYD ROBIN GRIEVE ROBYN CAREY ROGER LACEY ROSA LIMA ROSEMARY COOKE ROSS COX ROSS HEBNER ROY KNILL RUSSELL ALLAN RUSSELL BAILLIE S B SABIAN SALLY GATES SAM BURGESS SAM GROVER SAM HADLEY-JONES SAM MARSHALL SAM STONE SAMARA KRUSKOPF SAMUEL PRESCOTT SARAH LIGHTBODY SCOTT ESSER SEAN JENNER SHANE COLEMAN SHELLEY GILMAN SIMON HENSHAW SIMON MARGRETT SIMON RITCHIE SIMON VELVIN SIOBHAN KEOGH SONJA HANSEN STATHI TRIADIS STEFAN ROMIC STEPH LEON STEPHEN BATT STEVE PRYCE STEVEN WILSON STEWART LAWRENCE STUART MERCER SUE HAMMOND SUE HARRIS SUSAN IVERSEN SUSAN MADDOCK SUSAN MOYLE SUSANNAH RODDICK SWANTJE MELCHIORS SYLVIE KERR T MCNAUGHTON T PETERS TANEA HAWKINS TANYA CLOVER TAVA OLSEN TERRY HALL TERRY MURPHY THEO KLEE THERESA REID THOMAS BURTON THOMAS DAMERHAM THOMAS LEA-HUMPHREYS TIM TIM TIM BIRD TIMOTHEUS FRANK TINA KAPOHE TINA POPE TODD FELLOWES TONI PALMER TONY DENLEY TONY OOSTEN TP ANNETTE TRACY RIDLEY TREVOR WITT TRISH THOMPSON TRUDY AMBROSE TRUDY KOREWHA TYLER VEITCH VALERIE MONK VANESSA EGLETON VIRGINIA LUBELL VIVEK REGMI WADE DEVINE WALLY CRAPPER WARREN GRANT WARREN HARRIS WARRICK WALTER WARWICK PETERSON WAYNE HENNESSY WAYNES SLOANE WILLIAM CHUNG WILLIAM GIRIMONTI WILLIAM LIEW WILLIAM SKELTON YANOSH IRANI YVETTE MORTIMER YVONNE CURTIS YVONNE MATTHEWS ZOEB ALI \[1\] CHARLES TEN HOVE W000015 14 Mar 2018, 11:06 AM I don't want a Government forcing me to make lifestyle choices for my life. What if they turn out to be wrong? Please let me decide what food etc is best for me then I will reap the rewards or bear the consequences as the case may be. You are not my parents and I am not a child. Tax should be for core services like law and order, and defence. I'm not even convinced Government should have such a big say in what our children are taught in schools or in how our health is treated or not treated. These can be done privately without Government interference in the choices of parents and families and their loved ones. Don't encroach into areas of responsibility for parents, families, communities, churches and voluntary organisations and watchdog groups etc. The more these are involved the better. Don't be a nanny state. That's lost an election for Labour once already. People don't like being told what to do or how to behave when it is just a matter of ordinary lifestyle choices. ANONYMOUS W000027 14 Mar 2018, 12:32 PM Collect revenue for core services, encourage activities beneficial to the country as a whole, redistribute resources to ensure all are given a ‘fair go’ and while society does not have to be “equal”, current levels of rising inequality must be mitigated, and needs to act as a barrier for the capitalist tendency for wealth and power to accumulate in a few and inequality to rise in the rest (even though I would currently be viewed by many as one of the few). Yes I worked to get here... but the affordable rented warm dry quality state housing my parents and grandparents lived in for their lives in the uk, the free healthcare, the free state school education and free university education my baby boomer parents received were key to setting up my life in the right path. Parents today in nz in the same situation as my grandparents or parents were simply do not have such opportunities which is a failure of government policy and tax systems DANIEL CHORLEY W000033 14 Mar 2018, 1:39 PM It has been shown that while some positive societal change can come from individual action via choices in consumption, real prosocial outcomes need to come centrally from government and tax should be a key tool in this. Tax should provide a more even distribution of wealth and ensure basic needs of education, health, and safety, are met. This should include tax-reduced incentives on healthier food options and higher taxes on harmful products such as alcohol, lottos. Not only should these improve government funds but also reduce costs in the way of preventative healthcare. Companies should be incentivised to engage in sustainable technologies to improve environmental outcomes. Business activities that then result in a cost to the public like pollution of waterways should be taxed to disincentives harmful activities and to remedy damage caused. Natural resources are owned by everyone so those companies taking them (e.g. water) should be taxed as to gain benefit for the whole country. YANOSH IRANI W000066 14 Mar 2018, 5:41 PM Tax is for funding the services and infrastructure that make our society worth living in. What these services are and their relative importance is determined by voters through their representatives in government. It is an essential tool to transform, shape and balance out problems in society and should change more often with emerging issues. LUCY HOFFMAN W000074 14 Mar 2018, 5:49 PM Almost all of the above. Tax and government are powerful levers for a better society. I want tax to support those who need it, encourage better behaviors and encourage businesse who do contribute to these aims. JAMES W000084 14 Mar 2018, 6:21 PM Your social engineering and cultural edits are not welcome ROSA LIMA W000095 14 Mar 2018, 6:59 PM Funding of core services is essentially what taxation is about. However we need to encourage broad investments, saving and a growing economy and reduce property speculation ANTHONY MEEHAN W000118 14 Mar 2018, 9:55 PM Australia provides a tax-free bracket for low-income individuals. This is simpler than, and provides greater convenience for our poorest and most vulnerable. We should seriously rethink our current tax brackets, adding another tax bracket at higher incomes, and removing tax altogether from the lowest bracket. CRAIG DALTON W000129 14 Mar 2018, 10:40 PM Tax is being spent fine as is. Not opposed to levies or targeted tax rates on certain items to dissuade people from buying them such as cigarettes and alcohol. Am against a sugar tax. SIMON VELVIN W000141 15 Mar 2018, 1:32 AM It horrifies me that the homeless population has exploded in the last decade or so. Taxes should be used to support the wellbeing of our society, especially the least of us. A nation should be judged on the lives of those born to the people in the shittiest situations; those children should enjoy as many of the advantages that being born to wealthy parents as possible. STUART MERCER W000158 15 Mar 2018, 9:48 AM The 1st and 4th point combined. Should generate income for it's core services while also helping the people who need it. THOMAS DAMERHAM W000162 15 Mar 2018, 11:13 AM Taxes are important for ensuring that NZ continues as a cohesive society that values fairness and opportunities for all. As such a more progressive tax system is essential with the following options important in my opinion; - In order to treat all income the same, introduce a comprehensive capital gains tax on inflation adjusted capital gains at the time the capital gains are realised. - An inheritance tax over a certain value that stops the very wealthy from being able to pass all of their accumulated wealth to the next generation and thereby hindering social mobility. MIKE SCOTT W000167 15 Mar 2018, 12:25 PM I have no problem with taxing certain things to encourage positive choices. Cigarette tax is helping keep NZers healthy (which also means lower burden on the health system). I agree with introducing a sugar tax, but I believe that it needs to come with strong messaging about why sugar should be taxed (see recent article on Berkeley's sugar tax: https://www.stuff.co.nz/national/health/101449829/a-sugar-tax-made-me- quit-berkeleys-residents-shun-sugar) . I also agree with a tax on fossil fuels, for similar reasons. Ultimately though, the revenue raised should go towards helping people, be that infrastructure, innovation, education or welfare. ALLAN PARSONS W000186 15 Mar 2018, 2:59 PM We are over taxed now. JOHN THOMPSON W000201 15 Mar 2018, 4:32 PM The primary purpose of tax should be to collect revenue for the provision of government services. NZ benefits greatly by the BBLR (Broad Base Low Rate) tax model and its 'clean' lack of exemptions and carve-outs. That said the tax system can serve other useful purposes by being a significant financial incentive. This should be done where it does not compromise the current clean BBLR nature of our tax system and does not create perverse incentives. JERED AITKEN W000222 15 Mar 2018, 10:40 PM Taxes are for making sure we all have support and that our public services are the best in the world. They are also to make sure that large companies don't have a monopoly, and that they are paying for the pressure they put on our infrastructure. For example, bottled-water and soft drink companies could be taxed to make them incentivise recycling, rather than the public paying for it. Tax should also work in favour of small businesses and should not become too much of a burden for them. Capital gains should DEFINATELY be taxed, especially with investment properties. The environment should always be taken into account before any tax spending. And things that harm our environment should be taxed harshly. GST should be removed from veges and fruit. ANONYMOUS W000240 16 Mar 2018, 2:58 PM Our tax system should be how we create a fair and equitable society. Everyone in Aotearoa/New Zealand should be able to access health care, education and housing, without fear of going into debt, but at the moment this is not the case. Our tax system should be used to make wealth is distributed equally in New Zealand. STEPHEN BATT W000269 17 Mar 2018, 10:06 AM A tax system should be discouraging negative behaviours and if not effective then spreading that cost across all. An example at the local level. Disposal of dangerous items such as paint should be free for all and managed not charged a premium otherwise people will cheat the system and the outcome for everyone is worse. I beleive income tax at the lower levels needs to fall further as providing rebates and incentives after the fact is ineffective and masks the problems. A tax system that is fair for the weakest members of society means that we ask the correct questions. The argument around free school lunches should be universal and not focused on benefit payments to parents. GST should be removed from grocery food items. This is not difficult, Sweden does it today. Poorer families are encouraged to eat at home and people with extra money can eat out but pay GST for their meal. LORRAINE PELLS W000276 17 Mar 2018, 10:55 AM The Government is neither the mother or father of individual or collective tax payers. It is the individual who has to sort their own lives. Where they can't, a core government service is social welfare. Social welfare should not offer an individual more income than hard working families receive - and I have seen this happen with the DPB when doing budget advice for clients. It should be an safety net with aspiration expectations. Unemployed people need support but also need training and jobs. They need to gain skills that will make them more desirable for employers. JEANETTE GARNETT W000288 17 Mar 2018, 3:43 PM Tax is a "bank of democracy" that allows a very small country to have a higher level standard of living for it's citizens and promotes social wellbeing, business opportunity and the ability to care for it's future (particularly environmental care). For this reason I would like to see all potential expenditure (local government too), measured against 'per capita' gains. WAYNES SLOANE W000298 17 Mar 2018, 8:15 PM Tax incentives are needed for SMEs and other businesses in proportion to the number of full time equivalent staff employed; 2. organic agri-hort businesses; and 3. others with waste management systems approved by the MftEnvironment - an assessment process would need to be established for this. Tax is already used punitively via excise tax on alcohol, tobacco, motor oil. Extend this to negative environmental and or health impacts: 1. consumption of meat and dairy products; 2. soft-drinks; 3. heavy vehicles to transport goods (e.g logs, containers) by road; 4. commercial air travel; 5. commercial use of fertilisers and pesticides with known negative affects; 5. commercial water use; 6. commercial waste management practices not approved by the MftEnvironment. Tax should not be used to subsidise businesses' training and professional development of their staff, via State funded work-place training - other than in traditional apprenticeships occupations (ie. trades) or medical occupations DYLAN FLETCHER W000339 18 Mar 2018, 9:42 PM A government shouldn’t follow a typical business model. Key infrastructure is essential to the running of the country and isn’t maintained properly when sold off to private companies who are profit driven. Taxes should be used to own, expand and maintain the infrastructure and services required by the citizens of the country. EVAN HULLAH W000368 19 Mar 2018, 10:47 AM First off I’d like to say that I’m all for using tax across the board if it’s done in a positive and productive way. I have been hearing talk of a sugar tax that will increase the cost of products that have a large amount of sugar in them. Have we posssibly thought about implementing a tax on businesses that produce the products to try and encourage them to use less sugar. Or incentives to companies who produce healthier alternatives. When I’m at the supermarket and looking for something nice to drink I see that soft drinks are often less than a bottle of water. If we could raise the price slightly while bringing the cost of healthier alternatives down I think we would see the change we want. ALEX HALL W000378 19 Mar 2018, 11:42 AM Tax should be there to support core services and not be there to support people who decided not to work even when they are capable of it. GARRY FERGUSON W000384 19 Mar 2018, 12:10 PM Taxes collected to be used for running the essential services for the country including pensions, rail network, electricity supply and distribution, Air NZ, Telephone and internet, postal service, defense, national works programmes like roading, dams etc; through re-instatement of the M.O.W. JULIAN HUTT W000418 19 Mar 2018, 5:42 PM Taxes shouldn't be a punishment it's a subscription to participate in society. And the smoking thing hasn't worked smokers are still dying. And it's making them and their families less better off. NICK KEARNEY W000447 20 Mar 2018, 2:38 AM Clearly, the purpose of tax is to discourage or disincentivise behaviour. Why else are taxes placed on tobacco, alcohol and fuel. We hear time and time again that taxes are increased to discourage use, and that is generally correct. The same applies to income taxes. For this reason, income tax should be scrapped. The economy would benefit hugely if this were the case, and without any increase in the tax base, I am certain that government revenue will increase. LARA FLAVELL W000456 20 Mar 2018, 7:58 AM If you want to encourage New Zealanders to make better choices, try decreasing the tax instead of making people pay more. How about you look at removing GST off fruit and veg so it makes it cheaper for people to buy healthier foods. Another thought - why don't you reduce tax for people who have private health insurance as they are effectively, paying twice. Why don't people look at ways to reduce costs instead of always looking at increasing? We earn more but are poorer because the cost of everything is always on the rise - never decreases. SIOBHAN KEOGH W000474 20 Mar 2018, 10:47 AM I am in the highest tax bracket and would be happy to pay more if it means that people have equity - access to good food, housing, education, and mental health/general health services. I am fortunate enough to have had these things all my life and am under no illusions that it's because I'm smarter and I work harder - I am lucky. I don't want access to essentials to be a matter of luck, I want it to be a matter of fact for all New Zealanders. JADE DONALD W000491 20 Mar 2018, 2:28 PM Should be used to fund services but can also be used to encourage behavior that has positive benefit for us as a society. Eg tax on capital gains to incentivize other investments than housing. Environmental levies to move is toward zero carbon 2050. Removal of tax on fresh fruit and vegetables so no-one is priced out of these, multinationals must contribute. ALAN FALLOON W000496 20 Mar 2018, 2:37 PM A large welfare state is the best thing for New Zealanders and the economy. Income inequality is the biggest problem facing New Zealanders today and in the future. Tax is a crude but effective way of correcting for income inequality. CARL PETERSON W000522 20 Mar 2018, 7:50 PM The purpose of tax should be primarily directed towards encouraging investment, savings, and productivity. Tax should be incentive-based, encouraging those positive aspects of society, and discouraging harmful activities such as tobacco, alcohol, and drug abuse. Inflationary income taxes, fuel taxes, and road user fees should be discontinued in favour of deflationary taxes such as GST and a 30% Capital Exit Tax to capture foreign profit as it leaves New Zealand. Ultimately most tax should be abolished as the private economy responds to no income taxes and rapid capital growth. The present GST and the Capital Exit Tax will encourage economic growth by discouraging rampant consumption and the departure of capital overseas. In this vein, all NZ govt investment overseas should return to NZ, and all private investment overseas that chooses to remain there should be retroactively captured by the Capital Exit Tax. Tax should be targeted for the people rather than banks and corporations. THOMAS LEA-HUMPHREYS W000536 20 Mar 2018, 9:38 PM Tax needs to be about providing a strong middle class society to maxmises positive outcomes for people, is safe and supports people and business to succeed ANONYMOUS W000555 21 Mar 2018, 6:25 AM Tax should NOT be used to encourage or discourage any type of behaviour be it social or economic behaviour. It is ethically wrong to do so. We're all familiar with the book 1984 and the themes in particularly the "thought police". The purpose of tax is to provide core services only. Health, education, roading. LINDA SORENSEN W000579 21 Mar 2018, 10:16 AM Tax should cover some core needs such as medical care, and provide a safety net for those who require one. I would love to see the institution of a minimum basic income so that everyone could contribute based on what they excel at or love, rather than what society has decided has value. Free education would allow for more equality in wages - if you are not saddled with huge debt for getting a degree, you don't need a huge income to cover the debt. Decrease public funding of specialized projects such as sports arenas and stadiums - shift this to more user pays including the sports associations that would benefit from the project. People who can't afford a ticket should not pay for these kinds of projects with their rates. STATHI TRIADIS W000609 21 Mar 2018, 11:37 AM Redistribution to keep opportunities equal and facilitate good business. WILLIAM GIRIMONTI W000636 21 Mar 2018, 12:52 PM The tax system should always be about funding core services only and should not be used as a political or economic weapon that disparages some for the benefit of others. At its core, the tax system should benefit ALL New Zealanders and be applied equally across the board. TANYA CLOVER W000645 21 Mar 2018, 1:18 PM Tax big business and companies that impact our natural flora and fauna or environment. No more tax haven rubbish! RAYMOND STEIN W000668 21 Mar 2018, 2:10 PM I think taxes spent on creating a better quality of life for current & future generations is essential as this will encourage individuals to take responsibility also (& make better choices), rather than leave it to the government of the day to solely attend to. LUKE COPSEY W000689 21 Mar 2018, 3:07 PM It’s to fund infrastructure, services, and armed forces. It isn’t a charity MARGARET DELBRIDGE W000701 21 Mar 2018, 3:55 PM The only reasonable purpose for tax is to fund core services. It should neverbe used to enforce social policies or to change behavoiur. Those need penalties and/or positive assistance not taxation. MARK GREAVES W000736 21 Mar 2018, 6:41 PM Tax needs to be kept simple so we don't create an industry to manage tax returns. But instead of tax poor behaviour we need to reward behaviours we want to encourage I.e. Tax discounts for having medical insurance to take pressure off public health system. BEN STRODE-PENNY W000761 21 Mar 2018, 8:33 PM Housing as a form of investment is taxed far less than any other form of investment. This is dumb. SIMON HENSHAW W000777 21 Mar 2018, 9:35 PM Use tax incentives to: - encourage sustainable business investment and practices, renewable energy, electric vehicles and public transport, healthy consumer choices - discourage fossil fuel extraction and use, wasteful consumption, SYLVIE KERR W000795 22 Mar 2018, 6:30 AM The 'purpose' of tax is all of those things, but in a world facing climate change and other issues caused by decades of deregulation, tax can be a powerful tool to get society (inequality) and the economy back on track. PATRICK MCKENNA W000810 22 Mar 2018, 8:45 AM there will always be too many loopholes and complexities for tax to be effective as a means to change in most areas. cigarette tax has worked because they are a clearly distinguished item. alcohol could be further targeted in the same way. many areas, particularly food, are too complex to be effectively targeted so it is better to use tax money to educate the public. soft drinks could be an exception though T PETERS W000835 22 Mar 2018, 11:20 AM I support taxes need to be collected for the core business of the government to function. I also think we should have a safety net for the needy and disadvantaged in our society. I do not support taxes as a general wealth redistribution, or to dictate public behaviours eg sugar tax, taxes to discourage private motor vehicle use etc. TODD FELLOWES W000854 22 Mar 2018, 1:28 PM Hi Tax Working Group Team, There is so much I could say here however I will attempt to keep things brief. Firstly, and I appreciate the commitment to work in an open and transparent manner and so therefore, with Sir Michael Cullen, chair of the Tax Working Group, assembling a great team for the job. Who is on this team exactly please ? This is important. I am a historian of monetary history and lets just say, an economic scientist, with a 19 year background in this field. Before anything, it needs to be fully recognized as to why things are the way they are. This is also very important. Why is housing in an unprecedented bubble ? Why are interest rates at an historic low over a duration than in any time in history? Why has the RBNZ held interest rates in suspension? Why is tax required in the first place ? This is a just a couple of things that need consideration over all else. You can not and will not succeed in plugging holes in a dam expecting successful or results. GORDON CAMERON W000863 22 Mar 2018, 1:56 PM The purpose of tax is for all of those things - to fund state expenditure, to fund welfare, to shape the economy, and to motivate changed behaviour. Environmental concerns need a tax consequence. otherwise many of us won't change our behaviour. The UN's 17 sustainable development goals will need tax as one tool to achieve these. Tax is also useful as an efficient and reliable measuring tool (working with Stats NZ). STEWART LAWRENCE W000906 22 Mar 2018, 7:21 PM Inequality has increased massively in New Zealand, and with it many social problems. Greater equality has been shown in other (i.e., Scandinavian) countries to make everybody, rich and poor, more satisfied with life in general. SUSANNAH RODDICK W000915 22 Mar 2018, 7:46 PM There are always more people who at times, will need more help or be in a more vulnerable position. If I suddenly get sick, then I'd be grateful for tax-paid support to help look after my family in a reasonable way. These needs are never going to disappear, and may apply to any of us at some time. I'd be very happy to pay more tax, ifI could be more sure that our vulnerable people were looked after. EMILY BURTON W000928 22 Mar 2018, 9:07 PM Your options simplifies it too much. I think tax plays an important role in.all those areas. LARA IRIARTE W000951 23 Mar 2018, 12:14 PM The options above should have allowed for more than one answer. Tax can achieve more than one purpose. To look after the most vulnerable, provide core services, and discourage environmental damage / pollution. ANONYMOUS W000966 23 Mar 2018, 3:32 PM Tax should not be used to build more roads and bridges. While essential, there are more pressing issues that need attention. Public transport! Social services! Dealing with climate change! Education! Health! Raising salaries of educators etc. Those that are in need of help should be helped with tax dollars. CATHERINE OLSEN W000980 23 Mar 2018, 6:00 PM The purpose of tax should be to cover the costs of giving all nzers a comfortable life, good education, health care etc. ANONYMOUS W001029 24 Mar 2018, 1:17 PM The government should stay out of everything but core services. GEORGE JASONSMITH W001049 24 Mar 2018, 4:05 PM The purpose of the tax system should be simple, straight-forward and easily understood. The first four options listed in the Quick Poll above do not meet this objective. In my view the objective of the tax system should be: "To raise the money required to run the machinery of government, deliver all core public services, and those discretionary services that a government may determine from time to time." Under this definition it is essential to define core services, which is also required for Quick Poll option 1, which unfortunately opens a "whole new can of worms", but one that must be opened. I n simple terms they include Public Heath, Social Housing, Law and Order, Defence and border protection, Foreign Affairs, protection and maintenance of Crown Land and natural resources, provision and maintenance of trunk land transport (rail and road) links, etc. STEVEN WILSON W001067 24 Mar 2018, 5:28 PM Tax should be used to support those who can’t NOT won’t help themselves, encourage people to make better decisions and encourage local, PRODUCTIVE investment. It currently does the opposite of these these things in many cases. It provides a drag net not a safety net encouraging long term welfare dependency, it encourages investment in unproductive housing and ignores the massive damage caused by fatty/sugary food/drinks. SAM STONE W001106 24 Mar 2018, 9:41 PM Tax should be used for all of the above. It should enable New Zealanders to live fulfilling lives through providing essential services and support, and encouraging sensible spending. This last point can come in the form of using tax to price items and services which are unfavourable to health or the environment out of the market, such as the current tax on cigarettes. LES NEWMAN W001128 25 Mar 2018, 6:30 AM All tax acts as a sea anchor to the economy and should be kept to a minimum People who earn/make money should be left to spend it as it is theirs therefore an increase in user charges is fairer than higher taxes Those unable to care for themselves should be helped generously but those who choose not to work or have chosen not to get an education should not receive the same degree of support as those in real need this two tiered approach would bring fairness to the system and reduce the need for more taxes Hand up rather than hand out is better especially when the money being handed out has come from someone else's hard work So in short keep the taxes low, encourage education, training, and a healthy life style Increase tax on booze smokes and sugar ANDREW BOYCE W001132 25 Mar 2018, 7:45 AM I strongly believe that Government has like Local councils forgotten what their core function is ! DONALD ARCHER W001144 25 Mar 2018, 9:02 AM Obviously a big part of tax goes to running our country and essential services but I believe there should be a reasonable proportion used to support better choices without making them a hardship on people or a target for the black market. Local and central taxes need to be at least reviewed together as the total amount of rates and taxes increased over time. MELISSA GREENE W001162 25 Mar 2018, 12:16 PM We need to support those who need our help, but also encourage the people of NZ to make better choices. We could introduce tax on sugary drinks and use the money raised to support programmes that provide breakfast/lunch for school children that aren't fed at home. We could also encourage people to buy locally, helping Kiwis eat healthier and supporting local businesses. Raising/introducing plastic bag levies could drastically improve NZ's consumption of plastic and alter our position from being one of the most wasteful countries in the developed world. 5-10c per bag is not enough, we need to force people to make better choices for the environment with a levy of 20c at least. Another way to do this is by supporting businesses that prove they are reducing their carbon footprint and finding other alternatives to plastics. ANDREA SPEARS W001184 25 Mar 2018, 2:43 PM Tax should he transparent Shoukd be collected to support the core services: Especially Health and Welfare. Dental Care for those under 20 (not under 18) Public Hospital Healthcare FOR NZ CITIZENS ONLY TO REDUCE Costs for seeing GP For NZ Citizens Only Education Housing for all income families NZ Resident/Citizens Only Welfare support for NZ Citizens only. NOT to support Non-Citizens. Australia does not alliw non citizens to claim any welfare or state assistance (not even NZers) REECE MOODY W001195 25 Mar 2018, 3:33 PM Firstly, I am of the opinion that the Tax Working Group is a facade. Rather than 'how can we overhaul the tax system', I think it is a front for 'how can we increase the tax take'. Because that is how Labour works. So my answers may seem somewhat cynical since they are in that context, but are no less valid. Taxation is a form of state- sponsored theft. However, i recognise the need for public/shared services to be funded, and in the absence of a better solution, tax is the only answer. To minimise tax, it should be targeted to three key areas only. My recommendation is to limit tax to: - Infrastructure (roads, drainage, etc. including LINZ); - Military (including Law Enforcement and Customs); - Judicial System (Courts, prisons, etc). Other state- operated programs are (e.g. WINZ, ACC, etc) are abused by too many people. It is not the purpose of the state to 'encourage' me to make better choices. As long as what i am doing is not a crime, it is none of the state's business. ROBERT LLOYD W001222 25 Mar 2018, 5:46 PM Tax is needed to create good infrastructure and essential services for every community in NZ. RIGHT NOW THE DISPARITY BETWEEN THOSE WHO HAVE AND THOSE WHO HAVE NOT is too great. Secondary tax should be reduced to zero, as the only people needing to work 2 or more jobs are the people who need the money the most. The HAVES do not need a 2nd job, unless u call money laundering a job. NZ Immigration policy over the last 10 years has been appalling letting in too many of the wrong kind of immigrants. Yes we r all immigrants in some way, but as a NZ BORN Kiwi I feel my country is no longer my own. Giving way to property developers and overseas speculators taking advantage of NZ VERY SOFT POLICY AROUND HOUSE BUYING AND SETTLEMENT. When u come from a country of over a billion people, it's dog eat dog, & we (kiwis) don't eat dog!!! I'm ashamed to be a kiwi in the 21st Century, when we sell ourselves as 100% Pure, I'd say pure bullshit. As it's just not right. DEIDRE BUTLER W001237 25 Mar 2018, 7:41 PM Tax should be simple and it should be straight forward and transparent. For instance the video expresses tax is for “stuff we need”. But what does that mean? What one person thinks they need, another would not necessarily? Absolutely tax should encourage responsibility for making the right choices - or preferably, responsibility for making the wrong choices. Wrong choices have a cost outcome that should be user pays - e.g. pollution=clean up, smoking=health impacts, eating unhealthy=health impacts, sugary drinks=teeth/health impacts. Tax should encourage good decisions and behaviours and discourage bad decisions and behaviours. Ultimately though, it should DIRECTLY collect the revenue from the offendors of the bad decisions to offset the costs of those bad decisions from them! REBEKAH STEWART W001263 26 Mar 2018, 10:42 AM Because of our liability laws I believe NZ tax supports Kiwis but I also believe it should stay in the background and look after core services. Core services should be protected DAN CARPENTER W001288 26 Mar 2018, 3:59 PM I think the role of Govt is not to control and make decisions on behalf of individuals. ADAM RANSFIELD W001308 26 Mar 2018, 9:28 PM Tax needs to remain simple. Clear and easy to enforce and collect. The more complicated we make it the more it costs to collect it and the less useful it is. That said I think as a country who prides itself on being clean, green and healthy we need to also drive the changes we what to see in our society and tax is a great tool for doing that. For these reasons I would like to see some more behaviour based taxes placed on businesses in areas of pollution, transport, production. These taxes should push us towards waste reduction, clear air and water and clear streets. While I would love to encourage clean eating based behavioural taxes i don't think this has been done well in other countries like Australia and has not had the desired effects. ANDREW ELPHICK W001324 27 Mar 2018, 8:31 AM The purpose of a tax is to raise revenue from the people to fund activities, It should not impose a compliance burden and be as simple as possible to manage. Social policy initiatives should be left about as much as possible apart from determining income levels for social assistance. If taxes are required to induce social change they should be too complex to create a burden on businesses. In addition neutrality, as much as possible should be built into a tax to allow buy-in by the people by way of voluntary compliance. TERRY MURPHY W001341 27 Mar 2018, 10:11 AM Too much money is spent on supporting top heavy bureaucracies. I worked as Personnel Director for Abbey National Building Society, at that time the second largest building society in the world, employing 12000 people. I also sat on a number of government an CBI committees. After that I worked as a self employed consultant and in that role was employed by government agencies such as the Department of Em,ployment to look at their internal structures and management style. I had a number of major company clients in the UK and overseas. Always managed to reduce the size of the non productive bureaucracies. The same exercise needs to be done in NZ government and Local Government. In order to achieve that the blame culture needs to change. PAUL KING W001358 27 Mar 2018, 11:49 AM Any deviation from strict tax neutrality and uniformity creates unforeseeable social and economic consequences, often even at the expense of those issues that targeted tax policies are intended to improve. Special tax treatment also creates powerful perverse incentives, diverting productive activity and investment away from where it will do most good for the economy and citizens, towards, while sheltering inefficient and even toxic economic practices that push others outside the favoured demographic closer to poverty. ROB HENDERSON W001380 27 Mar 2018, 3:09 PM Tax allocation for running a public sector as part of NZ employment is a mistake and should not be referred to as part of the economy. Tax allocation should be as a major purpose used for infrastructure to assist the economy to function. Infrastructure should not be a profit centre or economic unit. Its a cost to support the country that should be run on the basis of being efficient and effective. That includes communications, transport, medical, water reticulation, power etc. WILLIAM LIEW W001390 27 Mar 2018, 4:35 PM The purpose of tax is use the money for services. However, it's also being used to discourage people from certain things. Tax on cigarettes,... reduce smokers. Income tax, reduce hard working people. JEFF CHRISTENSEN W001398 27 Mar 2018, 5:00 PM Tax should be as neutral as possible so that no investments are specially favoured. KATRINA MILLER W001418 27 Mar 2018, 9:57 PM I think under the current system tax is to help those in need and that's what it should be for but it could also be used to guide businesses on their social responsibility. If businesses are contributing sustainable living they are already meeting their social responsibility and should be paying less tax than a business that is not. ANONYMOUS W001421 27 Mar 2018, 10:48 PM A combination of all options mentioned in the poll! The total level of revenue raised should be sufficient for core services and to administer a strong welfare state. Once that total level (whatever it may be at any given time) is established, any taxes which are intended to influence incentives (not just behaviours, but decision making, whether corporate or individual) should be accounted for. Where possible, these should be designed as revenue neutral. Once this has been factored in, the remainder should be acquired through broad base taxation, namely GST, (progressive) income tax, and corporate tax. Other notes: - Issue with income tax evasion when the top tax rate differs significantly from corporate tax rate (revenue neutral alignment desirable improvement ceteris paribus?) - Removing GST from any products is inefficient from a tax perspective. Rather than using the tax base to increase affordability, subsidise them through expenditure. SAM GROVER W001446 28 Mar 2018, 9:56 AM The purpose of tax is to raise money for the government to spend on services. This is very straightforward. However, tax also needs to be raised in a way that does not incentivise certain behaviours purely for tax reasons. In a perfect world, every decision we make with our money would be purely based on the value it provides, rather than the tax implications. The current system is not achieving this goal. The biggest example of this is our approach to capital. By not taxing capital, we are encouraging people to put more resources into capital (namely through buying houses) and fewer resources into other things. The negative effects of this manifest themselves in things like our low savings rate and low productivity. These are problems that our unfair tax system has created, and the tax system needs to change to fix them. DOUG SOMMERVILLE W001463 28 Mar 2018, 1:00 PM Trying to discourage/encourage certain behaviour with tax often results in unanticipated consequences. SCOTT ESSER W001471 28 Mar 2018, 2:37 PM Our tax system must be a tool for redistributing wealth so that all kiwi's have an equal opportunity. This mean adequately funded health and education sectors. We should implement another tax bracket for high earners; say those earning over $150,000 per year at 35%. R HUNT W001501 28 Mar 2018, 7:52 PM Tax is not the be all and end all, it should provide core services in areas such as health, schooling, some social security but shouldn't be used to subsidise particular industries. NZ was built on the back of people who worked hard and didn't epxect handouts. GERALDINE COMBER W001529 29 Mar 2018, 9:54 AM It should not be a continual grab for more money - cut down on government to save money JAMES LITTLEWOOD W001544 29 Mar 2018, 1:09 PM I don't know what you mean either by "stay in the background" or "core services." The purpose of tax is to enable the government to pay its bills. In some cases it can be used to modify behaviour, such as tax on fags and booze. But that is a distant secondary consideration. Whatever sort of society you want, you need tax to pay for it. ERIN STAGG W001556 29 Mar 2018, 2:14 PM I think tax can be used to encourage investment where we need investment and discouraging where we don't. However I also think taxes are the backbone to how society functions, and should be there to help the less fortunate access services ANONYMOUS W001578 29 Mar 2018, 5:20 PM Broadening the tax base ANONYMOUS W001590 29 Mar 2018, 7:27 PM Taxation is for all of these purposes or, even if not intended, has all of these effects: could we move on to the real (and harder) questions - for example: - how to address the regressive impact of gst; - how to address the absurd tax treatment of residential property investment; - how to recognise the income-related costs of wage-earners: for example, a self-employed tradesperson can deduct his or her transport costs while a wage earner can’t and very likely won’t be reimbursed by an employer; - how to measure and present the relative effects of tax and related measures in a transparent way; - why benefit fraud is punished far more heavily than tax avoidance, despite far larger amounts involved; - whether the current anti-avoidance provisions need to be broadened to capture use of trusts and other widely marketed tax minimisation measures; and - given the simplicity of the tax system for almost all people/businesses, how can that be achieved for the remainder? Thanks and good luck MELANIE KILFOYLE W001606 29 Mar 2018, 10:37 PM Inland Revenue seems to be a great agency for administering social policy (eg assessing and paying Family Support Tax Credits, collecting student loan payments and collecting child support from NCP). If you want to expand this, you really need to invest in staff training and staffing numbers. S B W001623 30 Mar 2018, 8:39 AM Tax should still be mostly in the background, and should not act as a major hindrance on businesses to ensure they remain economic. I would like to see tax on sugar, as this will have a positive impact on health, and reduce the significant cost on our health system, especially in regards to obesity and diabetes. In doing so, however, we would also need vegetables and fruit to be made cheaper by reducing tax. The cost of healthy food in NZ is much higher than other countries in the world. Please make it easier for New Zealanders to make healthy food choices. ANONYMOUS W001638 30 Mar 2018, 2:16 PM Encourage investment so more business will start with more employee JOHN LIVESEY W001670 30 Mar 2018, 10:29 PM I see the primary purpose of tax a redistribution of wealth and income within society; this is to say, to reduce the severe inequality in wealth that otherwise emerges in the winner-takes-all type of capitalist society we currently live in. ANONYMOUS W001694 31 Mar 2018, 11:26 AM Tax is critical to a fair, just and humane society, it should include all the options given in the above list. It should be structured to encourage ethical behaviours in both individuals, organisations and businesses. CHRIS WONG W001738 1 Apr 2018, 9:23 AM I want New Zealand's tax system to be more proactive on protecting the environment. In particular, I am concerned about: - How bottling companies are allowed to draw billions of liters of clean Canterbury water for little cost, and - How the Emissions Trading Scheme still doesn't cover agriculture, which is the largest contributor to CO2 emissions by far. KATHERINE PARK W001744 1 Apr 2018, 2:32 PM Tax is the contribution that everyone makes to ensure that our country functions in an economically viable way. And that the health, education, environmental and infrastructural needs of our nation are met. The tax system and spending of tax payer money should be an open and transparent process. MICKEY WILLS W001789 2 Apr 2018, 8:00 PM The one that is was gone in the way better life for you and me is that responsible for you and me.and then if it's may have a good atiutiud for you and me is that we colling them are good man for people wanted in this life sitiuwayton.for that is now living for the people who want to go back for there pamison area and live us to do same life better for our family's.for this responsiblity is to forword on the people how have good life,but i now no one have good life,every body sin in this world,befor i prosid my explanation i like to say you my people,sorry for what some of our trib like that,but i now this time every thing is to be done.in time i can remine people for what we have saying this moment now,and then i can allways tealling people how are mine love evaill way off life,thas makes people have not incaragement in the live,this new version of life now is probably mineson that some way of living home might not good Becouse of people have consend about there land so that's y than KEVIN COLLINS W001814 3 Apr 2018, 1:32 PM Yes, the NZ tax system should absolutely encourage better choices and discourage harmful ones. In fact, using taxes to drive behaviour change is just as important as using it to raise revenue. Much of the costs that society bears (e.g., health care) would be greatly reduced if people made different choices. For example, use the tax system to discourage sugary drinks just as we use it to discourage smoking. I want to see the tax system used to give consumers the information they need to make purchasing decisions. For example, put a high, differential tax on businesses that do not produce an approved social and environmental "sustainability annual report." Companies must release traditional financial annual reports on which people can base their purchasing and investment decisions; consumers should have the same type of information in other spheres. Tax companies more if they don't report how much waste they produce. Then watch market forces drive those amounts down. ANONYMOUS W001817 3 Apr 2018, 2:11 PM The purpose of tax is to provide a minimum living standard in New Zealand. Currently, this minimum standard is below that which it should be. Tax system should encourage certain behaviours, such as, retirement saving, environmentally friendly choices, no GST on fruit and vege. It should also legalise drugs and collect tax on the income. PAUL WING W001834 3 Apr 2018, 7:43 PM The tax system should only be used to collect revenue for government spending. It should NOT be used to drive behaviour. If something is that bad, eg tobacco smoking, it should just be banned. As can be seen with cigarettes high taxes have not stopped people from smoking just created crime. WARREN HARRIS W001838 3 Apr 2018, 7:55 PM Tax should not only be used for social engineering sparingly. Tax on tabacco and alcohol have proved effective and are argueably collecting too much revenue for the costs imposed on society now. However a sugar tax is a step to far. Nutritionists were only recently saying a fat tax would be needed. It is now common science that fat is not as unhealthy as once thought. There is a high risk of such taxes being a tool by lobby groups with fake intentions, ie companies wanting a market advantage. Where any amount of smoking is unhealthy, it can be shown that moderate sugar intake is not unhealthy, and thus should not be subject to tax. Likewise GST exemptions or other systems that add complexity to the tax system should be avoided. DEVAN KESHA W001882 4 Apr 2018, 12:50 PM Tax should be used to encourage people to make more socially harmonious decisions which benefit all members of our society. YVONNE CURTIS W001894 4 Apr 2018, 2:22 PM The purpose of tax is broad. People do respond to financial indicators. That is why there is so much investment in housing. We need a capital gains tax and why Americans do not pay off their mortgages. A good tax system uses taxes on Sugary drinks and alcohol for example to discourage use (much better than making illegal) and the money goes to the health system or Police. So much tax payers money goes into policing and health measures. A good tax system is not regressive like GST. The poor should not pay proportionally more and benefit less. Check out the occupations of the parents of uni students on the student allowance in dentistry, pharmacy etc etc. allowance. A good tax system is broad based and fair. There should be a progressive company tax to benefit small and medium sized businesses. We should tax tourists atleast $50. for use of public facilities in NZ. This should be spent on public amenities and go to Dept. of conservation. We need more tax money., not less. P H W001906 4 Apr 2018, 6:12 PM NO to a sugar tax. All taxes end up impacting the most on those who can least afford it. Corporations always pass on any increase in cost. Therefore any increase in existing taxes, or any new taxes always increase the cost of living, which is already high. NZ taxpayers and small businesses need tax relief, NOT the opposite. We're struggling to survive as it is. NO more tax! We can't afford it. JUDY CRUICKSHANK W001917 4 Apr 2018, 6:30 PM I think I have answered above. Core services such as health and infrastructure should be govt purpose. Making people work for their income also. Stop incentivising welfare beneficiaries. MORGAN KNOESEN W001938 4 Apr 2018, 10:47 PM Modern Taxation systems are wealth management funds for the super wealthy. Corporations and businesses in industries such as pharmaceuticals, construction, transport and medical companies offer services to the government to use tax money to provide services to the people who pay taxes. Most of these companies pay minimal tax and allow their employees to carry the tax burden. PAUL EADY W001942 5 Apr 2018, 5:53 AM Tax is primarily to provide core services and infrastructure that can't realistically be 'user pays', e.g. defence, law & order, education, public health, pre-funding development of national infrastructure networks. It also has a role in addressing the externalities that the market has not priced in to its goods and services, so that the price properly informs consumers of the consequences of thier decisions. Some tax revenue needs to be directed toward providing assistance to those who cannot provide for themselves, and helping them get to a stage where they can support themselves. It is not the role of the tax system to interfere in the market economy and incentivise certain types of commercial enterprise over others. TAVA OLSEN W001952 5 Apr 2018, 9:28 AM It is worrying that these options don't acknowledge that actually the government doesn't need to tax to spend, the government spends and then taxes so that we don't get run away inflation. I strongly recommend the tax working group reads Ann Pettifor's The Production of Money: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F4eGTY6RWeg GARTH BARLEY W001971 5 Apr 2018, 8:23 PM Tax, in my mind's eye, should be used to solidify and expand our societies foundation. In practical terms that means education, support networks, health services, police and legal services, and infrastructure. While maintenance of these is important, expansion is also a primary concern throughout new zealand (not just here in auckland), since a healthier, more enabled populace with the agency to act will enable us to live happier and more meaningful lives, as well as allowing our children and theirs to live better than we did. While I like the tax on cigarettes, for the most part I feel that tax money can be spent on bettering ourselves, we shouldn't tax things that are "detrimental" (unless there is significant scientific consensus that something can be detrimental to other people. It is one thing to choose to smoke, it is another when other people are affected from your choice and not theirs). HANK (HENDRIK) OPTLAND W001982 6 Apr 2018, 12:55 AM I feel that most people actually like to pay a reasonable rate of tax because that is the price paid for the civilised society we live in. However, many of the people I know do not like unnecessary waste when it comes to government spending. For instance, this week it was reported that it was going to cost about 1/4 million dollars to rename the Education Council of Aotearoa New Zealand to a new name which is quite similar to the old. I feel that the majority taxpayers would have liked this amount paid towards something more worthwhile such as half a State house. Principally, I would like to see a taxation system that funds core services and I would not mind a bit more tax collected for 3 main reasons: (1) full contributions to the New Zealand Retirement Fund as per Dr Cullen's calculations PLUS all the catch up payments missed by the Key/English government, (2) better support for KiwiSaver contributions and (3) sovereign debt repayment. I like this opportunity to comment. Thank you. PARIS PARAHA W002001 6 Apr 2018, 11:48 AM Purpose of Tax should be about protecting our natural resources, making better choices to help and encourage our people/community to do better then make our community unsafe and lastly should be able providing for things we as a whanau/community would need to survive. Because of recent behaviors such as smoking, weed, alcohol affects us negatively and is corrupting families. Which should become a much bigger tax and would help encourage them to drink less than more. This would help our community and maybe our country in the further years of tax. Kind Regards ~Paris~ NADINE SEIDEL W002011 6 Apr 2018, 4:26 PM All producers of plastic of any sort should be taxed massively to clean up our environment. Including nylon, microfiber and polyester clothes producers. MICHAEL HARDING W002048 7 Apr 2018, 2:21 PM Unforeseen consequences comes to mind when you get tax trying to guide choices. It wreaks of agendas and an idealistic outlook of some being forced on others. In my opinion, tax should not work harder for us, but those spending our taxes need to work harder to ensure they are not wasted. CATHERINE LAMB W002052 7 Apr 2018, 3:22 PM People should be getting educated on how to budget, grow gardens etc so they can make the right choices rather then being taxed for making the wrong choice. Education needs to start in preschool and go right through to the end of high school to help break the cycle of people making bad choices. CHRIS W002063 7 Apr 2018, 5:14 PM Tax is a tool used by the government for them to tell you what they want you to do by applying how much tax you need to pay for different behavior. DENNIS CONROY W002074 7 Apr 2018, 7:29 PM tax when working should be set at a certain amount and no more. .if you have paid tax through out the year. ...then IRD should not request for any more money ANGELA B W002112 8 Apr 2018, 1:11 PM TAX is for supporting unqualified people in parliament and to support a large proportion of people who do not want to work but do want to make other peoples lives a misery. We have a obesity problem in NZ yet we are building more houses and taking away large sections so there is only TV left. Easy solution close the border LUKE SCHNEIDER W002145 9 Apr 2018, 11:07 AM Protection of lives, liberties, and property from enemies foreign and domestic. Also to provide for an independent judiciary to resolve the petty conflicts that arise between people living together in a society. No wealth transfer, no public or commercial subsidies in exchange for votes and campaign contributions. MURRAY ELLIOTT W002170 9 Apr 2018, 4:15 PM We support many Low Income earners including ourselves, but find it difficult to get clients to pay their tax when they are running at a loss or getting a wage/income lower than those on the Benefit. There is currently no options available for them. I understand that Tax Revenue is paramount however I believe that there must be some equality around the very low income earners. MAE KIELY W002190 9 Apr 2018, 9:17 PM Tax should be to allow the country, the creatures and the people who live in here to flourish..to provide for shared facilities sure, to protect the environment by encouraging better choices,to take care of those who fall on hard times..to encourage us all to take the longer term view and the less selfish view. TIMOTHEUS FRANK W002207 10 Apr 2018, 8:33 AM The tax system also needs to function to redistribute wealth. We are all part of society and those "hard-working" folk who earn a lot of money, need to recognise that this can only done in the context of society. Because people are greedy and often do not redistribute wealth personally, the state has to do this through taxes. The tax system also should recognize families and impose lower burdens on those with young children. The tax system also needs to incentivise individuals (including those in charge of corporations) to make good choices and to avoid excesses of potentially good things, if they hurt society. Examples are alcohol and other addictive substances, the use of private motor vehicles (including trucks), excessive salaries (including in the public sector), access charges to scenic sites that are overrun, intensive land use. Other matters, such as gambling, pollution etc. also need to be taxed, when its prohibition would lead to illegal activity. ANONYMOUS W002243 10 Apr 2018, 11:03 AM like the idea of using tax to get people to buy more local and NZ made. Removing tax on certain foods would obviously make them more affordable and so people would make a healthy choice and save money. The problem with higher tax on things like smokes and alcohol is it puts the price up and then people turn to crime to get the money to pay for them, or steal them outright, often violently. ALASTAIR HOSKING W002264 10 Apr 2018, 11:52 AM I do not agree that taking more tax from New Zealanders will have any beneficial affects. It will raise the cost of living, make more families reliant on Government, encourage black marketing of a range of goods, encourage more people to enter the "cashies" underground economy, will not reduce obesity, gambling, alcoholism or homelessness. Increased taxes will have the exact opposite effect to that expected. We need to remove Government from peoples lives, reduce taxes, encourage a thriving economy that employs people on realistic wages. Government role should be facilitating independence not the "Mummy State" mentality that many have today. I believe that tax reduction should begin with the removal of all GST - It has made overseas internet shopping too attractive. It has made food too expensive given that many families and old age beneficiaries are living on minimal incomes. Get rid of GST - it has been a disaster for New Zealand. Consider a flat rate tax on every dollar of income. BILL WRIGLEY W002276 10 Apr 2018, 12:36 PM The proper use of taxation is to fund the core services the community requires the state to provide. By common consent in NZ, these core services are deemed to include the provision of free education , health services and various social safety nets in the form of unemployment, accommodation, age etc. benefits. Only when the state has fully met the above and funds are still available should the state consider advancing monies for any other purpose. The risk is that once this zone is entered all decisions are subjective and at best are highly politicised, whilst at worst are representative of "pork barrel politics". Evidence of this is the recent decision by the government to withdraw funding from three irrigation schemes on the basis that such schemes should be self sustaining and were of questionable environmental impact, while at the same time promising $114m to the 2021 Americas Cup event for which no environmental impact report has been done and which needed that money to proceed. ANONYMOUS W002290 10 Apr 2018, 1:00 PM Tax should be used for core services only yea some people need help time to time but people on benefits for too long shouldn't be encouraged.it should be used to help people who are effected by earthquakes and floods etc. GIOVANNA FERRARIO W002299 10 Apr 2018, 1:16 PM You do not discourage behaviour by introducing further taxes: an alcoholic will find other ways to get the money to keep their habit (crime?). I agree on reducing taxes on fruit&vegetables and those products that all families should be able to afford. I have so much to say about taxes as I have experienced first hand the disaster of a forever increasing tax system in Italy with no actual advantage to the people, just harder life. Taxes are not the solution; it is imperative to identify the main issue and work to establish effective improvements to eliminate or reduce it. It is the same than giving a piece of fruit to somebody, they will eat it and wait for another one...if instead that person is taught how to plant a seed and nurture the tree that comes from it, he/she can feed the whole family on the apples they are going to harvest. Very happy to be a more active part of this group, as there are so many matters that need sorting and taxes are NOT the solution...quite the opposite! ALAN MATTEUCCI W002322 10 Apr 2018, 2:11 PM - Government spending should be reduced, this should lead to less tax collection being required. - Any spending by government should be properly vetted and assessed before approval, and spending largess must be stopped. Examples of wrong spending of tax collected monies: $3M for Manus Isl criminals, increasing refugee quota and spending, paying for tertiary student fees for them to be doctors and lawyers adn well paid workers, giving away superannuation to non - residents who have never paid tax in this country, giving superannuation to millionaires, giving money to pay for winter heating to millionaires. In fact, any almost idea, business plan or service that private enterprise won't pickup is probably a waste of tax-payers money. People can donate to charity, or business can build trains if they want, right? RICHARD BROWN W002330 10 Apr 2018, 2:24 PM Tax is to provide money the government can use to provide and maintain core infrastructure for citizens, i.e. Police, Military, National Roading, Transport, Hospitals, Education etc. It's not for the current wasteful warm fuzzy BS that is prevalent amongst politicians who spend like it isn't their money. Pet projects to 'enhance wellbeing and feel good' are blatant wastes of money. We need to reign in 'nice to have's' and focus on 'must haves' to allow businesses and communities to progress under their own steam. Cut the waffly BS and stick to core services. It's bad enough that Councils waste money on non essentials - it's a crime when Government does this too. Governments need to remember that every dollar that is wasted was earnt by someone actually working.... ERWIN WEE W002343 10 Apr 2018, 3:10 PM Tax is not a weapon by the government to encourage or discourage certain behaviors, tax is a contribution by the society, to the society through the government for the purpose of the good operation and administration of services offered to the society in general and not only to core services. Should the government wants to encourage or discourage certain behaviors in society there is another way and that is to legislate, for example if the government discourages the use of petrol, then it should legislate for affordable renewable energy and not add tax on petrol as people can always source the income either locally or internationally to fund for the extra tax on petrol. GREG XAVIER W002361 10 Apr 2018, 4:02 PM Part of the purpose of tax in NZ should be to support people who need help, but the bigger part should be to provide for all basic needs of the people paying tax. Tax should cover healthcare across the board, education up to university level, free public transport, housing subsidies (but housing in general needs to be tackled separately as its own problem), telecoms and internet access at a basic level, and basic food and water supplies. Everything that people require at a most basic level to function in society. Very expensive of course, but I'd also expect to see us taxed at a much higher rate (50% + at the low end??) to cover all of the above. Tax should cover our basic needs. What we have left after tax should be our budget for luxuries. FRANK YOUNG W002377 10 Apr 2018, 6:52 PM Tax should be used to finance only the activities which are core to government responsibility. Taxes should not be collected to allow politicians to use taxpayer money to fund personal ideologies or indulge in social engineering at taxpayer expense. Tax should not be used by government to finance business development by attempting to pick winners. Most politicians have little or no experience of business and the record of government picking winners or attempting to be involved in business is abysmal. Instead R&D should be financed by tax deductions for legitimate R&D activities as business must make its own financial commitments before receiving any deduction benefit thus ensuring that R&D is carefully assessed and followed through by those with "skin in the game". Taxes should not be used as a means to modify personal behaviour. That amounts to political control of personal lives. Personal responsibility must remain the priority in food and life choices. ANONYMOUS W002419 11 Apr 2018, 12:17 PM Do we want a dog eat dog society or a society which has a level which individuals cannot fall below ,in other words do we want to be like the USA or Sweden DAVID ALLARD W002434 11 Apr 2018, 1:36 PM Apart from retirement investments, the taxation system should be neutral and not favour one form of investment over another. To do so inevitably leads to distortions. CRAIG SHARP W002515 12 Apr 2018, 7:47 AM nz is way over taxed you say 30% of goods made here goes into tax system but in fact most things we buy are taxed more than once and you forgot gst is an extra tax.very long term investments like forestry should be tax free to incourage invest ment into these sectors,why not put in place a fixed gst system say 25% on all spending no refunds and no income tax get rid off the ird as we know it also get rid of acc just another tax that could go back to insurance,our social welfare system needs to change to a work for dole system,there is no incentive to get people working if you pay them to do nothing that only breeds long term problems.more checks on these people not working needs to happen ,we need to get everyone who can working for the long term future of our system to look after our older people properly.central govt needs to look very hard at local body spending as rates tax system in nz is out of control,i feel nz govt spending of tax money is also out of control KARIN W002523 12 Apr 2018, 9:33 AM Industries that consume or otherwise render finite resources unavailable need to be taxed more - especially if pollution is the issue. I'm looking at the dairy & other animal- based industries. We cannot as a country sustain the levels of animal farming and pollution that are occurring now - literally cannot - we'll run out of room, clean water, and we cannot compete with the billions of acres in the world closer to those markets. If those industries go out of business because the actual costs make it unviable, then tough, the country should look at more sustainable efforts. Crops grown for human consumption need to be subsidised - not just have GST removed. Everyone ought to be able to buy ample rice, corn, beans, oats, fruits and vegetables. It ought to be so cheap it's a no-brainer to buy those instead of hyper processed & junk foods. Increasing the plant-based part of people's diets will significantly improve human and environmental health, saving lives, $$, and the country/planet. BRENDA WARD W002534 12 Apr 2018, 1:08 PM Tax has to be invested for New Zealand and for New Zealanders. We need to keep the economy turning over and allow the government to invest in projects to keep driving growth, but we also need to make sure Kiwis have a backstop in illness, adversity, or old age. The top earners in New Zealand have more money as individuals than they could ever need to run their lives, go on holiday, buy 'stuff' and give their children. The gap between haves and have-nots is growing. It's my belief when you have more, you can spare more and still live well. These people could be taxed more. Although businesses are rich too, I believe businesses still need tax incentives to grow and employ more people. Any drastic new tax measures will create shockwaves in the markets. We need the money going around from wages and spending. We need our investments to get good returns. So let's care for those who need it, and tax those who already have enough. ADRIAN JENKINS W002548 12 Apr 2018, 2:39 PM I think the primary purpose of tax is to provide Government services to the people of New Zealand. If we want a social service, low-cost quality education, fees-free tertiary education, a secure nation with well funded police and security services, high quality healthcare, someone has to pay the bill. Tax is the easiest way to ensure that everyone pays their share. Too many people begrudge paying tax. Many of the beneficiaries of government services hate the concept of paying tax themselves. We can't provide services if someone doesn't pay for them. PATRICIA JACK W002565 12 Apr 2018, 3:25 PM although I think that tax should be for core services I also think that NZ'ers need to make better choices on all sorts of things and that way we would all enjoy our lives a little better SHELLEY GILMAN W002582 12 Apr 2018, 4:24 PM Taxation has the role of doing all of the things above. It would be rather narrow to just select one. Government has a role to be the stewards of our land and peoples. It does not mean government should interfere with individuals lives but it will help NZ if making the right choices for the health of themselves and the health of our environments was easily done. For example it is difficult for children to make healthy choices when their food environment has been hijacked by Fast Food and Fizz. We have low cost alcohol so very accessible to young people because it is so cheap to buy premixed and is an easy step from just drinking fizz-tastes pretty much the same. Just ask a teenager . Taxation could reduce their access and subsequent harm. Taxation can be a great tool to encourage behaviour change. Tobacco is a fantastic example of this. JOYCE SHOTBOLT W002599 12 Apr 2018, 5:49 PM While I generally like the idea of tax remaining in the background and not impacting our lives too much, it has become obvious to me that there are some things going on in NZ that are impacting peoples lives detrimentally which could be helped by using taxes. In particular NZ needs to do something about the obesity crisis. Taxes have had an impact on smoking. Could a tax on refined sugar - and particularly in soft drinks - do the same for obesity? It would only work if alternative drinks such as water, or unsweetened drinks, were not taxed and clearly cheaper at retail level. I don't think drinks sweetened with low-calorie sweeteners should be exempt from the tax though, because they can also cause health problems and encourage a sweet tooth. Similarly Marijuana could also be taxed if it were legalised. It would be nice to see fresh fruit and veges exempt from GST. FIONA WRIGHT W002611 12 Apr 2018, 6:54 PM Increase tax on 'undesired' activities MARK O'BRIEN W002639 12 Apr 2018, 9:53 PM Can we change the normal GST (and provisional associated installments, eg AIM and ratio) to be required to be filed and paid every three months. Three months is the usual VAT filing period in the UK. It would make the compliance burden of GST less. Would also mean quartly accounts could be completed when GST returns are completed. BREANNA QUINN W002642 12 Apr 2018, 10:36 PM I think it is very important that we made healthy food more affordable and tax the unhealthy food. It is not ok that it costs less to buy potato chips that a fresh piece of fruit. I think it would undoubtedly reduce our nationwide healthcare costs in the longhaul. ANONYMOUS W002689 13 Apr 2018, 3:25 PM \[This is a group response from a tutorial\] We generally agree with all the aims the poll gave above. However, the 'Encourage New Zealanders to make better choices' option brought up some reservation. - There is a danger of a 'nanny state' - In general, it is better to reward good choices rather than punish 'poor' choices Ultimately, we see that tax has, and needs to have a multitude of roles. - Redistribution is a purpose that has been left out of the above. There seems to be a problem in NZ that the people most severely effected by tax are the poorest in society, and this goes against the 'purpose'. MATHEW TAYLOR W002706 13 Apr 2018, 5:02 PM The favourable tax treatment that residential property investment receives needs to stop. What other investment category encourages investment in a loss making activity for the purpose of reducing the tax liability from other sources of income and to receive a tax free capital gain? You should not be allowed to offset rental losses against your other income. The losses should be carried forward and only offset against future rental income. The family home CGT exemption should include the primary dwelling plus one other holiday dwelling. DAVID MOREL W002735 13 Apr 2018, 9:46 PM I've been brainwashed to go to school, Uni, buy a house, then another, then another... it's my retirement plan. Yes I'm an investor and I've only done what we've been taught since birth: save, save, save money for food, house, family, retirement! Not drink, drink, drink, smoke, drugs, and beg the government for a NZ super. All my tenants are from housing nz or recently exited housing nz and have bad credit records. Am I the bad guy because I support people in need? I agree that I made stupid money through the housing market because there were no capital gains tax. Yes I am heart broken to see people living in cars and 40k homeless people in NZ. It's not fair to be penalised for playing by your rules. Would we get tax credits if house prices were to drop? I've taken huge risk for a 3% rental yield. I feel like I operate a charity, I've taken family sacrifices to see my hnz tenants watching Sky! Please consider passing on capital gains tax to the banks not the risk takers. Tia GABD GRACE W002742 13 Apr 2018, 10:28 PM Introduce a transaction tax of 10%.Drop GST 5% LINDA SCOULLAR W002760 14 Apr 2018, 8:26 AM It would be good if you could simplify it down to what the tax covers. Like a Pie chart of the main areas that have been supported by tax. Real life updates and stories. Let people see where their money goes in real terms. Thank them for collecting and returning tax in a newsletter. Personal thanks email would make them feel better about paying it. Most people miss understand its value. TINA KAPOHE W002767 14 Apr 2018, 8:57 AM Tax should be fair. Secondary tax is not. GST on food is not. Everybody should pay tax if they make money in our country and this should be fair. Instead of minimum wage increases tax free thresholds should be introduced. Abatement levels are too Low BALAZS GEMESI W002787 14 Apr 2018, 4:43 PM Ideally all of them from the above list. We need to accept the reality that a Scandinavian level of taxation culturally not imbedded in New Zealand. Also New Zealand had some bad experience with large scale expenditure in the 70s and 80s. At the same time both the environment and challenges have been significantly changed. In order to get out from the middle income trap, productivity should be increased with smart incentives. The structure of income moved towards wealth as an origin. Although taxation as an equaliser has poor historical record (for further please read “The great leveller”), further encouraging rent seeking attitude likely to undermine growth and social cohesion. JAMES FLOCCHINI W002810 14 Apr 2018, 8:58 PM I my view the collection of tax is for core services which only a central government can provide. It should not be expanded for government to take away personal responsibilities or create greater dependence on government programs regardless of whatever they may be. Tax should be for education, health, infrastructure development, defense and social programs that are there for short term support and not a lifetime of support. PAUL HERD W002820 14 Apr 2018, 9:33 PM taxes should be for government core services and should not be wasted on other things . when there is an excess it should be given back in the form of tax cuts . avoiding tax should also be stopped . also hospitals and schools should be run as business and not by elected people who are not qualified to do so . also have private as well as public schools and hospitals is a double up of service and there should only be one or the other . .my preference option is public . AMELIA SMITH W002840 15 Apr 2018, 7:23 AM It depends on the purpose of each tax. E.g. a carbon tax encourages better choices whereas the fuel excise collects money for core infrastructure. You can’t just pick one of these options and generalise to all taxes. WARWICK PETERSON W002846 15 Apr 2018, 8:43 AM Maintain GST at current 15% level. No exemptions. Personal Income over $200.000 taxed at 49%. Stick to core projects. No special targeted rates other than the one below relating to work and residence. Govt to live within income or reduce services and employees. Tax levels to stay the same, except for above mentioned tax. Persons, companies selling houses to pay capital gains tax. New immigrants cannot get into this business for 5 years of permission to reside here. A special tax on those Auckland, Wellington Region office bound, govt, council employees who work more than 20kms from their permanent residence. Cheers. EMILY SHINE W002851 15 Apr 2018, 9:37 AM Tax is needed to pay for the services which keep our society functioning - roads, health, education, government etc. It is also important to share the wealth and enable those who are not in a position to work (young children, unskilled, health troubles, caring for others etc) to live comfortably. It is essential that wealthy New Zealanders help those who are worse off as mostly this is due to who you were born to and not 'your own hard work'. TRACY RIDLEY W002860 15 Apr 2018, 10:44 AM I believe government role in society is to provide equal OPPOUTUNITY not equal outcomes. Therefore the role of taxation is NOT to support fringe groups or persue the implementation of a failed ideolgy. Those that for some reason NEED help do need support. That is NOt to say welfare & tax payers money should pay people to stay at home. Those that do & fail I support, those that dont & have an entitillment ethos should NOT be supported by the tax payer. This would be painfull in the short term, yet imagine the benefit of everyone contributing to society in a positive manner. KAY HAUGHEY W002875 15 Apr 2018, 1:00 PM Introduce more tax brackets at the higher end (eg. $200k). Also $70k bracket is too low - well outdated given inflation & higher earnings. Some form of capital tax. Housing is a basic right (United Nations) - people should not make profit from it while disadvantaging others. Investors should be dissuaded. One alternative would be to introduce tax credits for proportionally high rental housing costs (as % of income). Further given the increase in people living alone consider tax breaks (eg. 1-2%) for them to set off the proportionally higher living costs that they bare. (Spelling?). Whatever you do be fair! You are introducting new wellbeing frameworks - this should well and truly be a point of consideration. JONATHAN GENSIK W002878 15 Apr 2018, 1:06 PM I believe that using tax to encourage better decision making will generate the most change and it is my opinion that the food sector should be targeted for this. Currently NZ sits third in the world as the most obese country, a sad fact. A big contributing factor to this is the price and convenience of unhealthy foods. A possible way to flip this trend could be to use tax as a way of subsidising healthier fresh foods to increase the likelihood of people purchasing healthier options. Alternatively unhealthy foods could have a tax imposed on them which, in turn, pays for the subsidies on the healthier options. The other factor that must be considered with fast and convenient foods is the packaging that most of it comes in. There are huge issues with the amount of waste people are producing at this point in time, a tax could be used to deter companies who don't use environmentally friendly packaging. Money generated from this could again go to subsidising healthy foods or to recycling. JO RICHARDSON W002881 15 Apr 2018, 1:46 PM I don’t have a problem with the way current tax is collected. I have a problem with how it is spent. I see myself and other people working out asses off every day. I bought an ex council house in an area where a large number of people are on benefits and they are sitting at home every day (clearly capable of working) while myself and many others fund their lifestyle. Our neighborhood needs cleaning up - why are these people not doing it in exchange for their pay check? I hear them talking about how they can purposely not get a job and swapping tips for staying on the dole. New Cycle lanes are going in to the city but there are roads in terrible condition elsewhere, our bins aren’t emptied. Get everything to a state before spending money on luxuries. How much revenue are these bike lanes bringing in to the city? A park and ride bus system would have been a better investment to cut down traffic as a lot of people don’t have showers at work or need to carry heavy items in. THEO KLEE W002898 15 Apr 2018, 5:40 PM Tax has to be fair on everyone. Under the current system, there is inequality because the super rich are not taxed appropriately. I think for the future we would need to tax these mega earners considerably more, whether it is Capital Gains tax or something similar across all of the super rich spectrum. Definitely a higher tax on the mega rich ! STEVE PRYCE W002923 15 Apr 2018, 10:02 PM This video is alarming. It is propogating the idea of taking money that people have worked for to then try and control their behaviour, I hope you can see the issue with that. Tax should only be for the bare minimum to cover essential services (life and liberty). Anymore and you are infringing on people’s freedom. RHEA DASENT W002950 16 Apr 2018, 8:42 AM I think tax needs to be clearly linked to services received. It should not be viewed by the govt as a way of earning money which goes into a general pot to be spent on whatever. The methods of collecting tax need to directly relate to what that tax will then be spent on. I like the concept of ACC tax on car regos for example, as there is a clear link between paying the ACC levy and assurance to myself as the "customer" that it is going towards a related service that I may or may not need one day. I really do NOT like the idea of taxes which are intended to change behaviour, mainly because it is the govt's idea of what is good behaviour and my idea might differ. This concept also strays from core services as the govt tries to intervene in our everyday lives. I do not want to be molded into a "perfect citizen" by the govt, I want to be my own person thanks. DAVID BLAKE W002968 16 Apr 2018, 12:45 PM The primary purpose of tax is the finding of course services. This does not mean it cannot serve secondary purposes through strategic taxation. Taxing polluting activities to fund investment in clean energy creation. Taxing capital gains in order to reduce income tax and GST, thereby stimulating domestic consumption and reducing the demand for complicated systems of social welfare payments. Taxing sugar laden products to help pay the health budget. ROBERT ANCELL W002975 16 Apr 2018, 2:49 PM As well as providing revenue for core services tax is an important mechanism to make our society equal. We need to redistribute wealth so that all New Zealanders have equal opportunity to lead a good life, rather than a free ride if they inherit wealth or being stuck in a poverty trap at the other end. An equal society is important for everyone, as this will increase happiness, reduce crime and allow us to have a healthy economy in which everyone can generate wealth and buy products / services. IAN MORONEY W002983 16 Apr 2018, 3:40 PM This may help New Zealanders to invest in our country for its betterment and retain or create employment FIONA JARDEN W002996 16 Apr 2018, 5:49 PM Purpose of tax should be twofold 1. To ensure that no one person or entity gains at benefit at the expense of others in the community. eg benefiting from rising house prices with the resultant exclusion of others from the housing market and the high cost of housing (including renting) that leave others living on an unsustainable amount eg business profiting at the expense of the environemnt 2. To provide services that allow all citizens to gain the skills they need to become caring responsible members of society BETH LENIHAN W003015 16 Apr 2018, 8:43 PM I strongly believe tax should be used to encourage positive behaviour as long as it is backed by rigorous scientific research and public opinion. Revenue collected should be used to support behavioural change and members of our society affected by the adverse behaviours. JULIAN VESTY W003050 17 Apr 2018, 1:17 PM A civilised society provides for those in need. I do not mind paying higher taxes when I know that the money is well spent on those in need. EILEEN WRIGHT W003069 17 Apr 2018, 4:51 PM How best to encourage better choices and discourage harmful ones, I believe our tax system has an important role to play in this and it doesn’t need to be complicated. When industry pollutes public rivers, and is harmful to ecosystems, people included, this behaviour can be discouraged by placing a tax on the pollution. This tax would be fixed to ensure no corruption of levels of pollution. However when the social costs of dealing with the pollution have been met and are lower than the tax collected, a rebate could be paid. When the population needs to have certain behaviours discouraged for health reasons a tax on harmful products could improve health outcomes. This has worked and is still working with tobacco and alcohol and could be extended to sugar. All processed foods could continue to have GST added. All fresh foods could be GST free. The lost revenue could be recovered by increasing GST on processed food. NAREN KUMAR W003086 17 Apr 2018, 7:04 PM We dont want new taxes....life is already hard please dont make it more hard. Also there is no way housing will become affordable if we play with tax system. DARRIEN LE COMTE W003091 17 Apr 2018, 7:37 PM Income tax is too high for low income earners. Minuim wage should be tax free. Income earners up to an annual maximum amount of 35k, should only be taxed at 10%. All property investment, commercial or housing, should be taxed for capital gains tax. Kiwsaver should not be taxed. Kiwsaver is for retirement, and the capital has already been taxed! No foreigner should be able to easily exit this country with outstanding fines, or hospital fees. All visitors must have medical insurance. Maruiajana should be legalised and taxed. Alcohol admissions to hospital should have an alcohol cost charge. Alcohol tax should cover all of hospital and prison expenditure for costs to the state. The super benefit and winz should not be taxed. Every dollar paid for child support to ird, should be credited in full to the children guardian, not a percentage. All of petrol tax including gst, should be set aside for state highway improvements. Community service card holders, should have free prescri TANEA HAWKINS W003103 17 Apr 2018, 9:19 PM Tax needs to be collected from all players in the economy. Ensure international entities are paying their share. Prevent ability of international companies from creating artificial costs in order to create zero profit in NZ. Ensure all purchases from overseas are captured. Keep government spending down, less tax needed; less drag on economy. Use tax breaks to incentivise savings for houses; farms and fishing boats ala 1980’s saving schemes which put people into farms houses and fishing industry. Move tax rate threshold from $70;000 to $90;000; $70k is not a lot of money. KARA REID W003125 18 Apr 2018, 8:22 AM Yes I agree that it is to support those in New Zealand who need help, but also focusing on education & health services and not only to us in NZ, but also to those in other countries who we are partnered with to help. JIM MILLER W003137 18 Apr 2018, 9:21 AM Core services our essential to NZ life Immigrants need to be a certain age and qualifications and have a stand down period before accessing certain systems ex health care Tourist should have insurance or a levy to access acc Health care, health and wellness should be gst free We should have incubators for new business- if they get tax breaks they give up equity MATHEW BAYLISS W003154 18 Apr 2018, 11:47 AM Our taxation system needs to be as simple and transparent as possible, additional complexity results in an administrative burden which undermines productivity. There are multiple alternatives to tax for influencing personal behaviors, differentiating food and services when calculating GST would create an industry dedicated to navigating the resulting complex tax regime. Taxing consumption uniformly is simple and easy to administer, focusing on reducing un-taxed consumption should be a priority. As an example, inbound tourists should be taxed at the border to generate funds to maintain and protect the environment they are travelling to NZ to experience. CRAIG JACKSON W003162 18 Apr 2018, 12:50 PM All of the above, but most importantly to make sure new zealand has the very best infrastructure possible. J B W003171 18 Apr 2018, 2:42 PM Tax should be used to keep the economy stable and pay for core services. If it is used as a way to influence the behaviour of businesses or individuals and either punishes or rewards taxpayers for certain actions, it is a very slippery slope. Social engineering and supporting political agendas is definitely not the purpose of tax and has no place in a healthy taxation system. LIZ ALLEN W003193 18 Apr 2018, 7:18 PM I totally agree with the idea of encouraging New Zealanders to make better choices and I said this in my previous submission in terms of supporting solar energy and EVs as well as less tax on basic foods, fruit and vegetables. Also putting taxes on foods which are not healthy like sugary drinks and fast food. For far too long we've undermined our country's infrastructure in health and education by not investing in these key areas and creating a two tier system where those that have money can afford private health care and education while the rest of NZers have to make do with failing systems. Other countries have higher taxes and have invested in their basic support systems. We've gone the other way and tried to push it all back on the individual in a user pays model. It hasn't worked and now the current government is faced with having to spend billions to fix the under investment. GERARD NEEDHAM W003202 18 Apr 2018, 8:18 PM Carbon tax, with carbon credit. From this we can get companys and farms to pay for the tones of carbon they produce and make a start to off set there carbon foot print. This will also help people who own rich nz bush lots to get money and credit they disverve. This is also how the NZ goverment will get there cut from DOC land and better funding for DOC also our local ewi with there land. This will also help people and power companys to plan for greener energy. We also nees to a single use plastic tax. This extra money should be used for rychicling witch is at a very poor rate in NZ. Also have floating tax on food, meaning fast food and unhealfy food is tax high than fresh fruit and vegs. As we all know gst is a joke. ACC is a joke. For instance i would like to get a motor bike for my weekly comute but rego is way to much and does not out set the cost. A motor bike is alot less dangerous to other people, uses less gas and cO, better for roads. MICHAEL CHO W003209 18 Apr 2018, 10:03 PM Taxes address certain situations where markets fail. In some cases, a small share of one's wealth to their neighbour can have a profound positive effect on society. However, just as any organisation, profit or non-profit, has a tendency to over grow and can start over consuming than it is necessary. Governments, just like large corporations, increasingly become inefficient over time - tangled in bureaucracy. The inefficiency of governments in delivering social good is made worse by the lack of transparency in how every tax dollar is spent and mostly importantly how much positive impact it produces. Throwing more money into a problem rarely solves any problems. The government as a monopolistic entity of social good have often poured our hard earned dollar down the sink. I would urge the government to squeeze every tax dollar to produce maximal social good, rather than year on end increasing it. PEYMAN MOMENAN W003230 19 Apr 2018, 9:04 AM Tax is and continues to be the mechanism for a government to collect the money needed to fund services and activities that undertakes (including helping those in need) for the benefit of all the population. I also think pitching tax on items such as alcohol, tobacco and fossil fuels as "correcting behavior" is just false. Consumption of certain items will have significant costs for the collective society (e.g. consuming fossil fuel will result in air pollution.) The extra cost to the society requires the consumers of these items to pay a enough to cover these additional costs. But to charge these taxes, the extra costs to the society must be reliably measured. This will be much easier said than done. It is not IRD's job to make us behave. I am was born in a country where its government wants to send everyone to heaven. That government may consider books harmful to your heaven worthiness and move to tax books accordingly. ANONYMOUS W003261 19 Apr 2018, 3:34 PM Taxes will only help create the changes we want to see if everyone pay their share. It is all well to talk about taxes and what could change in order to create a fair and better society. First, there should be greater efforts towards finding and punishing tax fraud and evasion which costs our society millions in lost revenue. Also, as country and a society, New Zealand should not allow tax evaders from other countries hide their money here. DAVID BAILEY W003284 19 Apr 2018, 9:10 PM I think its a complex balance core needs for the functioning of the country uses our tax but people who are in need also should benifit from it also the environment. But also investigation needs to go into people who are abusing the system to get money for doing nothing, there are too many people abusing winz and staying on benifits while dealing drugs or having far ton many kids adding to our poberty issues sonthing needs to be done please. Im happy for my tax money to help people who ACTUALLY need it!!! NAOMI POCOCK W003296 19 Apr 2018, 10:46 PM There are many global meta trends that we have little influence over as a nation and certainly as individuals (customized news feeds from social media influencing the news we are exposed to, lack of critical journalism, anti intelligence movement, ostracizing drug users etc). Government should use tax to do good in society - invest in environment, assist the poor through programmes such as housing first, provide preventative healthcare, provide a way way way better education system that's based on educational rather than economic principles...) ANONYMOUS W003313 20 Apr 2018, 10:12 AM Government taxes do not support government spending. They are inefficient, unnecessary and having been created by agents of the rich, serving only to widen the gap between the rich and the rest. Because the dollar is the result of laws, and the government has 100% control over those laws, the government cannot unintentionally run short of dollars. Even if all taxes fell to $0, the government would not run short of dollars. KIT GOLDSBURY W003334 20 Apr 2018, 2:41 PM Tax should be about collecting the least amount of money from people and that's all people, not just the so-called rich people, as is possible. Tax is not just a one way street - it should not just be about collection. It should also be about spending it as wisely as is possible. The fact that this is a tax payer funded website, full of videos and other self serving palaver, shows me that you lot have no interest in how to spend tax money wisely and the lame ignorance of your justifications for taxation is just moronic. Do you have any awareness of how hard people work for their money in this economy? You come across as a bunch of smug, self satisfied government fat cats. The fact that none of you have ever earned a non tax payer funded dollar in your lives makes you all the more reprehensible for promulgating this sort of propaganda. The first thing on this website should be an apology from you to the tax payers of this country. But I won't be holding my breath for that. ANDREW BARTLETT W003369 20 Apr 2018, 10:48 PM We already have a number of tax nudges, like ACC charges in registration being variable to safety history, or tobacco charges. I think it is quite reasonable to use tax for nudges, like alcohol taxes and sugar taxes where problems are society-wide, and for where we need to nudge choices such as funding public transport from car transport taxes (fuel tax etc). We do need to tackle climate change, and while a carbon tax is politicly difficult, it is really nothing more than a resouce use charge for our atmosphere, while also being a tax nudge. MICHAEL C BARNETT W003410 21 Apr 2018, 10:44 AM Pay for essential infrastructure, support research and development, fund support services to deal with the social unrest that has come to the fore in the past thirsty years as a result of the extreme wealth and income divide between the fortunate few and the rest. MAX ROBITZSCH W003428 21 Apr 2018, 3:57 PM Taxes are there to fund the core functions of society, from providing common infrastructure to social services. While not solely for those in need, providing funding for those in need is absolutely crucial. Taxes are also important to counter-balance the fact that "money accrues more money", i.e. low taxes lead, over longer durations, to more and more inequality and social injustice. MARK LEWIS W003440 21 Apr 2018, 5:39 PM Tax should be simple, not have lots of exemptions and should focus on taxing wealth rather than income. There should also be limited ways to reduce tax liability. TINA POPE W003453 21 Apr 2018, 7:23 PM The tax system should influence individual and company choices for the betterment of our society. Tax things that are bad for the environment and communities and ensure ir reflects the real cost of products and services (including environment, social costs). The tax sysyem ought to benefit businesses that are for the betterment of our society. Higher taxes for employers with poor policies, lower taxes for employers who look after environment and people. Totally tax wealth. ERWIN MEIER W003464 22 Apr 2018, 1:21 AM The tax system should underpin a fair society that provides quality services for all. The tax system should not be in the background. Citizens need to appreciate that through taxes we are purchasing services like education, roading, health services and social support, etc. A focus on minimising taxes leads to an errosion of services, infrastructure and fairness of society. Looking forward, we need to understand that acceleration technologies like AI will have dramatic impacts on jobs. Those who destroy jobs through technology must share profits gained with society as a whole through higher taxes. MARILYN DAVIES W003483 22 Apr 2018, 10:45 AM Currently it seems the purpose of tax and tax collecting has changed. It seems that now we are born paying tax and die still paying tax whether we use the benefits of it at any time or not. It seems to me that far too many people are clever in the use of taxpayers money - don't work, collect benefits as they know the system, and don't bother to ever work. To someone such as myself who has worked since 16 years old paid tax and in 50 odd years had just 5 months off to have a baby this is awful. I've saved for old age to provide for myself and am thankful for the little bit of pension to help get me to being able to live a not too restrictive life. Please consider being more careful with benefits applicants - give more to genuine people in need and assist pensioners more in keeping with the rest of the worlds standards. Be more careful with our money when you take it from us - look after it and distribute it more wisely. Thank you for this opportunity to voice an opinion. MARIKA JACKSON W003492 22 Apr 2018, 11:17 AM Knowing what is and isn't taxed and the reasons for that can encourage NZers to consider these reasons and make better choices. JAMES MULLINEUX W003502 22 Apr 2018, 3:18 PM The second to third options are scarily reminiscent of a thought-police approach. Who decides what are 'better choices'? It is a common law principles that people have a right to be foolish. Who decides who 'needs help'? Those who refuse to adapt to the modern world and its responsibilities do not need help, but options to iprove themselves. I reject completely the suggestion that the government knows best what is good for everyone else. The approach is fundamentally totalitarian, as Popper's The Open Society and Its Enemies shows anyone caring to read it. Tax is necessary for basic amenities for a free society, but is not to be abused for ideologues' benefit. What the system should do is remove the opportunity for the rich to minimise their share of tax without making them responsible to pay for those who refuse to participate in society and instead choose to live on it. GWYN JONES W003533 23 Apr 2018, 7:05 AM Agree that the tax simple should be kept simple. I would like to see more support for children in NZ who are vulnerable, my idea is to see parents who are at risk (regardless of whether they are beneficiaries or not) incentivised to complete parenting classes. Its distressing to see the many young children disadvantaged due to poor parenting from the get go. Mandatory programmes that teach parents basic parenting - how to talk to their children, (as basic as, cutting out bad language) teaching how to read stories, clean teeth, etc and keeping their houses safe. We seem to have no expected return from parents the state supports Easing stress on the Health system. An idea to extend gastric bypass capacity. Change those who are eligible to have 'skin in the game' (not intended as a pun) this health issue could be better supported, if, like student loans, people wanting to undertake by pass surgery were subsidised, but had to take a (part ) loan to help pay for the surgery. VALERIE MONK W003561 23 Apr 2018, 1:09 PM This poll is difficult because I could only mark one option. Tax has a multitude of purposes Health, education, research, infrastructure, as well as support for communities and the needy. The range is huge. SIMON RITCHIE W003569 23 Apr 2018, 1:54 PM In general terms tax is used for the government to provide infrastructure and a stable environment for its citizens. For a stable society increasing inequality is a threat - historical examples abound. Its relationship to crime and other dysfunctional behaviour is strong. I think the use of tax to reduce society's inequalities should have a much higher priority for the government. ANONYMOUS W003584 23 Apr 2018, 3:46 PM I believe that tax should be used to provide social services for those who need them - along with raising funds for core services. There are currently too many people who are unable to live at a reasonable standard, even if they are working. FLEUR HARDMAN W003594 23 Apr 2018, 4:30 PM We need to ensure those who really need it are supported. Quality education, health care and housing etc should be available to all, not just those who can afford it TIM W003609 23 Apr 2018, 5:10 PM Tax should cover the core needs of all New Zealanders with respect to education, infrastructure and social needs. In order to generate efficiency, in some areas of society, public private partnerships seem like a sensible approach so they are driven by commercially driven people with skin in the game that want to make it work. However, some areas of society should never be driven by a commercial approach but controlling cost is critical to ensure tax dollars are used effectively. Unfortunately government departments are inherently bad at generating the right culture within public servants so that the dividends of the state owned enterprise can be returned to the tax payer by substituting what would have been profit in the commercial approach for better service such as more operations etc. PAUL THORNTON W003621 23 Apr 2018, 6:13 PM It would be great if Income Tax was worked out per family/household. People who can afford trusts and companies are able to distribute income across all parties and this should be an option available to all New Zealanders. If a family decides that one parent should work part time to help raise their children why should the parent who works full time be punished for making that choice and be taxed at a higher rate. One family unit should pay tax at the same tier for all their income. GAVIN WEBB W003627 23 Apr 2018, 6:25 PM I would like our taxes directed at three of the above options. Encourage NZers to make better choices Encourage investment in green businesses Support those in NZ who need help. DOUG ROBERTSON W003645 23 Apr 2018, 7:47 PM the tax system is there to redress the dicrepencies in income between the rich and the poor so that the capitalists dont become so greedy and rich that the people rise up ,gilotene them and over through the capitalist system. so in essence it is there to protect the capitalists from their own greed and shortsightedness. ANONYMOUS W003651 23 Apr 2018, 8:12 PM No more new taxes are needed cut services and live within your means like we all have too... JACK CRAW W003694 24 Apr 2018, 9:33 AM Good tax systems reward good environmental, social and economic decisions. LOTTE BLAIR W003713 24 Apr 2018, 10:49 AM It should be a combination of reasons. Primarily it is to pay for public services, and since many of these are not yet available to all (e.g. needing to pay to visit the doctor), then more tax should be collected to pay for these services. Tax should also be used to dissuade companies from behaving badly, especially in terms of environmental choices. But I think these types of tax incentives/disincentives are best for large companies rather than individuals. And I definitely don't think they can work in isolation - there are always some who can afford to pollute and pay the tax. So these taxes need to be backed up by regulations too. By taxing and regulating companies, the positive effects of their behaviour will be felt by individuals (cleaner air, better jobs etc.) without individuals needing to pay directly for it on the goods and services they consume. CHE SOFFE W003731 24 Apr 2018, 1:30 PM Taxes should be used to provide core services, provide a safety net for all people, encourage sustainable investments, clean up social costs, and look after people's wellbeing. CHRIS. CAMP W003746 24 Apr 2018, 2:32 PM Tax is a necessary means of funding. It should not be in the forefront of people's minds. Applied correctly and fairly it should not be necessary for companies or individuals to have to plan to avoid tax. SUE HAMMOND W003770 24 Apr 2018, 4:42 PM Hello. I have already emailed a brief submission that was of personal concern to me; now I wish to record my thoughts on a broader level. It's clear to me (and, I have to add, to anyone with half a brain) that taxation must be geared towards promoting a just, humane and harmonious society. The major - and escalating - social problem of our times is the gap between extreme wealth and extreme poverty, and taxation could go a long way towards closing that gap. If, that is, our concern, as a nation, about rising poverty levels is sincere? Such a tax, properly applied, could eliminate some , if not all, of the need for Government social spending at a 'bottom of the cliff' level. I do not support, though, taxation being applied as a 'bad-habit deterrent' (as with the cigarette tax). Who, exactly, would get to decide what was, or wasn't, undesirable? A dangerously autocratic concept. Please, please don't go there! Thank you. SEAN JENNER W003794 24 Apr 2018, 7:33 PM The purpose of tax is to raise revenue , which should then be used by the Government to pay for the social services, education, health, housing etc, that comes with living in a modern, civilised society. But due to the unfair targeting of high taxes on those that earn the least, while giving tax breaks to billionaires over the last thirty years, successive governments have seen their revenue take decline, along with the public spending on core services. So tax needs to be applied more fairly by raising corporate tax rates, closing loopholes that allow tax " avoidance ", to be legal, while tax evasion remains a crime. Coming up with clever ways to tax wine, art, or middle class wealth still allows huge concentrations of wealth to remain locked away and unproductive. Middle class and working class people tend to spend their money in the real economy, creating jobs, and supporting small businesses. A transaction tax is a very good idea, that the financial system could easily absorb. TRUDY AMBROSE W003811 24 Apr 2018, 9:31 PM Absolutely we should be encouraging better behaviour. Better general health and happiness of the population will lead to a more productive work force. Using tax encouraging healthy food options and sustainable ways of living will also have a better impact on the economy. Why not reduce gst tax on fresh produce or lean prime meats or offer subsidies to producers to reduce thier cost. The effort of cycle lanes has been great really great to see. Let's have tax going on more initiatives like that to not just support living but make it enjoyable. JENNIFER GOLDSACK W003819 24 Apr 2018, 11:13 PM Sufficient tax collection to provide services. Services need to be identified. Government Departments have changed names, amalgamated. divided, disappeared and new Departments with obscure names and convoluted missions have appeared. this has been costly, disruptive and deliberately hidden losses and at great expense! Make a List and stick to it. Stop moving offices and buildings. https://www.govt.nz/organisations/ SIMPLIFY. Spend Less on identified NON Government business. PROVIDE CORE SERVICES and what else in order of prority can be afforded. Less population increase - less infra-structure needed. Freight by train - TAX Trucks off the roads = cost saving on road repairs, road safety and transport efficiency HUGH LECKIE W003827 25 Apr 2018, 12:43 AM For the last six decades that I have lived here multinational companies have fail to pay tax using the excuse that they provide employment. The worst of which are our banks which feel that they shouldn’t have to pay tax or very little amounts. All companies should be required to pay their fair share of tax. No exceptions. All purchases that come into the country should attract the GST as part of the transaction wheather purchased at a retail shop outlet or purchased on line, eg Google, EBay, Amazon need to play by global rules. The free market is a myth, the cyber market is making a huge impact on individual countries. Environmental issues are being recognised by the youth as important issues to address , rather than just discuss and debate. Housing has become more difficult to afford especially for new home buyer required to have a 20 percent deposit. Building cost have escalated. Ten fold in the last 30 years. Why? Compliance and materials. Wages have not increased by this amount. ANTHONY VEITCH W003835 25 Apr 2018, 5:04 AM The purpose of tax, apart from providing essential government services such as health and education etc, is to spread the benefits of living in this country more evenly among all who reside here. In other words, to create an egalitarian society, which research has shown is a happier, more contented society. Also, this country, and the world, faces unprecedented challenges in the form of climate change. Government will need the fiscal clout to make really radical moves if we, as a species, are going to survive beyond mid century. We simply can't afford to carry free-loaders in the form of rich people avoiding paying taxes. GERRIE LIGTENBERG W003858 25 Apr 2018, 8:23 AM Tax is revenue so we can ensure every person has equal access to core services such as health, housing, water, transport and a safe environment which includes police and environmental protection. Progressive tax where higher incomes pay more tax in order to a fair contribution to the country as a community would be my purpose of tax. A.G. TALBOT W003875 25 Apr 2018, 10:42 AM The NZ tax system is perverse, counterproductive,dysfunctional and inequitable. It encourages rampant speculation on non productive assets such as housing and land, taxes the small savings of ordinary people, disincentivises diversification of the export sector, penalises the poor through regressive GST. It fails to tax subversive Air BnB (and Uber) which increases rents through reduction of supply of rentals (Queenstown and other centres), undermining employment in the accommodation sector. NZ allows multi-nationals to avoid paying any significant tax on sales in NZ and offers a safe haven for international tax cheats. This failed tax system permits wealthy/high income earners to avoid or pay very little tax through property ownership loopholes, whereas a minimum wage worker pays at least a 25% of their income in direct and indirect taxes. The consequences have seen increases in inequality and poverty over the last 30 years which are well recognised internationally (OECD). LYNEKE ONDERWATER W003889 25 Apr 2018, 11:35 AM I feel that all those options above are right. Core services, such as health, education, infrastructure We want people to do the right thing, so that others, inc animals and the environment, are not badly affected by their choices and behaviour. We want to encourage investments in certain businesses that help increase our happiness and improve the environment for all of us (inc. animals, plants, people, etc) Some people are not good at looking after themselves and they need extra help from their community and possibly the government. ALISTAIR NEWBOULD W003898 25 Apr 2018, 12:12 PM In answer to the poll the first option applies with the proviso that the system must create a level playing field where it does not exist (eg polluter pays taxation). In this section much has been written about equity in taxtion, and yet the whole review exercise has been restricted to exclude any taxation of the family home. Whilst the group have to work within these terms of reference they MUST also point out that the restriction builds in inequity. The graph "Marginal effective tax rate on savings" Fig 21 of the future tax submissions background paper does this admirably. The group must not hide behind the political acceptability of proposals ie it would be politically unacceptable to tax imputed rent or capital gains on the family home, so we will not consider it. The group must point out in their report the limitation of their review. The principal of Te Pae Tawhiti demands equity which is missing without addressing Fig 21. An all encompassing asset tax is needed to address this. ELLEN BLAKE W003919 25 Apr 2018, 2:17 PM Some prices of things don't accurately reflect the whole cost of making the thing. Tax can help balance this up so that the right incentive is in place to, for instance, discourage people using private vehicles that have high manufacture costs and ongoing pollution costs as well as the cause of road injury. Public transport is much safer and uses less resource, produces less pollution. Road injury and pollution is one of our biggest but also most accepted costs. Tax is needed to pay for common goods (health and education, conservation lands, national identity documents, geospatial information, standard setting) Tax should be more fairly distributed, eg reduce GST so lower income people don't pay so much. Proportional to ability to pay. Tax is needed to address inequities eg gender pay gap, lack of suitable jobs for people, fair application of the law THERESA REID W003956 25 Apr 2018, 7:58 PM To encourage participation in our society. This is through giving the poor health, housing and education that will allow them to enhance their chances in life and become contributing members of society. It is also through requiring the rich to pay fully for the services they use and not avoid/tax; and to contribute to equity in society. It is also through taking the pressure off middle income earners ( say $200000pa for a family of four) so that they are not carrying the burden of the tax take. ANONYMOUS W003976 26 Apr 2018, 7:01 AM Support those in NZ who need help. ADAM SCHOFIELD W003994 26 Apr 2018, 11:10 AM The tax system needs to be all the above. It needs to be in the background so that it is unobtrusive; it needs to collect enough revenue to provide for government spending; it needs to encourage the sort of society we collectively want (or at least not encourage anything contrary to a just society); and it needs to be structured in a way that doesn't cause hardship or harm to anybody ANONYMOUS W004003 26 Apr 2018, 1:38 PM Quick poll: what is the purpose of tax? Collecting tax and then using that collected tax for re-distribution to other parties within that system can be seen as inefficient if only used for wealth distribution between individual taxable entities. All New Zealander's and parties present and acting in any fashion within the New Zealand economic zone should be paying their fair share of "core service" costs while they continue activities in zone. Citizens, permanent residents, tourists, visitors, businesses etc. Determining what is a "fair share" of tax to extract from the parties acting in zone is always going to remain debatable. Likewise measuring the "benefit" from "core services" offered received by parties acting in zone is also just as challenging. Having international businesses avoiding acting in the jurisdiction of New Zealand because we are "too hard" to operate in compared to other markets would be catastrophic and ultimately put use in an undesirable position globally. ANONYMOUS W004037 26 Apr 2018, 10:52 PM The purpose of tax is to enable an equitable society built on a foundation of fairness, where all New Zealanders have opportunities to do great things and live a great life. Our current system favors those WITH wealth. That is not EQUITABLE. For NZs future we need a BIG overhaul. Let’s be leaders and do the hard thing for a better future for all. The alternative.... well just look where America are currently. DANIEL SHANAHAN W004062 27 Apr 2018, 12:43 PM Everyone should pay the same percentage of their income in tax, it's unfair to make rich people pay a higher percentage because they'd already be paying more anyway even if they paid the same percent. Rich people use way less public services than poor people so they shouldn't have to pay a disproportionate amount for services they don't use like public transport and public health and public education. If the tax rate was a fair percentage for everyone, that is the same percentage, then you would see less tax avoidance from rich people because they would be more willing to pay in a fairer system. The tax system is too complicated, everything and everyone should be taxed equally and universally and quite highly so the government can subsidise highly and make everything free. Like everything should be taxed at 20 percent, anything you earn, buy, own, sell and that should be used to pay for free universal healthcare, education, transport, housing and healthy food, and free to air nz sport ERIC TAYLOR W004092 27 Apr 2018, 3:39 PM You should seriously consider making superannuation payments tax free. this money has already been taxed, and it is an unnecessary expense to collect it. Retired people could do with some extra cash. MARGARET HILL W004111 27 Apr 2018, 4:46 PM Why is superannuation taxed? It comes from taxes we have paid all our working life so in my opinion, it is a double tax and should be removed KATIA DE LU W004122 27 Apr 2018, 6:09 PM Tax is essential. It’s how the government funds vital public services like hospitals, schools, environmental protection, and public infrastructure. It's also how the government funds the social safety net, which is vital for helping New Zealanders in need. As a society, we have a responsibility to make sure everyone has the basics to live. We do this well for the elderly, in the form of superannuation, but we need to do a better job with everyone else. The benefit and public housing are a good idea, but too many people are slipping through the cracks. Tax can also be used to incentivise public good while dis-incentivising harmful activities. We already do this with taxes on cigarettes, but there is so much more we could do, e.g. corporations should be taxed for the environmental harm that they cause (which falls to the tax payer to clean up!). On the flip side, tax incentives can help new, beneficial technologies like electric cars to catch on faster, which benefits us all. ELIANE GENEVIEVE LAGNAZ W004149 27 Apr 2018, 10:37 PM The purpose of taxes is all of the above as outlined in your paper. NEVILLE HILL W004170 28 Apr 2018, 8:01 AM Any tax needs system needs to be seen to be fair. If it is not then it encourages avoidance ( legal) & evasion ( illegal) A lot of people especially in the lower to mid- high brackets get annoyed to see avoidance commonly practiced as this is something most wage & salary earners can’t do much of . I think the high taxing of interest earned on savings has encouraged the high rate of investment in additional houses over the one a family buys to live in , I personally find this really discouraging, tho’ I have saved hard regardless. Kiwi saver must be compulsory from commcement of employment . I am totally against a capital gains tax on the family home . For roading maybe more tolling on certain high grade out of city motorways, with cheaper concessions available for regular users . To help reduce the health budget put more effort into promoting good diet, it doesn’t take much research to discover that the Western diet which is high in sugars, carbs is causing untold health problems KATHERYN-MARGARET PASCOE W004175 28 Apr 2018, 8:35 AM I believe there are benefits to reviewing our tax on food purchased in grocery stores. I support the removal of, or reduced tax rate on, fresh fruit and vegetables to make healthy choices more affordable. This can assist in shifting societal patterns of consumptions and food choices and can have a lead on affect in the long term by reducing health care bills. Unhealthy eating is linked to diseases such as diabetes, heart disease and high blood pressure. The government should lead by example by reducing or removing gst on fresh fruit and vegetables to encourage healthy choices. To make up for revenue loss, the tax working group may consider a different tier for high sugar foods such as fizzy drinks, candy, biscuits and chocolate. FRED HAYWARD W004190 28 Apr 2018, 10:35 AM The purpose of tax to me is for it to be used for the good of all the people so that we can function well as a fair and balanced society. Our taxation system should be used to ensure we don't have unwanted homelessness, hunger and other deprivations forced upon some of our citizens. Taxation should be used to encourage us to do the right thing and protect and enhance our environment. DONNA REDDEN W004198 28 Apr 2018, 11:15 AM Drop the tax on food this is way to high and the reason everyone eats junk food it's cheaper to buy than vegetables and fruit , medication tax also needs to be dropped some people dont pick there medications because they cant offord to pay for them , clothing not everyone can offord new cloths either , power people have there power cut off all the time because they cant offord to pay for it to geep them warm in the winter months , drop the tax on everything that is to do with needing to survive and is vital to live ! put Tax up on smoking so we can have a smoke free country HARTWIG CLASEN W004226 28 Apr 2018, 2:44 PM New Zealand continues to be using a high per capita amount of fossil fuels, when compared internationally, particularly for private, public and also commercial business related transport. Also does fossil fuel use for heating purposes and some other purposes continue. Given the seriousness of climate change, more needs to be done to change energy use behaviour by private persons and businesses, for instance by dis-incentivising the use of fossil fuels. This may be achieved by levying a reasonable carbon tax on such energy use, or by similar means. Although a small player on the global scale, New Zealand must take responsibility, particularly since the country and its people pride themselves with a so called 'clean green' image overseas, when selling certain agricultural products and tourism services. This should compel New Zealanders to lead by example. Taking GST off certain goods and services may also be an option, offering incentives to use certain products and services. PETER THOMPSON W004233 28 Apr 2018, 3:17 PM The purpose of tax is to provide governments with the buying power to provide essential goods and services, especially public goods which the market does not efficiently provide. The key problem with the current model is that tax is structured and perceived as an intervention in third party market transactions which co-opts and diverts buying power from the taxed party to the government. This inevitably engenders resentment because both the public and businesses consider themselves to have been penalised. Since monetarist macroeconomics, public services have declined because it would be electoral suicide for any government to announce the kind of tax regime required to sustain them. The solution is two-fold: First, the issue of private money creation through fractional reserve bank debt-issue must be addressed. Why can a private bank with $100 in the vault issue credit of $1000? That should be the sovereign role of the state. Second, universal basic income should be established. TRISH THOMPSON W004243 28 Apr 2018, 4:06 PM Tax is clean rivers, pristine beaches, forests and parks available to everyone; tax is a safety net, it’s health care and education for every person regardless of their income. Tax is the price we pay to rebalance society for the greater good of all and to take care of our shared assets for us and for future generations. It recognises that our economic systems mean it’s always easier to make money if you already have money, so it rebalances wealth in a fairer manner. Tax is the principle of egalitarianism in action. Tax also needs a PR job. It shouldn’t be something we resent when it’s actually vital to our society and our democracy functioning. We should teach the purpose and use of tax in our schools so that everyone understands this. We need a media that encourages debate on how we should pay and spend tax rather than just holding up tax cuts as the holy grail. Right now the environment and health care are both badly in need of better funding and this should come before tax cuts. MARGARET GWYNN W004256 28 Apr 2018, 5:11 PM In the main I think the tax system should be neutral, but given the crisis we are facing with climate change, I would like to see polluters pay more tax. The Emissions Trading Scheme has largely failed to change behaviour, so something more is needed. I also think we need to tax sugary drinks to encourge healthier choices. MICHAEL RUTLAND W004282 28 Apr 2018, 8:24 PM Taxation has several purposes, but the main ones include Running the Country and government (Parliament, Security services, Courts, police and other regulators); Welfare ; Health and Education. I do not believe that it is a function of government to redistribute individual wealth, and in the current economic climate any such attempts are likely to reduce the long term government income. If the 'rich' have lower incomes they will pay less tax and everyone else will have to pay more. Attempts to tax their holdings off the 'rich' are likely to transfer those holdings into offshore ownership. WADE DEVINE W004296 28 Apr 2018, 10:53 PM Tax should be used for core services of running the country including the regions. Health, Education, to modify uneconomic, unfair behaviour, minimise - eliminate poverty. Should be collected fairly regardless of race or ethnic grouping. CORWIN NEWALL W004307 29 Apr 2018, 9:02 AM I definitely think eating healthier should be cheaper than not. Sugar is everywhere and I find it daunting thinking how I’m going to keep my daughter away from things with high/added sugar in them. There needs to be a sugar tax—whether or not we like it. Someone needs to make the tough decisions and I hope it’s going to be you, Labour/NZ First/Greens. There should be more and higher levies on investment made in things with a negative effect on New Zealand and the world in terms of health, environment and wellbeing. An astronomically high plastic wrapping tax would be perfect—make everything that is wrapped in single use plastics 50% more expensive and use the money to help businesses and consumers transition to not filling the ocean with junk. ASTRID HARRIS W004323 29 Apr 2018, 10:21 AM I want taxes to encourage New Zealanders to make better choices, environmentally, health wise, energy in cars and homes, incentives for investment in saving for ones own retirement and a health system that is fair for all. If folks paid into taxes what they now paid into insurances in all areas then all would probably be better off and it would be cheaper and fairer for all! JEN OLSEN W004329 29 Apr 2018, 10:37 AM Taxation has more than one impact on society and can be used for a variety of purposes. One core purpose is to pay for services such as education, infrastructure development, health and social services. Another is to provide a structure to redistribute some of the wealth within society from those who have achieved highly and accumulated wealth, to those who are in need. It should be graduated to gain proportionally more from the most wealthy and provide a clear indication that it is socially unacceptable to accumulate excessive wealth at the expense of other citizens. Taxation can also be used to incentivise certain behaviour, such as to reduce cigarette use, and potentially, the consumption of unhealthy foods. Taxation should be used to reduce the externalisation of the costs of environmental damage by increasing costs on unsustainable business behaviour, such as pollution or resource depletion. The revenue gained should be such that it covers the costs of damage mitigation. CHRISTINE LARKING W004350 29 Apr 2018, 1:16 PM I would see the purpose of tax as 1. Supporting people that need help with a means to live, but also to help themselves as much as they can. Even without physical impediments, mental impediments can stop people helping themselves and not necessarily from diagnosed mental conditions. Everyone has different issues and they need to determine what those issues are that are stopping them from helping themselves and so they can find solutions to those issues. 2. Encouraging people that don't necessarily need financial help, to help themselves financially as much as they can. I think this helps society as a whole as it can have positive flow on effects for the rest of society if they are in a better financial position. 3. Encouraging people to make good life choices that help with their well-being. 4. Encouraging people to do things that will help mankind. NIGEL JEMSON W004374 29 Apr 2018, 2:43 PM The primary role of tax should be a collection mechanism. It should only be used as a last resort to alter behaviour. In many instances, targeted regulation would be a better approach than using tax to alter behaviour. For example, a sugar tax would be hugely distortionary and would likely not deter people from consuming sugary drinks, only punishing them more financially for consuming them. Targeted regulation and education would be more effective. Tax should be as neutral as possible between different types of investment. Given the effective tax rate on savings is higher, there is a good argument that savings should be incentivised more and investment in housing should be incentivised less (e.g. via a land tax). CRAIG FISHER W004388 29 Apr 2018, 3:14 PM Difficult choice as all options have levels of appeal. 1. Simplicity and lack of invasiveness is always a desired policy objective. 2. In some cases, encouragement of good choices is desirable and even necessary, however this must be balanced against becoming an overly "nanny state" and undue restriction of personal freedoms. Examples such as tobacco taxes area good example of a useful taxation intervention as it ultimately saves NZ Inc. considerable health system costs where otherwise the burden of one person's poor choices fall on the rest of the kiwi taxpayers. Other areas I would support would be some simple environmental interventions such as plastic taxes to assist reduce our addition to environmentally disastrous single-use plastics. Likewise some form of sugar tax or junk food tax, especially as regards foreign multinationals providing unhealthy products at low prices and these adding substantially to a diabetes and other health burden need to be addressed. ANN MARTIN W004397 29 Apr 2018, 3:28 PM New Zealanders are too heavily taxed. No more tax on employees, businesses and citizens. Government must make better use of taxes it collects for core services and or find other ways to generate money it wants to use. International companies need to pay tax to New Zealand Government. ANN MARTIN W004399 29 Apr 2018, 3:28 PM New Zealanders are too heavily taxed. No more tax on employees, businesses and citizens. Government must make better use of taxes it collects for core services and or find other ways to generate money it wants to use. International companies need to pay tax to New Zealand Government. HILARY STACE W004412 29 Apr 2018, 3:56 PM The purpose of tax is to enable the participation in citizenship of everyone who lives in NZ. It is the way the state pays for all the things citizens need to be active citizens, via the governance of parliament. People pay in all sorts of ways including GST, various levies and PAYE. We need to celebrate taxation as a positive thing. It is great that we all contribute to tax and through this collective revenue have provided for us what we need for access to citizenship and democracy eg education, health services, disability support services, welfare benefits including superannuation, aged care, infrastructure, local and national governance and the hundreds of thousands of employees such as public servants who help administer and deliver it all. SUSAN MADDOCK W004427 29 Apr 2018, 5:06 PM I work part time in two jobs, I think you should pay secondary tax only after you work a forty hour week. I don't agree with tax free credits -some people are paying negative tax this means I am expected to subsidise them, why is is that I have never benefited from tax breaks in my life time. I pay a student loan but stayed in the country. It seems like my generation is expected to pay more tax whilst others pay none. The tax system unfairly disadvantages older working new Zealanders people in their 40-60 age group. DANIELA BAGOZZI W004452 29 Apr 2018, 8:02 PM The purpose of tax is to raise sufficient income for Government to pay for necessary services, as well as to help with redistribution of income (through pensions and benefits for those who are unable to work or unable to earn, and through subsidies where necessary), an additional purpose of tax is to act as an incentive towards economic behaviours that are considered beneficial to society at large, and to act as a disincentive towards behaviours that are considered harmful to the health and wellbeing of the people and the environment. ANONYMOUS W004465 29 Apr 2018, 9:00 PM Income splitting for families is a much fairer approach than individual tax. A sole earner for a family should not be taxed the same as a single person, who only has to supply income for himself/herself. Other OECD countries (e.g. Germany) follow the income splitting approach, to reduce financial hardship on families. JOCELYN PAPPRILL W004476 29 Apr 2018, 9:39 PM Most of the four listed but essential to redistribute income for the benefit of all citizens, to create a more equitable society where there are more resoruces to invest in health, education, state housing and social services. A progressive tax system will build a more just and fairer society. CAROLINE SYDDALL W004488 29 Apr 2018, 10:22 PM The purpose of tax is to create a more equitable society and one in which all people's basic needs are met. It must enable the government to deliver social and environmental services to create a sustainable future. It must redistribute income and wealth so that wealth cannot have more power than the democratic system. JOANNE WAITOA W004507 30 Apr 2018, 12:20 AM The purpose of tax is to fund public services so that everyone in the country has the same minimum of health, education, housing, infrastructure and other public services. Tax should ensure no one falls below those minimum standards of living, so that society is more equal. RICHARD KELLER W004516 30 Apr 2018, 7:56 AM As wealth has been used to further the ideology of dominance (planetary ecosystem, class in human relationships, etc) and increased inequality, wealth must be a strong focus of tax. (Capital gain could be a part of that, focusing on difference from a norm which is based on balancing negative impacts and enhancing impacts on the planet.) Tax cannot be separated from other aspects of human relationships, government, etc. Once those fundamental changes are accomplished then the tax environment will look different. GARFIELD TORO W004527 30 Apr 2018, 9:27 AM Impose / extend sugar, alcohol, cigarette and fuel taxes to mitigate health and environmental costs. Provide GST/tax exemptions for fresh fruit and vegetables KATARINA TE MAIHAROA W004549 30 Apr 2018, 11:39 AM Purpose is for Better choices, encourage and discourage certain businesses. To keep all community services fully funded and running smoothly. Please include Ambulance and Fire Fighting services! To ensure the financial security of pensioners, welfare users and most vulnerable. To ensure health care is top quality, available and free to use and access. To spread the wealth, no hoarders of excessive money. Helps keep NZers at a level playing field as the ones who are able to contribute more should contribute more to help those who are struggling. Socialism style, community focused like the indigenous way. Move away from Neo Liberal nonsense. ASHLEIGH MACDONALD W004563 30 Apr 2018, 12:13 PM n/a MERV HUXFORD W004594 30 Apr 2018, 2:25 PM I believe sometimes tax incentives can help change behaviour, but these should only be introduced for a very limited time, eg say 1 year and once only to any individual or entity. Otherwise it is my experience that people rely on them and dont make otherwise sustainable decisions. ANONYMOUS W004602 30 Apr 2018, 2:59 PM I support the idea of taxes that discourage environmental and personal harms. GRAEME GOODWIN W004621 30 Apr 2018, 4:08 PM The purpose of tax is to raise revenue not force moral choices on people who may not agree with the policies of the government of the day. AARON PURDIE W004627 30 Apr 2018, 4:16 PM Using tax as a redistribution of wealth to support the ones who need it most should be the fundamental purpose of tax. PAUL EDWARDS W004629 30 Apr 2018, 4:17 PM Tax in my view should be simple, if it can be avoided it is not simple enough. Consider productivity a key measure of wealth creation and therefore linked to an increase in tax revenue. So why do we increase the % of income taxation as someone earns more? Surely you want people to work hard and boost their overall productivity. Yet the current system disincentives hard work and productivity. Why not a flat rate of income tax of 15% from anyone on $50,000 or more no matter how many jobs generate the income? This could equally applied to corporate taxes too. Too much avoidance. The coming disruption through technology of the workforce in the next 10 years is recognised. New Zealand will not be immune from the impact through isolation. We need to build a high earning, low taxation economic model now so that we can develop, attract and retain our best people. Worrying about changing behaviours through taxation misses the seriousness of what technology and globalisation is going to inflict. DEAN LEE W004638 30 Apr 2018, 4:26 PM It's the fee we pay for living in a society, and you get what you pay for. Governments can borrow and buy more cheaply because of scale, and it's dumb to have millions of individuals wasting money on individual purchases when big ones will do. Needs to be pitched in that way! KIM MCGREGOR W004652 30 Apr 2018, 4:38 PM There should be a green tax on all Non NZ passports coming to NZ to help pay for facilities they use e.g. toilets, car parks and access tracks to the things they have come to view. A much larger chunk of $$ needs to go to Councils and Department of Conservation to deal with the increased number of visitors. I don't agree with (social taxes) unemployed people on the dole receiving hand-outs from tax department for all the offspring they produce. Meanwhile educated people but not wealthy like myself and partner have no kids because we can't afford a mortgage on modest house and children simultaneously. This has the eventual effect of dumming down the population. Idiots and drop kicks are breeding whilst us professionals are not. We can't afford the luxury of having kids because we pay too much tax. Hence less professional future tax payers being born but more bludgers on social taxes being born. WARREN GRANT W004669 30 Apr 2018, 5:05 PM The correct purposes of Taxes are... (1) To act as a disincentive to behaviour which economically counterproductive, environmentally unsustainable or damaging to society. (2) To mop up excess spending power and so reduce inflationary pressures within sections of the economy and for the economy as a whole. (3) To charge for products and services provided through the action of government at a rate that reflects their true cost of production. (4) To reduce the extremes of wealth within the community. Interestingly, one of the purposes of taxation is not to provide income for Government expenditure because as the monopoly issuer of the nations money supply the Govt. does not need income from taxation. ANONYMOUS W004679 30 Apr 2018, 5:22 PM The purpose of tax ought to be support the improvement of core needs for the local/national communities, help those in extra need. Ideally it needs to create a motivational response from people ie, they can see the real-life benefits across the country/communities and feel proud about this. CHERRYL SMITH W004702 30 Apr 2018, 6:30 PM Tax should be less about taking money than an opportunity to share any abundance abundantly with those that can be struggling in life. Tax should also be able to guide people to make better choices, choices that improve the well-being of the environment and people. Taxes can be used as incentives for creating future wellbeing for environments and people eg transition to a clean, green economy JAMES LITCHWARK W004717 30 Apr 2018, 7:44 PM Tax has multiple purposes, and all are important, but an often overlooked function is to protect market freedom and Specific taxes can be used to capture the true costs of externalities from business activity, such as destruction of public assets (pollution of clean water supplies, chemical contamination of land). Failure to capture these effects amounts to subsidisation of certain activities, which distorts the market and reduces overall economic growth. By appropriately taxing these externalities, the true costs become internalised and market competition can then determine which activities are genuinely economically viable. JUSTIN CONNOLLY W004725 30 Apr 2018, 8:15 PM I think that the options in the above poll are misleading, as the purpose of tax is in fact to achieve multiple of the options listed there. Fundamentally I believe that the purpose of tax is to contribute to the maintenance of a society where opportunity is moderately fair and even, through the provision of things LIKE core services, caring for those that are less well off, and ensuring that our environment is sustained for habitable and beneficial enjoyment in the future. Tax is the subscription fee of living in a developed society. We all need to pay our fair share, and it should contribute to the benefit of society as a while, even when this may be achieved through support of specific groups. ROB HUGHES-GAMES W004727 30 Apr 2018, 8:19 PM products that harm the well being of the n environment should be taxed more. MERETE HIPP W004739 30 Apr 2018, 8:34 PM Tax is necessary to run the services of the country. I'd rather pay more in tax and have decent roads and a well functioning health system for all. ANONYMOUS W004748 30 Apr 2018, 8:50 PM N/A KATY MILLER W004755 30 Apr 2018, 8:58 PM Tax pays for shared infrastructure and high quality public services ANGELA MILLS W004770 30 Apr 2018, 9:19 PM All of the above, with the hope that society will always be aware of the need that tax creates a place worthy for us all to live and those who have more ability may pay more to help those who have less. STEPH LEON W004797 30 Apr 2018, 10:44 PM I once lived in Denmark where the top rate of tax was 60%. Still is. The country frequently appears in the top quartile of "happiest nations" because the taxes collected are exceptionally well spent. Health, transport, education, child care and other core services are of the highest quality. I believe that, if people see what they are getting for their money, they will accept higher taxes. What they resent is folly and waste. Deliver meaningful and lasting change to people's lives and everyone benefits. Keep deferring it and noone does. And everyone resents it. MATTHEW BLAIR W004808 30 Apr 2018, 11:44 PM Help maintain the fragile democratic, peaceful and civilised society we take for granted by reassuring all citizens though transparency and visable policing of the tax system that all other citizens are "contributing their fair share" to the shared costs of society. Things can breakdown quickly if one thinks their neighbour does not through perceived or real "loopholes" etc. In that sense I actually think the concept of income tax returns all being on public record could have merit being considered.