Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. Proclaimed Sovereign Hapu Authority Lawfully Constituted in accordance with the internationally recognised He wakaputanga o te Rangatiratanga o Nu Tireni 1835, with full acknowledgment of the internationally recognised Te Tiriti o Waitangi 1840, whilst exercising Hapū Kawa Tikanga within the territory of Nu Tireni. 1 Te Whare Ariki o Runga Assenting Body of Divine Spiritual Law of the Wakaminenga o Nga Hapu o Nu Tireni STANDING ORDERS OF TE WHARE ARIKI O RUNGA WAKAMINENGA O TE TINO RANGATIRATANGA O NGĀ HAPŪ O NU TIRENI Issued 31 January, 2018 To Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern Of the Queen in Right of New Zealand Parliamentary Buildings Wellington To Her Majesty the Queen of England –Elizabeth II Buckingham Palace London SW1A 1AA Anei ra e mihi atu ana ki a koutou e ngā Rangatira o ngā Hapū huri noa I ngā rohe potae o Tēnā o Tēnā o Tēnā kokonga o ngā motu tapu o Nu Tireni Tēnā koutou Tēnā koutou Tēnā koutou. He mihi aroha tenei ki a koutou I hui me mātou ki te Kōkiri tenei kaupapa. Ae ki a mātou ki a koutou, e akiaki ana I ngā Huarahi o ngā Moemoea o ngā Matua o ngā tupuna tenei te mihi hohonu, no to koutou manaakitanga I a mātou I hui tahi ai me koutou kia puta pai ai tenei pukapuka hei whakatakoto I ngā ture me ngā tono o Tēnā o Tēnā o Tēnā o tātou kia tono he pukapuka Kotahi ai ki ngā Kaitakawaenga o te Kawanatanga o a tātou herenga ki te Tiriti o Waitangi 1840 me ngā ture o to tātou Whakaputanga o Ngā Rangatira raro mai I ngā whenua o Hauraki. Ae Tēnā koutou. REINSTATEMENT OF THE SOVEREIGN ORDER OF HE WAKAPUTANGA O TE RANGATIRATANGA O NU TIRENI 1. These Standing Orders are a corollary to Proclamations and Standing Orders notified by Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga Hereditary Chiefs on 14 th , 28 th September and 10 October 2017 to;  Queen Elizabeth II Sovereign of the United Kingdom Great Britain and Northern Ireland.  His Holiness Pope Francis,  British High Commissioner New Zealand.  The de facto Government of New Zealand and their Officials.  The New Zealand Māori Council.  The Governor General of New Zealand Patsy Reddy.  The United Nations Secretariat of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.  Lord Chief Justice Queen’s Bench \[1\] Proclaimed Sovereign Hapu Authority Lawfully Constituted in accordance with the internationally recognised He wakaputanga o te Rangatiratanga o Nu Tireni 1835, with full acknowledgment of the internationally recognised Te Tiriti o Waitangi 1840, whilst exercising Hapū Kawa Tikanga within the territory of Nu Tireni. 2 Te Whare Ariki o Runga Assenting Body of Divine Spiritual Law of the Wakaminenga o Nga Hapu o Nu Tireni regarding the reinstatement of the Sovereign Order of He Wakaputanga o te Rangatiratanga Nu Tireni also known as the Declaration of Independence of the United Tribes of New Zealand, 1835 including all prior rights of jus cogens and rights entrenched in Te Tiriti o Waitangi 1840 in order to uphold the native peoples Ngā Hapū Sovereign governance of our country Nu Tireni/Aotearoa. 2. That we affirm Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga Tino Rangatira o ngā Hapū o Nu Tireni in its collective capacity as The Sovereign to have been reawakened at Te Hapua on 19 August, 2017 and proclaimed at Waitangi Tai Tokerau on 10 September, 2017 to exercise sovereignty over our whenua (country) Nation State of Aotearoa Nu Tireni. 3. Our country situated 40.9006 degrees south, 174.8860° east of the equator comprises the four (4) Islands of Te Ika a Maui (North Island), Te Waka a Maui Te Waipounamu (South Island), Rakuira (Stewart Island), Rekohu Wharekauri (Chatham Islands), Hawaiki Tautau (Continental Shelf of Aotearoa Nu Tireni) and all those surrounding seas of Te Moananui a Kiwa, Te Tapokapoka a Tawhaki (Tasman Sea) and ngā motu katoa (all the islands) within our territorial domain. 4. Te Whare Ariki o Runga is the spiritual domain of Te Ture Wairua (Spiritual Law), Te Wakaminenga is the earthly domain of Te Ture Tāngata (The Law of Humanity, The Legislature), who holds legal powers to implement Te Ture Wairua and Te Ture Tāngata hei orangatanga (for the health and wellbeing) of ngā Hapū and of their land Nā- Papatuanuku-Aotearoa Nu Tireni 5. Te Whare Ariki o Runga and Te Wakaminenga Confederation of Hereditary Chiefs of Aotearoa Nu Tireni will in the future instruct the Māori Government in all transitioning and administration processes. 6. On 4 th of February, 2018 we Ngā Hapū of Nu Tireni descendants of the Hereditary Chiefs reaffirm our rights in He Wakaputanga,1835(Declaration of Independence and Proclaim the Reinstatement of the Sovereign Order of our Sovereign Country of “Nu Tireni “(otherwise known as “Aotearoa” under the native title of “Nā Papatuanuku o Aotearoa”.) 7. On 6 th February 2018, We reaffirm and Proclaim our unextinguished title, undisturbed possession of all of our lands, our takutai moana, maunga, ngā awa and taonga tuku iho upon our native lands and seas known as Nā-Papatuanuku-Aotearoa, Nu Tireni guaranteed under the internationally recognised He Wakaputanga 1835 Declaration of Independence and further entrenched in Te Tiriti o Waitangi 1840, (Māori version) not withstanding prior rights of jus cogens. 8. That the de facto New Zealand Government does not have the mandate to continue as the government over the Sovereign native peoples and therefore we Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga Hereditary Chiefs and Ngā Hapu do hereby give Notice that we have resumed the exercise of our sovereign powers and authority to govern over our own country. \[1\] Proclaimed Sovereign Hapu Authority Lawfully Constituted in accordance with the internationally recognised He wakaputanga o te Rangatiratanga o Nu Tireni 1835, with full acknowledgment of the internationally recognised Te Tiriti o Waitangi 1840, whilst exercising Hapū Kawa Tikanga within the territory of Nu Tireni. 3 Te Whare Ariki o Runga Assenting Body of Divine Spiritual Law of the Wakaminenga o Nga Hapu o Nu Tireni 9. In respect to governing and the making of laws, dispensation of justice, the preservation of peace and good order, the regulation of trade and the social, cultural and economic advancement of the Sovereign people Ngā Hapū and the protection of our Land, Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga Hereditary Chiefs further invoke our sovereign powers and take the responsibility for these from the de facto New Zealand Government pursuant to Article 2 & 3 He Wakaputanga 1835, Article 2 Te Tiriti o Waitangi (Māori version.) TRANSITION TO SOVEREIGN GOVERNMENT OF AOTEAROA NU TIRENI 10. A Joint Declaration for the stability and the upholding of national unity and territorial integrity and taking into account the history of Aotearoa Nu Tireni and its realities will be prepared between Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga Hereditary Chiefs of Nu Tireni, the Governor General of New Zealand, Queen Elizabeth II of England and as well the British High Commissioner that Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga Hereditary Chiefs o Ngā Hapū o Nu Tireni (the Sovereign) has resumed the exercise of sovereignty over Aotearoa, Nu Tireni. 11. The transition implementation plan of the policies for the health and wellbeing of our peoples Ngā hapū whānau and our land are to be in place by 28 October, 2018 with full implementation of The Plan by 6 th February, 2021. 12. As part of the Joint Declaration and transition to sovereign government and to maintain social stability and economic prosperity a government management commission will be established to guide the new government to effect a smooth transition to sovereign governance and to maintain procurement and supply for public and private sector services. 13. While the implementation plan will require a phased in approach we have identified THREE PRIORITIES for immediate implementation and action. Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga invokes their sovereign power and authority and places a Rahui (prohibition) on the use of the following toxins banned in most countries around the world and known for their indiscriminate lethal harm to human and non-human life. These toxins are;  1080 and any of its derivatives are prohibited from use. As well  Fluoride and any of its derivatives are prohibited from use in public water supplies where tāngata whenua are connected to public water supplies.  Safe alternative control methods are to be used against harm to humans, native species, plant and fauna and other animals. All animals and plants are sacred and every effort is to be used to ensure their safety and protection. 14. Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga Hereditary Chiefs and Ngā Hapu have not given our consent to nor have we been consulted on the CPTPP. The CPTPP impacts on our unextinguished, inalienable native rights, land and taonga therefore we want to know why we The Sovereign have not been consulted. A Rahui (prohibition) is placed on all further \[1\] Proclaimed Sovereign Hapu Authority Lawfully Constituted in accordance with the internationally recognised He wakaputanga o te Rangatiratanga o Nu Tireni 1835, with full acknowledgment of the internationally recognised Te Tiriti o Waitangi 1840, whilst exercising Hapū Kawa Tikanga within the territory of Nu Tireni. 4 Te Whare Ariki o Runga Assenting Body of Divine Spiritual Law of the Wakaminenga o Nga Hapu o Nu Tireni negotiations until Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga Hereditary Chiefs and Ngā Hapū have been consulted. 15. In summary Ngā Rangatira o Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga Hereditary Chiefs o Ngā Hapū o Nu Tireni issue these Standing Orders. STANDING ORDERS : THE DEFACTO NEW ZEALAND GOVERNMENT WILL : A) At dawn, on the 6 th of February 2018 raise the two flags of two sovereign partners of Te Tiriti o Waitangi. That is the flag of He Wakaputanga ko mātou ngā Tino Rangatira o Ngā Hapū o Nu Tireni raro mai o Hauraki known as Te Wakaminenga o Aotearoa Nu Tireni, (Te Kara), our flag, to be raised above the flag of the British Imperial Government (Union Jack) and above the Governor General flag. They are to be raised on the Pou Haki situated on the central grounds in front of the wharenui and Treaty House at the Treaty Grounds at Waitangi. B) That you the De facto New Zealand Government, your representative, and your guests stand alongside Te Whare Ariki o Runga, Te Wakaminenga Ngā Tino Rangatira before the Pou Haki as their guests in recognition of the covenant that the two flags Te Kara and the Union Jack represent. C) In recognition, of the tiakitanga you have administered in our country of Nu Tireni (known as Aotearoa) we invite you to remain with us for the 21 gun salute. D) Te Whare Ariki o Runga and ngā Rangatira of Te Wakaminenga o Nga Hapu o Nu Tireni will then accept your invitation to the wonderful celebration banquet that you have prepared for us. E) We Te Whare Ariki o Runga Te Wakaminenga Ngā Tino Rangatira o Ngā Hapū o Aotearoa Nu Tireni deliver these Standing Order copies as provided for, within the original arrangements of He Wakaputanga o Te Wakaminenga o Te Rangatiratanga o Ngā Hapū o Nu Tireni. \[1\] Proclaimed Sovereign Hapu Authority Lawfully Constituted in accordance with the internationally recognised He wakaputanga o te Rangatiratanga o Nu Tireni 1835, with full acknowledgment of the internationally recognised Te Tiriti o Waitangi 1840, whilst exercising Hapū Kawa Tikanga within the territory of Nu Tireni. 5 Te Whare Ariki o Runga Assenting Body of Divine Spiritual Law of the Wakaminenga o Nga Hapu o Nu Tireni GAZETTING OF STANDING ORDERS 16. That these Standing Orders be gazetted in the Te Whare Ariki o Runga Wakaminenga and the Maori Government of Aotearoa Nu Tireni Official Gazette, Te Kahiti. Please contact Liaison Arikinui Tapaiuru Ripekatangi for any inquiries regarding the Standing Orders. Arikinui Tapaiuru Ngakawairangi -Sue Nikora Prime Minister of the Maori Government Te Whare Ariki o Runga Te Wakaminenga o Ngā Hapū o Nu Tireni Arikinui Tohora – Herewini Karaka Te Whare Ariki o Runga Te Wakaminenga o Ngā Hapū o Nu Tireni Arikinui Ra Marama Rehua – Bundy Waitai Te Whare Ariki o Runga Te Wakaminenga o Ngā Hapū o Nu Tireni \[1\] \[1\] \[1\] \[1\] \[1\]