Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act.         Review of New Zealand’s  Tax System      By email: submissions@taxworkinggroup.govt.nz       30 April 2018    This document is the submission of Xero Limited (Xero) as part of the review of New Zealand’s tax  system being undertaken by the Tax Working Group.      About Xero    Founded in 2006 in New Zealand, Xero is one of the fastest growing software as a service companies  globally. We lead the New Zealand, Australian, and United Kingdom cloud accounting markets,  employing a team of more than 2,00 people in 20 offices around the world.     Our cloud-based accounting software connects people with the right numbers anytime, anywhere, on  any device. We’re proud to be helping over 1 million subscribers worldwide transform the way they do  business.     Forbes identified Xero as the World’s Most Innovative Growth Company in 2014 and 2015. Among  other recent awards, Xero won Product of the Year at the British Accountancy Awards 2017 in the UK,  and was rated by Canstar Blue as Australia’s best accounting software three consecutive years from  2015-2017.     Xero has more than 270,000 small business customers in New Zealand. Our ongoing market research  and data analysis gives us a unique insight into the small business economy in New Zealand. It is with  this focus on innovation that Xero provides comments on features we would like to see in New            Zealand’s future tax system.       Xero’s submission is as follows:-    Frameworks  We support the current broad-based, low rate system and believe that it will continue to benefit New  Zealand in the future. The current approach is generally consistent enough to allow for long term  planning by small businesses and for small businesses to adequately forecast tax impacts.    Progressive company tax  The concept of a progressive tax rate for small businesses has some appeal. A progressive tax rate  offers the prospect of cost effective support for small or medium sized enterprises (SMEs). However,  consideration of any progressive tax regime for small businesses should consider the possibility that  the regime may add some administrative complexity to the tax system.   The first possible complexity is in the definition of a small business. In our experience a small or  medium enterprise can have a mix of attributes such as turnover level, number of employees, or  complexity of systems. Any one of these attributes on its own is too blunt an instrument to define a  SME, whereas together they add considerable complexity in determining what a SME actually looks  like.   The second possible complexity is that this approach may encourage some artificial business  structures created solely for the purpose of capturing the lower SME tax rate. Medium size businesses  may artificially break up into a number of smaller businesses that qualify for the lower tax rate. This  action would introduce costs to the economy that are not born by those artificial SMEs but are borne  externally. For instance, suppliers would have the complexity of multiple entities, and Inland Revenue  would have more tax entities to deal with.    GST exemptions for particular goods  We support the Government aim of assisting people with low incomes.             The Tax Working Group will be aware of the experiences of other jurisdictions showing that  introducing exemptions (usually on foodstuffs) introduces complexity and uncertainty into the  application of GST. For instance, GST may be exempted from fresh food, but this raises the question  of when does food cross the boundary from fresh to cooked? One instance of this is that retailers  would have different GST rules for hot chicken and cold uncooked chicken. At what point does a  chicken cross the threshold from raw to cooked? Would a green salad served in a restaurant be  regarded as fresh food, and therefore be exempt from GST? These types of uncertainties mean more  complexity for all participants in the supply chain.  GST exemptions also benefit all consumers, not just low income consumers. Thus GST exemptions  are a very blunt instrument when it comes to assistance for low-income people. A tax-free income  threshold or targeted assistance through Working For Families may be better ways of getting the  assistance where it is needed.  GENERAL ISSUES RAISED IN THE ISSUES PAPER  Cash Basis Accounting For Small Businesses  In the spirit of simplification of the tax system, we support the removal of the requirement for small  business to prepare tax financial statements on an accrual basis. For the sake of simplicity, the  threshold for cash basis tax reporting should be aligned with the GST cash basis threshold.  Cash basis tax reporting would significantly simplify the end-of -year process for many New Zealand  SMEs. There would be a timing difference in tax payments as some tax revenue may be deferred to  future periods. However timing differences will eventually work their way out of the tax system.    GST On Low Value Imported Goods  Our response on this issue assumes that this problem is large enough to need solving.  A technological solution could provide a cost effective way of identifying the intended recipient,  notifying them by text message or email, and collecting GST via credit card payment through a mobile  phone app. Effective use of technology could allow a broad based approach where all imported  goods are subject to GST, with very few exemptions.             This submission is not intended to be a full system description, however we believe that this problem  is best solved by collecting the GST from the recipient (as Customs presently do with higher value  items), rather than from the sender (as the Australian model intends to do).  Collecting GST on imported low value goods also has the advantage of helping to level the  competitive playing field for many NZ businesses.    Alignment Of Company Rate, Trustee Rate And Top Individual Rate   We support the alignment of the top individual marginal rate of income tax with the current company  tax rate and the trustee tax rate. Alignment of these tax rates would simplify tax planning and reduce  the use of artificial structures designed purely to arbitrage the difference in tax rates. Alignment also  contributes to the redirection of economic activity from tax minimisation toward productive  economic uses.      \*​\*\*   Thank you for the opportunity to submit on these matters. As part of this consultation process, we  would like engage with Officials to discuss the points raised in this submission. I look forward to  hearing from you to arrange this.      Yours faithfully        Grant Anderson  Head of Government Relations    Xero Limited    \[1\]