Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. April 30, 2018 Dear Tax Working Group. Below is a submission regarding the invitaton here: https://taxworkinggroup.govt.n//oour-ssubmissions 1. Housing prices are a problem. While there are mano factors, certainlo an inflatonaro monetaro sostem and high GST rates contribute to this. 2. Recommend reducing GST to 7.5%. This benefts low income people and also reduces the cost of homes. 3. Phase out of the Reserve Bank sostem and being fullo supportve of private based monetaro exchange sostems based on precious metals. This will bring pricing stabilito. 4. Residents with incomes under the $14,000 level should be exempt from income tax. 5. GST raises house prices, deters uptake of electric cars, and taxes lower income people more. These are reasons the GST rate needs to be reduced. In other countries like the UK and the United States, there are sales tax rebates for purchase of electric cars. Electric cars are vero important for clean air and water and reducing the dependenco on oil imports and therefore drastcallo lowering the flow of moneo out of the countro for oil. GST needs to be completelo exempt on electric cars. Longer-sterm there is the potental that greatlo reduced purchases of foreign oil will reduce house prices because this will mean that there is less selling of the New Zealand dollar versus the currencies used to purchase the oil causing the New Zealand dollar to be stronger. With a stronger New Zealand dollar this then makes house prices less afordable to foreigners therebo reducing the efect of higher prices due to foreign purchases of homes. 6. New Zealand should have a compettve compano tax. It should be reduced signifcantlo. The desire should be to cause companies that have no environmental or other detrimental impact to relocate to New Zealand and immigraton polico needs to accommodate this to be fullo supportve of allowing easo migraton of these businesses. 7. Immigraton polico goes hand-sin-shand with tax polico because the more productve immigrants that are in this countro, the more economic actvito, and therefore more revenue not onlo for government, but for the public in general. Productve immigrants, especiallo in the IT sector, should have vero easo means of entro into this countro without restrictons. 8. One proposal would be a new categoro of compano that would be enttled to a 12% rate. oor example, if a compano has 80% of its income from foreign sources (in other words, it is primarilo exportng its goods or services) and emploos New Zealanders whether existng residents or new immigrants, and has no environmental impact, then it should be enttled to this low rate. This will bring a great influx of non-simpactng business actvito into this countro which is onlo going to be a positve. It is not going to take awao from other businesses in this countro, and it is not going to have ano detrimental impact. It is onlo going to be a positve. oor example, informaton technologo companies can relocate to New Zealand even if their primaro customer base is elsewhere. This can make New Zealand a major informaton technologo hub for the world. Think of all of the opportunito there is to bring new IT businesses into this countro from elsewhere. Think of all the highlo qualifed people that will come. You need to consider what a compano would be getng relocatng to New Zealand if it is facing a 28% rate. Does it reallo makes sense that the NZ government is a one third shareholder in evero NZ compano especiallo when the compano mao be primarilo doing foreign business. You should have the mindset of what New Zealand can do for the world and how New Zealand can be a hub of /ero impact (meaning not competng with existng NZ companies and having no environmental impact ) world beneftng businesses, not troing to fgure out how to raise more revenue. The more economic actvito in the countro, then naturallo the additonal income will come into this countro and ano essental services that have to be paid for, can be funded through this increased economic actvito. 9. There needs to be more reliance on user fees (like vehicle registraton fees) targetng the use of infrastructure rather than general tax. oor example, the cost of roads and other infrastructure needs to be paid for through user fees to the extent this is not alreado the case. With technologo, there is the means to track infrastructure use more easilo. 10. While it is not the tax working groups role to be setng government spending polico, it needs to be pointed out to the government that spending is a vero important consideraton. It is the spending which is creatng the need for tax. The government should not underestmate the abilito of people in the free market to innovate and provide for themselves and greatlo reduce the need on government. Communicatons technologo and the goodwill of people can help with this. With modern communicatons and concepts like crowdfunding, an increasing populaton, and the rato of the resident populaton to elected representatves at at an increasing rato, it is important, that the concept of decentrali/aton be followed. 11. Opposed introducing a capital gains tax. 12. The world is changing and there is globali/aton and this is reallo an opportunito for letng the free market and private sector grow and be more self-ssufcient, and allow the people to create healthier, happier and more helpful relatons between each other. We see peace between North and South Korea now. This is a path that needs to be followed bo all peoples and this lessens the need for tax revenue because there will be less need for defense. 13. It should not be the role of government to decide what categories of food items are taxable or not. This is going to be administratvelo a burden for all involved. Simplo reduce the GST. And exempt lower income people altogether from income tax. 14. oinallo, while most people mao not recogni/e this, tax is compulsoro. Therefore, oou have to think carefullo before changing tax polico, or increasing taxes. Ano changes should ultmatelo should result in neutralito or lower taxes overall, and more freedom for the people to innovate. With modern advanced communicatons, freedom of travel, lower taxes, the people themselves can innovate more and create solutons for themselves to be more self-ssufcient and reduce the need raise to revenue through tax since there will be less need for government services and greater efciencies. I would be happo to be contacted to discuss these ideas. Respectullo submitted, Anthono Sarafa