Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. Depreciation and land tax Assessment of selected Tax Working Group recommendations Report to Property Council of New Zealand 5 February 2010 NZIER’s standa rd terms of engagement for contract research can be found at www.nzier.org.nz. While NZIER will use all reasonable endeavours in undertaking contract research and producing reports to ensure the information is as accurate as practicable, the Institute, its contributors, employees, and Board shall not be liable (whether in contract, tort (including negligence), equity or on any other basis) for any loss or damage sustained by any person relying on such work whatever the cause of such loss or damage. About NZIER NZIER is a specialist consulting firm that uses applied economic research and analysis to provide a wide range of strategic advice to clients in the public and private sectors, throughout New Zealand and Australia, and further afield. NZIER is also known for its long-established Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion and Quarterly Predictions. Our aim is to be the premier centre of applied economic research in New Zealand. We pride ourselves on our reputation for independence and delivering quality analysis in the right form, and at the right time, for our clients. We ensure quality through teamwork on individual projects, critical review at internal seminars, and by peer review at various stages through a project by a senior staff member otherwise not involved in the project. NZIER was established in 1958. Authorship Prepared by: Shamubeel Eaqub, CFA Quality approved by: John Ballingall Date: 8/02/2010 4:05 p.m. Version: 1.3 Acknowledgements: Brent Layton, Sarah Spring \[1\] NZIER – Depreciation and land tax i Key points The Property Council of New Zealand (PCNZ) has engaged NZIER to assess the merits of two policy recommendations by the Tax Working Group: removal of depreciation on buildings and introduction of a land tax. Our analysis 1 shows that these recommendations: (i) Are inconsistent with the ‘good tax policy’ criteria set out by the Tax Working Group. (ii) May work against over-riding government objectives to become more internationally competitive in order to close the income gap with Australia by 2025. Removing depreciation on buildings would raise tax expenses for businesses. It would increase the effective marginal corporate tax rate from 30% to 32%. This is clearly against the Tax Working Group’s “critical concern” that “New Zealand relies heavily on taxes most harmful to growth – particularly corporate and personal taxes on capital.” In addition, depreciation of commercial buildings is common practice in the OECD. Removing depreciation in New Zealand would make us an outlier and reduce our international tax competitiveness. This could hamper already weak foreign direct investment into New Zealand, the health of the local capital market and erode export competitiveness. This is clearly counter to government policy objectives of making New Zealand a more internationally competitive economy and would place us at a further disadvantage to Australia. A land tax would be efficient and fair only if broadly and uniformly applied. New Zealand has a long history of land taxes beginning in the late 1800s. Exemptions and reductions have made land taxes politically unsustainable. They were finally repealed in 1990. We see no reason why a land tax in the future should be any more politically sustainable, particularly given the strong views of key stakeholder groups such as farmers, retirees and Iwi. A land tax would also impact on land prices. This would impact on banks – at least 2/3 of bank lending is to land based and housing segments. This could impact on the cost and availability of capital - and consequently on economic growth – perhaps for a protracted period. Our initial analysis strongly suggests that far more detailed analysis and rigorous debate is required before these ideas progress further. Otherwise potentially damaging policy decisions could be made. 1 Our analysis looks at these policy suggestions in isolation and not in the context of potentially offsetting policies. Confidential draft - 8 February 2010 NZIER – Depreciation and land tax ii NZIER – Depreciation and land tax iii Contents 1. Introduction ........................................................................................................... 1 2. Removing tax depreciation on commercial buildings ....................................... 1 2.1 Depreciation of buildings common in the OECD ........................................... 1 2.2 Removing depreciation lifts tax costs for business ........................................ 3 2.2.1 Removing building depreciation lifts effective tax rate to 32% ............................................. 3 2.2.2 Removing all depreciation lifts effective tax rate to 42% ...................................................... 4 2.3 Assessment against criteria .......................................................................... 5 3. Imposing a low-rate land tax ................................................................................ 6 3.1 Long history of land taxes ............................................................................. 6 3.2 Assessment against criteria .......................................................................... 7 Appendices Appendix A – Removing all depreciation ...................................................................... 8 Appendix B - References ............................................................................................... 9 Figures Figure 1: Selected tax information of OECD countries ...................................................... 2 Figure 2: Building depreciation rates among OECD countries .......................................... 3 Figure 3: Removal of building depreciation scenario ........................................................ 4 Figure 4: Stacked against criteria ..................................................................................... 5 Figure 5: New Zealand Land tax through time .................................................................. 6 Figure 6: Removal of ALL depreciation scenario .............................................................. 8 Figure 7: Tax effect of depreciation removal by industry ................................................... 8 NZIER – Depreciation and land tax 1 1. Introduction The Property Council of New Zealand (PCNZ) has engaged NZIER to assess the merits of certain policy recommendations by the Tax Working Group (Buckle et al, 2010). We consider the merits of two particular recommendations in this report:  “Removing tax depreciation on buildings (or certain category of buildings) if empirical evidence shows that they do not depreciate in value.”  “...introduction of a low-rate land tax as a means of funding other tax rate reductions.” 2. Removing tax depreciation on commercial buildings “Removing tax depreciation on buildings (or certain category of buildings) if empirical evidence shows that they do not depreciate in value.” We assume that tax depreciation is removed from commercial property. Our analysis shows that:  depreciation of commercial buildings is common practice among OECD countries  removal of depreciation on commercial buildings would effectively increase the marginal corporate tax rate from 30.0% to 32.1%  to keep the tax bill for businesses the same, the corporate tax rate would have to be cut from 30.0% to 28.0%. The removal of commercial property depreciation would:  raise tax costs, which is clearly against the Tax Working Group’s “critical concern” that “New Zealand relies heavily on taxes most harmful to growth – particularly corporate and personal taxes on capital.”  violate some of the key criteria set out by the TWG, in particular economic efficiency and growth by reducing the incentive to invest  violate one of the key objectives of the Capital Market Development Taskforce (CMD) by effectively raising the cost of capital  violate the spirit and intent of the CMD and 2025 Taskforces by reducing New Zealand’s international competitiveness, by removing depreciation which is commonly in place in the OECD. 2.1 Depreciation of buildings common in the OECD A compilation of OECD country tax practices, summarised in Figures 1 and 2, show that New Zealand is similar to the OECD in the treatment of building tax depreciation. The real divergences appear to be in the absence of a capital gains tax, harmonisation of various tax rates and a higher value added tax. The analysis of OECD countries suggest New Zealand’s current rules on building depreciation are the norm. Removing this depreciation would impose a cost on New Zealand businesses that is not commonly found in the OECD. New Zealand would be less competitive in the global scene, and in particular less attractive relative to our NZIER – Depreciation and land tax 2 closest competitor Australia. New Zealand already allows less depreciation on buildings (2%) than Australia (2.5%-4.0%). This has the potential to weigh on foreign direct investment into New Zealand (which is already low). Figure 1: Selected tax information of OECD countries Main corporate tax rates Value added tax Building depreciation Corporate Capital gains Branch Main Selected Straight line Accelerated Australia 30 30 30 10 - 2.5-4 - Austria 25 25 - 20 10 2-3 - Belgium 33 33 33 21 - 3-5 - Canada 19 9.5 19 5 13 - 4 Czech republic 20 0/20 20 19 9 3.4 - Denmark 25 25 25 25 - 4 - Finland 26 26 26 22 - - 4-20 France 33.33 0/15/33.33 33.33 19.6 - 2-5 - Germany 15 14 15 19 7 2-3 - Greece 25 25 25 19 3-13 5-8 - Hungary 10/16 10/16 10/16 20 5 2-6 - Iceland 15 15 15 24.5 7 - 1-6 Ireland 12.5 22 12.5 12.5 0-13.5 4\* - Italy 27.5 0/27.5 27.5 20 4-10 3 - Japan 30 30 30 5 - 2-14.3 5-35.7 Korea 25 25 25 10 - 2.5-5 - Luxembourg 21 21 21 15 3-12 1.5-4 - Mexico 28 28 28 15 0-10 5 - Netherlands 25.5 25.5 25.5 19 0-6 Limited - New Zealand 30 - 30 12.5 - 2 3 Norway 28 28 28 25 8-14 - 2-8 Poland 19 19 19 22 0-7 1.5-10 - Portugal 25 25 25 20 4-14 2-5 - Slovak Republic 19 19 19 19 10 na na Spain 30 30 30 16 4-7 2-3 - Sweden 26.3 26.3 26.3 25 6-12 2-5 - Switzerland 12.7-25 - 12.7- 25 7.6 2.4-3.6 1.5-4 3-8 Turkey 20 20 20 18 1-8 2 - UK 28 28 28 17.5 0-5 0% from 2011 - USA 35 35 35 Various Various 2.6 - Source: Ernst & Young (2009) (\*Industrial only) NZIER – Depreciation and land tax 3 Figure 2: Building depreciation rates among OECD countries 2.2 Removing depreciation lifts tax costs for business Depreciation is a non-cash expense for businesses, which spreads capital expense over the life of the investment. The effect of depreciation is to reduce the tax burden (by reducing the taxable income by the depreciation amount) and lift after tax cash income. Removing depreciation on buildings would lift the effective corporate tax rate from 30% to 32%. Removing all depreciation (not just buildings) would lift the effective corporate tax rate to 42%. 2.2.1 Removing building depreciation lifts effective tax rate to 32% We estimate the removal of commercial building depreciation would levy large costs on New Zealand business (around $1 billion in 2008). This equates to effectively increasing the marginal corporate tax rate from 30.0% to 32.1%. Keeping the business tax bill the same would require a corporate tax rate of 28.0%. OECD Building Depreciation Rates 0510152025 Finland Japan Greece Poland Mexico Norway Belgium Canada Denmark Hungary Ireland Korea France Iceland Portugal Sweden Czech republic Australia Italy Luxembourg Switzerland USA Austria Germany New Zealand Spain Turkey UK Netherlands Slovak Depreciation rate (%) Lower bound Upper bound NA Limited 0% NZIER – Depreciation and land tax 4 Figure 3: Removal of building depreciation scenario Data in $b 2008 actual Without depreciat ion Change % $b Income 561 561 0% 0 Expenses 513 510 -1% -3 Building Depreciation 3 0 -100% -3 Other depreciation 16 16 0% 0 Other expenses 494 494 0% 0 Taxable income 47 51 7% 3 Statutory tax rate 30% 30% 0% Cash income pre tax 67 67 0% 0 Tax paid 14 15 7% 1 Cash income 52 51 -2% -1 Effective marginal tax rate 30.0% 32.1% +2%pt 0 Source: Statistics NZ, NZIER The data on depreciation and taxable structures is limited in New Zealand. While due care has been taken, the estimates are illustrative. We estimate the 2008 building depreciation amount by assuming it is 3% of the market value of non-residential buildings (the statutory rate is 4%, but this applies to historical cost, not market value). All data in Figure 3 relate to all businesses in New Zealand as recorded by Statistics New Zealand in the 2008 Annual Enterprise Survey. 2.2.2 Removing all depreciation lifts effective tax rate to 42% We also analysed a scenario where all depreciation is removed. While this was not a recommendation of the TWG report, it serves to highlight the significant divergences between industries. Capital intense buildings may face marginal tax rates in excess of 50%. Without any depreciation net cash income by businesses in 2008 would be $6b (or 11%) lower. This equates to an increase in the marginal tax rate from 30.0% to 42.2%. Supporting tables can be found in Appendix A. NZIER – Depreciation and land tax 5 2.3 Assessment against criteria Removing depreciation on commercial property does not stack up against the criteria and objectives set out by the TWG, Capital Market Development Taskforce and 2025 Taskforce. We consider the policy in isolation and not in the context of potentially offsetting policies. Figure 4: Stacked against criteria Group and criteria Meet? Comments Tax working group Efficiency and growth N Reduce economic efficiency and growth. Depreciation allowance typically promotes investment in capital. New Zealand’s low productivity growth and demise in economic leader-boards is in part explained by low capital intensity. Policies that discourage investment can be detrimental to economic growth. Equity and fairness N Puts NZ businesses at a disadvantage in an international context, given depreciation of buildings is generally allowed offshore. Fair within a domestic context as it does not discriminate by property type. Revenue integrity Y Removal of depreciation allowance on property would reduce a bias in investment in residential property. Fiscal cost Y Raise revenue by around $1.3b (about $1b from commercial property). Compliance and administration cost Y Would likely reduce compliance and administration. Coherence N Removal of depreciation on commercial property would move NZ away from the 'norm' in the OECD, and importantly Australia. Capital market development workforce Minimise the cost of capital N Removing depreciation would reduce future income from investments in property (due to reduced future income streams) and lower NPV (due to lower cash-flows in early years). This means the required rate of return for a given investment would rise. Capital flows to most valuable uses N This would create an artificial distortion to invest in other forms of assets (such as plant and machinery) relative to property. This is against the intent of a level playing field for all investments. 2025 Taskforce Sharpening private incentives to invest, to save and to work N Removing depreciation reduces the incentive to invest, as it lowers the future stream of income from the asset. Minimising the regulatory obstacles the government puts in the wa y - Na Managing the public sector's own huge assets much more effectively - Na Source: NZIER NZIER – Depreciation and land tax 6 3. Imposing a low-rate land tax “A land tax is a highly efficient tax mechanism which could be introduced as part of a package of reforms to the New Zealand tax system.” (Policy advice division, IRD and The Treasury, 2009). A land tax is only efficient if it is applied broadly and uniformly. In the event of exemptions, the tax ceases to be efficient and becomes distortionary with economic costs. While it may begin as a broad and exemption-free tax, New Zealand’s long history of land taxes shows (Figure 5) that tinkering and changes are difficult to resist. A land tax would be a burden for the asset-rich-cash-poor segments of society, including farmers, Iwi and retirees. A greater immediate concern would be a loss of land value and its impact on the banking system. At least 2/3 of bank lending is to land based industries and residential property, so the impact on availability and cost of credit and the economy may be large. The land tax only stacks up under very special circumstances. Looking at it objectively against the criteria set out by the TWG, CMD Taskforce and the 2025 Taskforce, it seems unlikely that the main criteria can be satisfied over a reasonable timeframe. 3.1 Long history of land taxes New Zealand has a long history of land taxes. These became smaller through time as other taxes were introduced and exemptions were created. Even if introduced in a efficient fashion now, it is unclear if it can be politically sustainable. Figure 5: New Zealand Land tax through time Land Tax 10.1% 10.5% 11.2% 12.5% 7.3% 2.3% 2.1% 1.0% 0.7% 0.3% 0.1% 0.0%0.0% 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 1901 1911 1921 1931 1941 1951 1961 1971 1981 1991 2001 Share of tax revenue Source: McKay, L, April 1978, New Zealand Universities Law Review, Volume 8, "Historical aspects of the estate tax" NZIER – Depreciation and land tax 7 3.2 Assessment against criteria The land tax meets the TWG’s criteria only under very special circumstances. In particular, the policies need to be applied broadly and uniformly. Otherwise, distortions create economic loss. Even if enacted as such in the beginning, it is unclear if it can remain free from political interference in the future. More worrying is the prospect of land value declines and the impact on the banking sector. This could impact on the cost and availability of capital and restrain economic growth for a protracted period of time. Group and criteria Meet? Comments Tax working group Efficiency and growth N A land tax would be efficient only if applied uniformly. This is unlikely over the medium term given vote-sensitive and asset-rich- cash-poor segments such as farms, Iwi and retirees. In the presence of exemptions the tax would be inefficient and distortionary. There could be a large impact on the banking sector, with at least 2/3 of their loans to land based industries and housing. This could raise the cost and availability of capital, weighing on future economic growth. Equity and fairness N It would be equitable and fair only if applied uniformly. However, it would adversely impact on the groups identified above. In the presence of exemptions, as happened historically, the tax would not meet this criterion. Revenue integrity Y If properly implemented revenue integrity should be maintained. Fiscal cost Maybe The impact is ambiguous, as it would depend on the rate of tax, if the tax is a deductible expense and how much land prices fall. There may also be wider financial and economic ramifications which cannot be predicted accurately. Compliance and administration cost Maybe Would likely reduce compliance and administration. Coherence N Only targets one class of wealth and is thus not coherent. Capital market development workforce Minimise the cost of capital N Declines in land prices could impact on the banking sector and thus the cost of capital. Capital flows to most valuable uses N Creates a distorting incentive to hold wealth in assets other than land. 2025 Taskforce Sharpening private incentives to invest, to save and to work N Creates a distorting incentive to hold wealth in assets other than land. Does not give specific incentives to invest, save or work. Minimising the regulatory obstacles the government puts in the wa y - Na Managing the public sector's own huge assets much more effectively - Na NZIER, TWG Land tax background paper, Sep 2009 NZIER – Depreciation and land tax 8 Appendix A – Removing all depreciation Figure 6: Removal of ALL depreciation scenario Data in $b 2008 actual Without depreciati on Change % $b Income 561 561 0% 0 Expenses 513 494 -4% -19 Depreciation 19 0 -100% -19 Other expenses 494 494 0% 0 Taxable income 47 67 41% 19 Statutory tax rate 30% 30% - - Cash income pre tax 67 67 0% 0 Tax paid 14 20 41% 6 Net cash income 52 47 -11% -6 Effective marginal tax rate 30.0% 42.2% 12%pt - Source: Statistics NZ, NZIER Figure 7: Tax effect of depreciation removal by industry Change in - Effective tax rate Industry Tax bill Net cash income Scenario Increase Education and Training 139% -20% 72% 42%pt Information Media and Telecommunications 99% -18% 60% 30%pt Public Administration and Safety\* 94% -17% 58% 28%pt Electricity, Gas, Water and Waste Services 82% -16% 54% 24%pt Transport, Postal and Warehousing 72% -15% 52% 22%pt Retail Trade and Accommodation 67% -15% 50% 20%pt Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing 61% -14% 48% 18%pt Manufacturing 57% -13% 47% 17%pt Arts, Recreation and Other Services 46% -12% 44% 14%pt Construction 46% -12% 44% 14%pt Rental, Hirin g and Real Estate Services 44% -12% 43% 13%pt Mining(1) 44% -12% 43% 13%pt Health Care and Social Assistance 41% -11% 42% 12%pt Wholesale Trade 21% -7% 36% 6%pt Professional, Scientific, Technical, Administrative and Support Services 20% -7% 36% 6%pt Financial and Insurance Services 4% -2% 31% 1%pt Total 41% -11% 42% 12%pt \*2007, as 2008 year the sector made a loss, resulting in distorted calculations Source: Statistics NZ, NZIER NZIER – Depreciation and land tax 9 Appendix B - References 2025 Taskforce, November 2009, “Answering the $64,000 question – Closing the income gap with Australia by 2025”. Cameron R et al, December 2009, “Capital markets matter”, Report of the capital market development taskforce. Ernst & Young, “The 2009 worldwide corporate tax guide”, accessed from: http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Global\_Corporate\_Tax\_Guide\_2009/$FI LE/WWCT\_2009.pdf Nam, C W and D M Radulescu, January 2003, “The roles of tax depreciation for investment decisions: A comparison of European transition countries”, CESifo Working Paper No. 847. McKay, L, April 1978, "Historical aspects of the estate tax", New Zealand Universities Law Review, Volume 8. Professor Bob Buckle et al, January 2010, “A Tax System for New Zealand’s Future”, Report of the Victoria University of Wellington Tax Working Group. Policy advice division, IRD and The Treasury, July 2004, “Repairs and maintenance to the tax depreciation rules”, An official issues paper. Policy advice division, IRD and The Treasury, September 2009, “Land Tax”, Background paper for session 3 of the Victoria University of Wellington Tax Working Group.