Coversheet: CampaignanalysisfortheFutureofTaxengagementprocess Purpose: The following presentation was prepared by the Secretariat for the Tax Working Group as a summary of some key points and statistics from the Future of Tax public consultation process.The Group has access to the submissions but the Secretariat is analysing them and will be providing summaries and analysis. The Group intends to publicly release submissions once personal details of submitters have been redacted in accordance with the Official Information Act. Future of Tax Campaign 1March to 30 April 2018 1.The Group is seen as independent, credible and transparent 2.True and fair consultation has occurred 3.Public appreciation of the role of tax in society is increased 4.Groups and individuals who do not normally make submissions on tax consultations do so this time 5.Members of the public who currently question the fairness of the tax system are interested in and encouraged by what the Tax Working Group is discussing. WHAT SUCCESS LOOKS LIKE WHO MADE SUBMISSIONS? A key goal of this campaign was to receive submissions from groups and individuals who wouldn’t normally make submissions to tax consultations. Email 183 organisations made submissions through email. Examples are below. 55 of the 200 organisations we approached made submissions. ActionStationBritannia Financial ServicesCorporate Taxpayers GroupFederation of Women's Health... Active West CoastBusiness NZCPA AustraliaFertiliser Association AgcarmCAANZCraigs Investment PartnersFinancial Cohorts Forum (Chch) Alcohol HealthwatchCancer SocietyDairyNZFinancial Markets Authority Alexander Turnbull Library ...CDHBDeloitteFinancial Services Council AMP CapitalChild Poverty Action GroupDemocrats for social creditFinancial Services Federation Angel Association New ZealandChristchurch East Labour ...Diabetes New ZealandFisher & Paykel Healthcare ANZCitizens Advice BureauECE ServicesFood and Grocery Council Arthritis New ZealandCNI Iwi Holdings LimitedEdgar Diabetes and Obesity Research ...Foodstuffs Ashburton Alcohol and Drug ...Coca ColaEMA(Northern)Forest Owners Association ASPIRE 2025, ASH NZ...Commission for Financial CapabilityEnvironment CanterburyForsyth Barr Assn. of Salaried Medical...Communities Against Alcohol HarmEnvironmental and Human Health ...Frucor Suntory Better Public Media TrustCommunity Housing AotearoaEnvironmental Defence SocietyGenesis BNZCone MarshallEYGoodman Brewers Association of NZContactFederated FarmersGreenpeace WHO MADE SUBMISSIONS? One of the goals of this campaign was to receive submissions from groups and individuals who wouldn’t normally make submissions to tax consultations. Website Of the 4,700 submissions made through the website, the great majority were from personal email addresses, such as gmail and hotmail. However, some submissions were made from organisational email accounts. It’s likely these were mostly individual submissions. agresearch.co.nzcolourevolution.co.nzmagnumimports.co.nzsaatchi.co.nz airnz.co.nzcoversandcanvas.co.nzmultivac.co.nzscaffoldingauckland.com alliancetrucks.co.nzcresswells.co.nzngapourihighlands.co.nzsouthernspars.com barfoot.co.nzdriedfresh.co.nznorthcanterburyglass.co.nzstats.govt.nz beachsidecapital.co.nzelectrix.co.nznorthlanddhb.org.nzstein.co.nz beelinesupplies.co.nzemediacreative.co.nznz.pwc.comsurf.co.nz bell-lodge.nzengineeringnz.orgnzpost.co.nztewhangai.org betterworld.nzfamilylawchambers.co.nzoxfam.org.nztoyota.co.nz bnz.co.nzfishingoutdoors.co.nzpacifictractors.co.nzwestpac.co.nz brighttech.co.nzgeocivil.kiwi.nzpggwrightson.co.nzwetafx.co.nz camelotgroup.co.nzhayleymedia.comprogrammed.co.nzwhitestonecheese.co.nz ccc.govt.nzhealthalliance.co.nzrapauratimber.co.nzwinemarlborough.nz cdhb.health.nzjunoinvesting.co.nzrentmaster.co.nzxero.com civilandnaval.co.nzkordia.co.nzrivertown.nzzapwall.com clarity2020.comlincolnagritech.co.nzruapehudc.govt.nz KEY STATS –VOTES AND SUBMISSIONS We received 2,000\*submissions via post and email, 4,700online submissions and 15,700votes in the online quick polls. 533 1008 1441 849 287 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 No changes: Keep it as it is Some small changes needed Major changes needed A complete overhaul Something else: Tell us in the comment box below How much does our tax system need to change to be ready for the future? 1116 346 120 443 230 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 Stay in the background and collect revenue for core New Zealand services Encourage New Zealanders to make better choices. Encourage investment in some types of business Support those in New Zealand who need help Something else: Tell us in the comment box below What is the purpose of tax? 618 318 447 734 567 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 Funding Retirement Business taxProtecting the environment Introducing a Capital Gains Tax on investments which aren’t currently taxed Something else: Tell us in the comment box below What tax issues matter most to you? 680 1156 159 1148 399 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 Absolutely notA few thingsUnsureMost thingsYes we are taxing the right things Are we taxing the right things? 1463 1046 107 244 264 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 No –it’s not the responsibility of the tax system Yes, help make housing more affordable Unsure Yes, but I’m not sure how Yes, I have another idea: Tell us in the comment box below Should the tax system make housing more affordable? \* figure includes syndicated submissions KEY STATS & EXAMPLES –MEDIA The Tax Working group has appeared in the media around125 times sparking a national conversation about tax. KEY STATS & EXAMPLES –SOCIAL MEDIA Our Facebook advertising has been seen by 640,000 people generating 38,519link clicks and our videos have had over 116,000 video views. Our most popular Facebook post has generated 4,000 clicks, 481 comments and 45 shares. Our Tweets have generated 224,70 impressions. Instagram adverts have generated over 56,000 impressions throughout the campaign. There was 1,200+ comments on Facebook posts with everyday New Zealanders having a genuine debate about the future of tax . KEY STATS –DIGITAL ADVERTISING Our digital advertising achieved 28.9 millionimpressions leading to around 35,000clicks. Digital Display Impressions26,197,356 Clicks21,321 Digital Video Impressions2,065,443 Clicks4,746 Completed Views 135,035 Digital Radio Impressions440,391 Clicks255 Completed Listens 426,121 Google AdWords Impressions163,808 Clicks9,033 KEY STATS -RADIO Our radio adverts reached 1,745,796people an average of 5.5times. NZME; Mediaworks & NiuFM Networks Māori Media Network (23 iwi stations) 5,862 spots aired1,633 spots aired EXAMPLES OF DIGITAL ADVERTISING KEY STATS –Te Ao Māori We held 13hui across New Zealand and have 4more to come. We sent 30tailored letters to Māori organisations inviting them to participate and Sir Michael Cullen was interviewed for The Hui and Radio Waatea. Hui held to date: 1.Presentation to Iwi Chairs at Waitangi (1 February) 2.Chair of the Māori Accountants Association (12 March) 3.Māori CFO network (23 March) 4.Deloitte, (23 March) 5.Te Wānanga(23 March) 6.KPMG, (26 March) 7.Various iwi entities at the Māori Fisheries conference (28 March) 8.Hui with members of the PouTāhua(29 March) 9.FOMA small group (9 April) 10.MEDAB (11 April) 11.Te Au Rangahuand Te Au Pakirihui in Palmerston North (Massey) (12 April) 12.Hui with Ngahiwiand the PouTāhua(19 April) 13.Waikato Māori Business Network (19 April) The Tax and Te Ao Māori fact sheet was sent to 30 Māori organisations. Te Au Rangahu and Te Au Pakirihui in Palmerston North KEY STATS –WEBSITE 65,000different visitors to taxworkinggroup.govt.nz spent an average of 2minutes viewing4 webpages each. How they found the website: When they visited the website: What webpages they visited: Web page hits No. of visitors 0 2000 4000 14/03/201821/03/201828/03/20184/04/201811/04/201818/04/201825/04/2018 0100002000030000400005000060000 Thank you for your submission How to make a submission Future of Tax: Submissions Background Paper What is the purpose of tax? Can tax make housing more affordable? What tax issues matter most to you? Are we taxing the right things? What does the future of tax look like to you? Homepage Have your say on the future of tax Digital Advertising, 26462 Referral from other website e.g. media, NGO, 3273 Social Media, 24503 Email referral, 220 Paid Search (Google Adwords), 9784 Search Engine (Google), 4265 Directly entering url, 18271