Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document February 2019 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. 1 From:Andrew Body Sent: Tuesday, 30 October 2018 10:54 AM To: TWG Submissions Subject: Submission on Future of Tax Interim Report - building depreciation deductions Hello We refer to the Tax Working Group’s “Future of Tax Interim Report” published on 20 September 2018 (the Report). We wish to submit comments in respect of the Report’s comments on building depreciation deductions contained in paragraphs 68 through to 72, Chapter 14. As a consultancy providing corporate finance and advice services to government, institutional and corporate clients in the property and infrastructure sectors we have extensive experience in the behaviour and valuation of assets in this sector. Our comments follow: 1. Our experience is that nearly all structures, including buildings, experience both physical and economic obsolescence irrespective of their history of repairs and maintenance. 2. The case of seismic strengthening cited in the Report is but one example of a much larger set of regulatory, market and environmental factors that cause physical and economic obsolescence of buildings. 3. In the case of residential buildings our opinion is that multi-unit residential buildings have a much higher risk of obsolescence than stand-alone dwellings. This is because, compared to a stand-alone dwelling, multi-unit residential buildings: a. have significantly higher building standard regulatory risk b. are more likely to occupy land that develops higher-value uses c. are more likely to be constructed with materials and in locations that create high costs of re-tasking or significantly altering the building to meet new requirements 4. The decision to abolish depreciation deductions for buildings with effect from 2012 was a pragmatic response to the issues that the government faced at the time. However the abolition has affected the neutrality of the tax system and in particular in the case of housing directs investment away from development of multi-unit residential rental buildings, that are likely to provide the lowest cost accommodation in metropolitan centres for New Zealanders unable to afford to own their home. 5. We believe there is a strong case for the reinstatement of depreciation deductions on multi-unit residential, commercial and industrial buildings. Thank you for the opportunity to make this submission. Regards \[1\] 2 Andrew Body CAUTION: This e-mail and any attachment(s) contains information that is both confidential and possibly legally privileged. No reader may make any use of its content unless that use is approved by Andrew Body Limited separately in writing. Any opinion, advice or information contained in this e-mail and any attachment(s) is to be treated as interim and provisional only and for the strictly limited purpose of the recipient as communicated to us. Neither the recipient nor any other person should act upon it without our separate written authorisation of reliance. If you have received this message in error: · do not copy, disclose or use the contents in any way, and · please notify us immediately and destroy this message. Thank you. Andrew Body www.andrewbody.com \[1\]