Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. Tax Working Group Secretariat PO Box 3724 Wellington 6140 New Zealand Proposal to amend the existing tax brackets. 11 April 2018 Executive Summary: Taxation is a tool that can influence behaviour and provide the correct conditions within the economy for growth and productivity. The existing broad base system in relation to tax on earnings from salary and wages is excellent. With a slight tweak it would deliver a higher economic output and reduced negative behaviour of individuals within the system due to the current tax brackets and treatment at Work and Income NZ. This would include introducing a zero tax brackets for individuals to encourage low income earners and recipients of government transfers to productively join the workforce. This band would exclude income received from governmental transfers and income from business (e.g. self-employment, shareholders salaries with deductions). This in turn would lead to better short-term employment solutions for both individuals and businesses, increasing productivity within the economy and developing skills for future employment opportunities for these individuals. Secondary benefits in provide employment experience to new and returning workers would also improve outcomes. The Problem: The existing broad base tax system is international recognised as being ‘fair’ when it is applied to income that is tax at source (PAYE, RWT and scheduler payments). This is then influenced negatively when it includs other sources of income which allows a higher level of deductibility and assessability issues, like the capital gain on a rental property. This is a problem which is NOT being addressed in this paper. The problem I wish to address is that of the unproductive workforce that chose not to engage within the labour market due to their perception of their value in the market place or situations that will be detrimental to them in the long term. In this paper I will use three examples: 1. Qualified professional (accountant/ lawyer) who has had a break from their professional to have and/or raise children. Married with a good family income so does not need to immediately return to the workforce. This person was earning significant income prior to exiting the workforce and would happily work part time but not for the money that is on offer from employers for part time roles. They have a huge amount of skill and expertise that would benefit business in both productivity, management and growth. 2. Retired individuals who have good mobility and skills that would work in part time employment to supplement their retirement savings and/or government transfer (superannuation). This person would have great skills to cover shortages or seasonal work but chooses not to work or re-enter the workforce due to the value of their earning with the implementation of secondary taxation and the level of earnings they will receive (minimum wage). 3. Individual receiving the unemployment benefit (government transfer) who is actively looking for full time employment. This individual would happily work part time or seasonally while looking for full time employment but cannot accept those positions as they will then have a six week stand down on their benefit. They require this money and are forced into the position of not being able to work productively within the economy due to the stand down. These three examples are all people whom would actively participate in the workforce, adding value to the economy should the value of their contribution be more fairly taxed. The Solution: The proposed solution to get individuals to enter the workforce is to amend the existing tax brackets for income from employment. The existing tax brackets are: The proposed tax brackets: For employment income The proposed tax bracket will be for employment income that has deduction at source. Other income (governmental transfers, self-employment, investment, business etc.) will be taxed in full at the lowest tax rate of 12%. 0 14,000 10.5% 14,000 48,000 17.5% 48,000 70,000 30.0% 70,000 + 33.0% 0 5,000 0.0% 5,000 14,000 12.0% 14,000 48,000 20.0% 48,000 70,000 25.0% 70,000 150,000 33.0% 150,000 + 35.0% This tax free employment income would also not be treated as income for the entitlements that individuals would receive from Work and Income New Zealand. This proposal is to encourage those not engaged in the workforce to enter the market and productively contribute to the economy. If we use the examples as provided we can see the additional benefit. Example 1: The person is happy to work for a business knowing that the hourly rate for the first $5,000 is exactly what they will earn. They feel better rewarded for their contribution and have a vast amount of skill and experience that will benefit the business. This is a hugely under-utilized section of the workforce that are not included in the unemployment numbers as they are not actively seeking employment. They would work and this proposal will help achieve that. Example 2: As noted above the individual have skills and experience that is desirable but due to the inconvenience of the existing taxation system (secondary tax) and tax brackets they do not feel that the earnings are worth the effort. This segment is perfect for seasonal work and part time employment. They would be able to full regional shortfalls e.g. driving school buses due and provide depth for employers e.g. filling in for staff on holiday which remains an issue for employers. Example 3: This person wants to work and would happily take short term rolls if it did not impact the benefits that they are entitled to. In this case the individual would be able to undertake an activity like fruit picking for the six week season without the concern that it would impact their benefit. They also know that the income will not be taxed at source and the income they receive will be fully theirs, therefore encouraging them to seek these opportunities. In these three examples people whom would not normally engage in the workforce would be able to undertake part time or seasonal employment. They would contribute to the economy and provide valuable resources to businesses. As the unemployment rate continues to drop will be essential for productivity. It will also improve their perception on the fairness of the tax system. The added benefit is that these segments as identified (specifically example 1 and 3) would be gaining valuable experience and could be encouraged to return to the workforce or secure permanent jobs. Therefore, the taxation system at this level would be seen to be fairer and encourage productivity within the economy of those people whom currently feel excluded. The Numbers: The impact of the changes in taxable revenue in gross terms is minor. Using the 2016 data from Inland Revenue (1) we can determine this as detailed below. We are unable to calculate the impact of the other assessable income from governmental transfers ($20 + billion) and business income on the non-taxable tax bracket as these will still be taxed. Currently there are 579,000 (2) individuals receiving benefits and 514,276 (3) receiving super. This conservatively that would be an additional $864m of taxation collected which is excluded from the below calculations. Current State: From the below table we can see that the 2016 individual tax assessed was $31.226 billion. 2016 Individual Taxation Tax Brackets Rate No. Taxpayers Tax Assessed Average Average Average % $ (M) % Tax Assessed Income Rate - - 10.5% 98,000 2.7% - 0.0% - - - 14,000 10.5% 698,340 18.9% 505.7 1.6% 724 6,897 10.5% 14,000 48,000 17.5% 1,693,560 45.9% 6,311.9 20.1% 3,727 26,897 13.9% 48,000 70,000 30.0% 581,140 15.8% 6,056.4 19.3% 10,422 58,005 18.0% 70,000 + 33.0% 616,050 16.7% 18,462.5 58.9% 29,969 118,331 25.3% 3,687,090 31,336.5 70,000 150,000 522,380 14.2% 11,354.8 36.2% 21,737 93,384 23.3% 150,000 + 93,670 2.5% 7,107.7 22.7% 75,880 257,455 29.5% Proposed State: The table reflects a drop in the taxation assessed by $586 million, but this as explained above does not include government transfers that would have an additional $1,080 tax assessed on those individuals receiving them. This is estimated at least $864 million. Nor does it seek to quantify the business income that would also be tax fully therefore the government would actually see a minor tax increase from this. Tax Brackets Rate No. Taxpayers Tax Assessed Average Average Average % $ (M) % Tax Assessed Income Rate - 5,000 0.0% 364,840 9.9% - 0.0% - - 5,000 14,000 12.0% 431,500 11.7% 250.5 0.8% 581 9,838 5.9% 14,000 48,000 20.0% 1,693,560 45.9% 6,197.5 20.2% 3,659 26,897 13.6% 48,000 70,000 25.0% 581,140 15.8% 6,033.0 19.6% 10,381 58,005 17.9% 70,000 150,000 33.0% 522,380 14.2% 11,020.5 35.8% 21,097 93,384 22.6% 150,000 + 35.0% 93,670 2.5% 7,249.1 23.6% 77,389 257,455 30.1% 3,687,090 30,750.5 It would increase the burden for the top tax bracket which already carry the highest contribution, which may be seen as unfair by some. Although under the existing political environment this may be seen as desirable. Conclusion: The existing broad based taxation system is working and delivers into the government 40.2% of its revenue from individual taxation. A tax system should also be a tool to influence productivity within an economy. This in turn will delivery greater revenue from business activities (company tax) and consumption tax (GST) for the government. The existing taxation brackets limit the productivity from a number of segments in the workforce due to the taxation effect on their perceived value and the impact on benefits at WINZ. This could be removed with providing a tax-free level of income (proposed $5,000) that would encourage people to join the workforce. The benefits for the examples as noted above together with other segments e.g. students would provide a resource for business and add additional people into the workforce. Some of which has great skills and experience and others that can provide the necessary short-term labour for tasks such as fruit picking that is required. This will bring other benefits such as an employee being recognised as a “keeper” and retaining a full-time position and provided valuable experience for those entering or returning to the work force. This will lead to a fairer tax system and increase productivity with in the New Zealand economy. Philip Rance About the author: I hold a B.com in accounting and finance and am a Charted Accountant. I started by career with Inland Revenue then Ernst & Young. I have worked in industry within New Zealand, England and the United States of America. I am currently CEO of TaxRefunds.co.nz Limited which represents over 100,000 linked taxpayers filing both IR3 and Personal Tax Summaries. (1) www.ird.govt.nz/resources/9/3/930f79b9-03e0-429c-8ffa-247655f0c490/Thousand+dollar+bands+01- 16\_archive.xlsx (2) https://www.msd.govt.nz/about-msd-and-our-work/publications-resources/statistics/benefit/latest-quarterly- results/all-main-benefits.html (3) https://www.msd.govt.nz/about-msd-and-our-work/publications-resources/statistics/benefit/latest-quarterly- results/all-main-benefits.html \[1\]