Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. As a colony and evolving into a welfare state, New Zealanders have never discovered and learned what it is to be a “Free Society.” By Free Society, I am referring to a community that has evolved through the human compunction to trade value for value, and rests on the premise of voluntary association through exercising one’s individual choice, according to the values and individual chooses that will lead to the betterment of his/her life. Freedom is unequivocally the basis for human flourishing. Taxation is the antithesis of freedom. Taxation is the extortion of property, the theft of property, that rightly belongs to the individual who has expended his intellect/labour to manifest the fruits of his endeavours. Property is the extension of an individual’s life. Property belongs to those who produce it. In a Just society, a Man/Woman would be free to trade the value of the fruits of their labour on a voluntary basis for the goods and services of their choosing, according to where they perceive they receive the equivalent or worthy value in return. In a Just society, a Man/Woman would be self-responsible in the investment of their knowledge in order to make choices appropriate for their well-being and thus achieve their full potential over their lifetime, which may include providing for family, contributing to community, and voluntarily trading between other traders who are also endeavoring to achieve their own highest purpose. The result of this free association is property, goods and services for trade, wealth-creation. This is the basis of a ‘Win/Win” society, the result of positive Human Action. Taxation - like all government intervention, is based on the legalized theft of property. Taxation represents a gun at a man’s head with the threat of punishment and damages should he refuse to hand over the property targeted for extortion. Coercion never created anything, it only destroys. The premise of government “right” to extortion and ownership of the property of the citizens under it’s jurisdiction, is entirely Anti-human and TA X W O R K I N G G R O U P - S U B M I S S I O N - 2 9 A P R I L 2 0 1 8 - J U D I T H H I L L will never succeed to promote or provide a society fit for human flourishing - and it never has. History demonstrates in unequivocally truthful visibility, outcomes that range from genocide, murder, wars, poverty on the scale that no individual could ever achieve when left to his own auspices providing for his life. However, governments, unleashing the power of extortion, destruction and theft, are responsible for the most grotesque consequences to mankind. Yet they continue to garner even more power to ravage down this same destructive path towards total annihilation - then have the audacity to blame the consequences on “not enough money to do what we need to do. . . Just let us get our hands on even more of the citizen’s money and we’ll fix everything. . . those bastard industrialists who create CO2 and are ruining the planet.” While the consequences of failed government policies of interference continue rampant and obvious in every society on the planet today, the individual is left more and more impoverished to eek out his bare survival while endeavoring to provide a semblance of comfort for his family. Yet governments double-down on the same failed bromides, vilify the very people who are able to produce products and services that satisfy human needs, and pull the ground out from under the industry and business activities that could generate future prosperity for all. So, the latest New Zealand government committee, working group, taxation evaluation process, is yet another (there have been others before this one, also paid for by extorted wealth wasted) pretense of soliciting citizen’s input to give them some say in how the government will find additional ways to further extort money from their pockets. This is simply a ruse to disguise the fact that the government has NO RIGHT to TAX in the first place. The question should not be: what new taxes shall we come up with, what areas of human activity have we not attached ourselves to, what hidden corners are people securing their money that we have not ferreted out, how much can we get away with this time around before they catch on and vote for a lesser squeeze party? The question should be asked: BY WHAT RIGHT DOES THE GOVERNMENT EXTORT MONEY FROM THE POCKETS OF INDIVIDUALS? When individuals flourish, which they do by the sheer nature of humans to act in support of their survival and well-being, they are also generous, community-minded, humanity-concerned. It is in their rational self-interest to be aware, concerned and act in the best possible interests of all whom they must trade and live with. Contributions to a governing body which individuals elect to represent their wider community interests should be another area where individuals choose voluntarily to associate, to trade value for value. In such a society, there would be excess overflowing into the community - this is a natural outcome of abundance. An elected, representative governing body is merely an organization operating under a strict Constitution that clearly defines the laws and constraints which enable it, as servant to the people, to provide services that extend the ability of individuals to act for their well- being, under the protection of stable: SECURITY SAFETY LAW These three services are the only legitimate functions of any representative government. Anything more than this is a blatant violation of the rights of the individual to provide for his own life. SECURITY - National Defense - the tools, means and resources to ensure that aggression from outside the nation is met with firm, unequivocal, sovereign response to protect the rights of the citizens within the national jurisdiction from interference that could jeopardize his ability to perform his own actions; SAFETY - an internal police force - the tools, means and resources whose right to act is derived from the legal delegation of citizens to allow a third party to act on their behalf in response to violation of any of the law- abiding citizen’s rights and ability to perform their own actions; LAW - a system of OBJECTIVE laws - the basic human protections that underly all human action: the rights of the individual to act in his own self- interest. A system of Laws prescribes the thresholds of incursion between individuals, and prescribes the forfeiture as appropriate for any violations, the forfeiture of property, freedom, plus the requisite compensation to be made to the victims and/or society. AND THAT”S IT. Such services do not cost anything like what it costs today to support the burden and liability of the government that purports to be the omnipotent, omniscient savior for all human weaknesses. Today, the government is based around the outmoded and unchallenged view that ALL HUMANS WILL ACT IN EVIL if the government is not there to stop them. The government has simply replaced GOD as the arbiter of all human activity. By this it treats all humans as SINFUL and INCAPABLE OF LIVING A DECENT LIFE. Just look around the world and one could believe this to be true. HOWEVER, all governments (with the exception of one) have taken this view and it is not a big stretch to see the progression of the debasement of societies as a result - it’s just a matter of degree - the fast or slow road to hell. Venezuela being a recent example from wealth to ruin in a mere decade. And all governments today prescribe the same fatal medicine that they’ve been prescribing for centuries - more enforcement of the initiation of force, more taxation, more interference, more controls, more regulations, more constraints, more restrictions, more trampling over rights, more enforcers, more policies, more redistribution of wealth, less private activity, MORE GOVERNMENT. If, truely, the goal is Human Flourishing on this Earth - GOVERNMENT IS NOT WORKING. One has to wonder then, what is the goal of government intervention - government against the people. We deserve a society based on voluntary association: a FREE SOCIETY. How does a representative government provide the three services outlined, if contributions are VOLUNTARY? By the same methodology that is applied to purchasing Insurance; By a fee on contract agreements around all credit transactions; By lottery; The rational self-interest of all citizens manifests to a willingness to support the representative government services that protect their interests: Security, Safety, Law. \[For a complete summary of how government could be financed in a Free Society, I refer you to: “Government Financing in a Free Society” by Author and Philosopher Ayn Rand. The article appears in a volume entitled: The Virtue of Selfishness,” by Ayn Rand.\] Additional references: “Human Action,” by Ludwig von Mises, Third Revised Edition; “Socialism,” by Ludwig von Mises, translated 2nd edition 1932; “The Government Against the Economy,” George Reisman, PhD 1979 www.aynrand.org https://mises.org www.capitalism.net Submitted: 29 April 2018 Judith Hill \[1\]