Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act.     25 April 2018    Tax Working Group Secretariat   PO Box 3724   Wellington 6140   New Zealand    By email  Dear Tax Working Group Secretariat  Submission on ​Future of Tax: Submissions Background  Paper  Thank you for the opportunity to submit on the above paper. We strongly  consider that our country’s tax settings and their everyday effects are central  to New Zealanders’ wellbeing, as individuals, and together as a society.  We think the Tax Working Group’s Background Paper is a clear, well-written  piece that accurately summarises the features of New Zealand’s tax system  and the challenges it faces. We agree with the Government’s objectives for  the tax system and the criteria for evaluating tax reform as outlined in the  Background Paper, though we would prioritise the objective of equal  treatment of all forms of income and assets over the objective of system  coherence. Indeed, we do not think that a tax system can be coherent if it  treats different investments inconsistently. For the reasons outlined below, we  would also put a premium on improving the vertical equity of the tax system,  particularly given the dominance that capital ownership and investment has  had over labour.  Our submission focuses primarily on what we consider to be the most  significant failing of the tax system, and the largest impediment to achieving  those objectives: the failure to tax wealth and the inconsistent tax treatments  of different investments – in particular, the treatment of housing as compared  with other investments. At a time when the nature of work is changing, and  meaningful work is becoming increasingly harder to come by, this  fundamentally advantages capital over labour. We have also responded to  some of the Working Group’s consultation questions in the appendix to this  letter.    Jude and Helen Murdoch  \[1\]     We echo the Working Group’s view that, if New Zealand’s broad-based,  low-rate system was working well, there should be only minor (or no)  differences in the tax treatment of different forms of investment. There should  ideally be no difference in marginal effective tax rates between different types  of investments. This ideal scenario is unfortunately a far cry from the reality of  our tax system today, which does not treat wealth or housing the same way as  it does other forms of income.   The marginal effective tax rate on owner-occupied equity in New Zealand is a  fifth of the tax rate on investing in any business assets or long term savings  vehicles. The tax rate on investing in rental properties is around half the rate of  investing elsewhere. This combined with the ability to leverage the investment  of equity in either one’s own home or rental properties means there is just no  contest. Our tax system effectively directs anyone with spare money to invest  it in housing to make super-charged, tax-free capital gains. Indeed, as  commentator Bernard Hickey points out, for such people to do otherwise  would be economically irrational.  The effects of this unbalanced tax treatment have been well documented and  are becoming more visible in New Zealand every day: rampant house-price  inflation relative to wage growth; woeful productivity due to systematic  underinvestment in everything except house purchasing and renovating; a  record of poor savings and current account deficits with net foreign debt at  over 55 percent of GDP; and increasing inequality and segregation of society  into those with houses and those without houses. It is hard to overstate the  seriousness of these effects. In practice, they manifest in the form of ever  increasing numbers of people sleeping in cars; astronomical prices for poor  quality housing; property managers auctioning off tenancies to the highest  bidding tenants; and nurses, teachers, social workers, and other essential  service employees being priced out of Auckland.  Worse yet, as housing entrenches itself as the main means of making it in New  Zealand, and more and more people put what money they have in houses, the  housing bubble inflates further, and the political pressure on the Government  to ​not​ alter the current policy arrangements mounts. This perpetuates the  negative effects mentioned above, and puts us in a worse position to respond  to the future challenges the Working Group correctly identifies, including the  increasing costs of caring for an aging population, falling company tax rates  around the world, and the need to invest (and divest) in response to  environmental challenges.   We are first home owners and we sympathise with those in our situation who  fear the undesirable hypothetical of government intervention reducing the  Jude and Helen Murdoch  \[1\]     value of their houses to below the cost of their mortgage. However, we do not  think this fear justifies total inaction in reviewing and revising the tax system,  particularly given the increasing severity of the negative effects noted above.  We applaud the Government’s Kiwibuild supply-side response to New  Zealand’s housing crisis. However, we strongly consider that a demand-side  response in the form of changes to the tax system is necessary to properly  address the distorted incentives and negative effects noted above. In  particular, we favour the adoption of a land tax or a comprehensive capital  gains tax that operates on an accrual basis rather than on realisation. Without  such a response, there is too much risk of Kiwibuild perpetuating the current  one-dimensional approach to investment, despite the safeguards the  Government would seek to put in place.   New Zealand is not alone in the world in facing the negative effects of untaxed  wealth and capital gains. In what is perhaps the most comprehensive analysis  of developed countries’ economic data, Thomas Piketty forcefully  demonstrates that the rate of capital return in these countries is persistently  greater than the rate of economic growth. Piketty concludes that this will  cause wealth inequality to increase. To confront this challenge, Piketty  proposes redistribution through a progressive global tax on wealth. We see  significant parallels in the negative effects of, and the most viable solution to,  New Zealand’s housing crisis.  Shamubeel Eaqub has said, “At its core, tax is about pooling our resources  and redistributing, so that society is better off. Tax is love.” We endorse that  view, but we sympathise with those who have felt little but anger at the unjust  nature of the current tax system. This is ultimately about the sort of society we  want for New Zealand. In that respect, changing the tax system in a manner  that helps address the negative effects discussed above, and equips New  Zealand to deal with the impending challenges of the future, would make our  society far better off.  Sincerely,  Jude and Helen Murdoch            Jude and Helen Murdoch  \[1\]       Appendix - responses to consultation questions from  Future of Tax: Submissions Background Paper  Chapter 3: Purposes and principles of a good tax system   How would you define ‘fairness’ in the context of the tax system? What would  a fair tax system look like?  In principle, an effective tax system is one that meets the established criteria  set out on page 19 of the Background Paper. For the reasons outlined in the  body of our submission, we would actually put more weight on the criterion of  ‘fairness and equity’ ​–​ in particular, the equal treatment of all forms of income  and assets, and improving the vertical equity of our tax system ​–​ than the  other criteria.   One practical aspect of a fair tax system would be its consistent marginal  effective tax rates for different types of investments.  Chapter 4: The current New Zealand tax system   Should there be a greater role in the tax system for taxes that intentionally  modify behaviour? If so, which behaviours and/or what type of taxes?  There ​may​ well be a greater role for taxes that intentionally modify behaviour,  particularly in targeting environmental externalities. ‘Polluter pays  proportionately’ can be a useful guiding principle in this regard. Care should  be taken to ensure such taxes do not themselves entail other harmful  externalities or unintended consequences. However, where there is a net  benefit from such taxes, externalities and potential unforeseen consequences  should ​not​ be treated as insurmountable hurdles. Instead, to the extent  possible, externalities and consequences should be catered for in tax design  and implementation.   Chapter 5: The results of the current tax system   Does the tax system strike the right balance between supporting the  productive economy and the speculative economy? If it does not, what would  need to change to achieve a better balance?  As outlined in the body of our submission, our tax system’s inconsistent  treatment of capital as compared with other types of investment effectively  directs anyone with spare money to speculate (unproductively) in housing and  make super-charged, tax-free capital gains. For such people to do otherwise  Jude and Helen Murdoch  \[1\]     and invest their money in the productive economy would be economically  irrational. In this respect, our tax system is entirely unbalanced in its favourable  treatment of the speculative economy as compared with the productive  economy.  Changing the tax system so that marginal effective tax rates are as consistent  as possible across different types of investments would greatly assist in  addressing this imbalance, and levelling the playing field for investment  decisions.   Does the tax system do enough to maintain natural capital?   No. The ​Living Standards Framework ​’s recognition of natural capital is a  positive step. However, alongside the alarming environmental statistics and  indicators noted in the Background Paper, we note the OECD’s findings from  its latest assessment of New Zealand’s environmental performance:  a) our nitrogen balance deteriorated more rapidly between 1998 and  2009 than any other OECD country, which poses a significant risk to  freshwater resources that are already under pressure  b) we have one of the highest species extinction rates in the OECD  c) we are losing soil at around 10 times the average global rate  d) we have the highest number of cars per capita in the OECD.  For a resource-based economy, these statistics and indicators show that our  policy arrangements, including our tax system, have not valued our natural  capital enough. The tax system can and should be part of the answer to this  state of affairs. In particular, the tax system can assist in aligning incentives  and ‘internalising’ externalities: those that benefit from the environment and  those that contribute to its degradation need to face the costs of doing so.   Chapter 6: Thinking outside the current system   What are the main inconsistencies in the current tax system? Which of these  inconsistencies are most important to address?  As outlined in the body of our submission, our tax system substantially favours  unproductive investment in (mostly) pre-existing capital, particularly housing,  over other forms of more productive investment such as growing business and  innovation. Resolving this situation is perhaps the most important policy matter  before the Government.  Is there a case to consider the introduction of any new taxes that are not  currently levied? Should any taxes be reduced if new taxes are introduced?  Jude and Helen Murdoch  \[1\]     We favour whatever changes are necessary to bring our tax system into line  with the established criteria noted in the Background Paper, and to address  the negative effects discussed in the body of our submission. Provided such  changes brought about consistent marginal effective tax rates across different  types of investments, it would be appropriate to lower taxes on productive  activities (such as income) to at least partially offset increased revenue from  the other tax changes. The problems giving rise to the negative effects noted  above are not about how much we tax, but about what we tax, and what we  don’t tax.  Chapter 7: Specific challenges   How, and to what extent, does the tax system affect housing affordability for  owners and renters? Is there a case to change the tax system to promote  greater housing affordability? If so, what changes would you recommend?  As detailed in the body of our submission, the unbalanced tax treatment of  housing (and wealth) compared to other forms of investment has substantially  reduced housing affordability for owners and, consequently, renters. This in  turn has resulted in the negative effects discussed in the body of our  submission. There is clearly a case for reform to close this tax loophole and  promote greater housing affordability. We favour whatever changes are  necessary to bring our tax system into line with the established criteria noted  in the Background Paper, and to address the negative effects discussed in the  body of our submission.   Should New Zealand introduce a capital gains tax or a land tax (that excludes  the family home)? If so, what features should it have?   We favour the adoption of a land tax or a comprehensive capital gains tax that  operates on an accrual basis rather than on realisation.   We understand the political unpalatability of a tax on the family home.  However, to exempt the family home would substantially miss the point, and  not deal with the negative effects outlined in the body of our submission. The  vast majority ​– ​some 60% ​–​ of those benefiting from the loophole at the heart  of our unbalanced tax system are people that own their own homes.  Exempting the family home would therefore deal with less than half of the  problem.    Using an example to illustrate, if we saved to buy a house or simply had idle  money in the bank, we would receive interest which itself would be taxed. We  could spend the remainder of the income from the interest on whatever we  chose, however, we would have paid income tax on the money we saved and  Jude and Helen Murdoch  \[1\]     tax on the interest those savings generated. However, if we had enough  savings to buy a house, we would avoid the second of two taxes noted above.  The savings we invested in the house would return us at least two significant  benefits: firstly, a house to live in ​– ​imputed rent ​–​ and secondly, the untaxed  capital gains if the house appreciated in value. No money changed hands, so  no tax is paid. In aggregate, this seriously distorts how New Zealanders,  including us, invest our savings.   A capital gains tax that included the family home would be a step in the right  direction. However, such a tax would only capture an appreciation in the  house price, while the owner’s benefits from imputed rent would go untaxed.        Jude and Helen Murdoch  \[1\]