Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. TAX WORKING GROUP SUBMISSION S U M M A RY This submission is based on four principles: 1. Less tax is better provided that society is progressive and caring 2. It is better to incentivize people with rebates than to punish with tax 3. Helping the wage earner by taking from the wage payer is counterproductive. 4. The administration cost of collecting and reallocating tax is significant. Summary of submission: The basis of this submission is to incentivize people to reduce their need for govt/tax funded products and services such as: - Education - Health - Aged care - Superannuation - Clean energy - Support for the disadvantaged - Support of the environment - Accommodation This would be done by making a person’s spend on the above tax-deductible. Benefits to New Zealand - No change to tax rates, but high earners increased self-reliance would reduce costs to Government. - NZ’ers that are able, would look after themselves with their own money. - Government able to focus tax spend on those that need it. - Reduced tax administration costs H O W I T W O U L D W O RK The government would make provision for people to: - Opt-out of free education, their spend on education becomes tax deductible. - Opt-out of free health, health spend becomes tax deductible. - Opt-out of free aged care, aged care spend becomes tax deductible. - Opt-out of superannuation, and in return receive an increase in the percentage deductible off the other areas in this list. - Opt-in to clean energy usage, spend on clean energy becomes tax deductible. - Opt-in for support of others, any spend on charitable organisations becomes tax deductible. 2 - Opt-in for support of the environment, spend on environmental initiatives become tax deductible. - Rental 1 costs (up to a cap) become tax deductible e.g. up to $500 per week of rent payments would become deductible if money was auto-redirected into KiwiSaver. W H A T T H I S M E A N S T O I N D I V I D U A L S I M PA C T O N L O W E A R N E RS - There would be no reduction in services and benefits to low earners. - There would be more incentive for unemployed to get paid employment because once they start paying tax it can be off-set against accommodation costs... making home ownership more achievable. I M PA C T O N MI D D L E I N C O M E E A RN E RS - These earners would see opportunities to become more independent via self determination - Those middle income earners that want to pay for private medical or education etc could do so and would reduce demands on government funded services. I M PA C T O N H I GH I N C O M E E A RN E RS - High earners would see the logic and benefit in this approach. - It rewards those that already are independent but also incentivises those who are unnecessarily free-loading off the government for education, health etc. S U B M I T T ED B Y Chris Yates 27 April 2018 1 Excluding mortgages from this is like applying a capital gains tax on housing by stealth. It reduces the gap between the renter and the owner. It provides less incentive to owners while also making it easier to own if desired. It increases demand/supply for affordable housing but does not incentivise large property holdings.