Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document February 2019 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. 1 From:Alan Hejl Sent: Wednesday, 26 September 2018 8:51 PM To:TWG Submissions Subject: Labour Party's PROMISE NOT to increase Taxes! To the people and the Political Party who promised NOT to increase Tax in a effort to win an Election! My name is Alan Hejl. living in Tuakau, Waikato I am a simple man trying to live within my means and prosper. With the limited resources I have (money) I am trying to get ahead in my life and working for my eventual retirement. I do not live a hedonistic life, only purchase items I can afford, meaning I never place items on credit. I do not drink alcohol, I do not buy over priced and over rated coffee from the various establishments profiting from a flavored drink. I eat very simply, I've not had a restaurant meal for a few years now. (True!) Simply put I save as much as possible, with no real luxury items, a humble home. The last few years I have focused all my time and money in purchasing a house and property which has the potential to sub-divide. This will be part of my "Retirement Fund" among other savings including "Kiwi Saver" In this capitalist country we live in, to make money you must have money in excess or work for it hard. I have and am working hard all my life and the government and local council try even harder to come up with new ways to take it off me to finance a Idealistic fantasy world in which New Zealand will save the world by employing environmental policy's Has members of the government not watched TV and read the reports from around the world where most Third World Countries and China burn huge amounts of coal and emit huge carbon emissions. Little New Zealand will never be able to off set this pollution. So why are we expected to be taxed with the various schemes to save the planet. I understand we need to help. A bit off topic but does force introduction of new and increased Taxes and a overall increase in all day to day necessities of life. With the future introduction off a high Capital Gains Tax in my case you are proposing to slash my future retirement fund by one third. 33%. As I labour to build up this retirement fund I pay Tax on my income to pay for my property, I pay Tax (GST) on all the materials to improve this property to a modern living standard with the basic necessities. I pay tax to the local council to live in it. Now you want me to pay another tax on my hard unpaid work and my unpaid labour when it comes to the time I am forced to sell the property to pay for my retirement and eventual death which will also be taxed after I am dead. With this system of wealth and taxes of course the wealthy are the least affected in any tax increase who are also very good at avoiding paying taxes! It is the relative poor and middle class who really finance the running of this country. So in summary, Live up to your PROMISES during the election in regard to NOT placing more tax burden on the public. I disagree with any new Taxes as it will slash my humble future life style. The Government must learn to live within it's means as all hard working New Zealander's must do. STOP pandering to the people profiteering from the enforced Maorification of New Zealand's European and non Maori immigrants and their descendants, which also force increased government expenditure "Increased Taxes" Make all entities; Maori owned companies, Iwi owned companies, It should not matter which race or who owns a profit making company. They all should pay the same taxes! It should not matter which race one identifies with. We all live in the same country and we all should be treated equally! \[1\] 2 W e should ALL be subjected to the same tax system! Fair and equatable! Regards Alan Hejl \[1\]