Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document February 2019 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or imprope r advantage. Whe re information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. 1 From: Robin Oliver Sent: Wednesday, 31 October 2018 11:59 AM To: Nicole Geluk \[TSY\] Subject: FW: Tax Working Group Discussion - BDO I had this email – can you include as a sub to TWG – Mark has said he is happy for it to be treated as such. robin Robin Oliver MNZM Director Olivershaw Limited Web: www.olivershaw.co.nz Email: Level 3, 120 Featherston Street, Wellington PO B ox 30-504, Lower Hutt 5040, NEW ZEALAND  Please consider the environment before printing this email From: Mark Lodder Sent: Friday, October 26, 2018 11:13 AM To: Robin Oliver Cc: JK Sahi Subject: Tax Working Group Discussion - BDO Hi Robin Very many thanks to you again yesterday for the discussion. Very gratefully received from the team and myself at BDO. In light of the discussion, I thought I would take the opportunity to quickly highlight some comments (I can’t necessarily write for all, but will myself) in relation to a CGT: 1. Appreciate that CGT should not be applied retrospectively and that to achieve this is a revaluation of the base cost of assets to market value (where market value exceeds cost) at a certain date. However, there are concerns with the practicality of this approach; particularly given it is probable Inland Revenue will require documentary evidence of valuations within a specified timeframe (perhaps within six months of year-end). Is this realistically achievable? Apologies, no other solution at this stage other than voicing a concern. \[1\] \[1\] \[1\] \[1\] \[1\] \[1\] 2 2. With Inheritance Tax being “off the table”, how do you deal with death and a realised CGT? Do we effectively need a IHT backstop to CGT to achieve desired objectives, or is death another form of rollover? Yet more complexity and concern that IHT will effectively be introduced by stealth. 3. I appreciate your comments re: DTAs etc, however is there any merit in considering a “xenophobic” CGT for non-resident owners? Or at least a CGT that applies to non-resident owners who suffer a CGT in their country of domestic tax residence? These are my very quick thoughts. I will canvass the Group to see if there are any more comments to make, acknowledging that you are working with very tight timeframes. Cheers Mark MARK LODDER Director BDO Christchurch Limited P O Box 246, Christchurch 8140 4th Floor Awly Building 287-293 Durham Street Christchurch 8013 NEW ZEALAND www.bdo.nz From 1 October 2018 we may need to ask you for more information. Under the revised Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act (AM L/CFT Act) we may need to undertake client due diligence before carrying out your work. Find out more. Tax Advice Privilege: Under section 20B of the Tax Administration Act 1994 this correspondence may constitute a tax advice document and be subject to non-disclosure rights. In providing our advice, we have relied on the facts, information and assumptions and representations provided to us. We assume that these are complete and accurate. If our understanding of the position is not correct please advise us immediately as this may change our advice. The advice expressed herein is not binding on the Inland Revenue Department and we cannot guarantee that they will adopt the same opinion as us. Our advice is solely for your benefit and is not intended to be relied on by any third party without our prior written consent. This advice is confidential and may not be quoted or circulated without our prior written consent. \[1\]