Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. The Future of Tax A submission to the Tax Working Group, April 2018. By Kerry Bevin B.Ed. Dip. Tching. \[1\] Introduction As financial transactions globalise, small nations struggle to gather revenue fairly and equitably for necessary development. Several strategic considerations mean significant changes tax management are required to deliver a sustainable and secure life for Kiwis. Long term goal setting is delusional. Clear medium term setting and vision must be tied to 3 yearly governmental cycles. Firstly Our tax take is too low. Compared to other progressive regimes, more revenue is required to sustain first world standards. Infrastructure, social services education, health, defence, recreation and financial processes never have sufficient development funds. Our society is held together by an army of volunteer organisations and charities. Expecting so many to work for nothing is unfair and exploitative. This position is untenable into the future. The overall tax take must increase an estimated 10% or more. Secondly Our tax administration is too complex. Too many economists, accountants, assessors and advisers are required to monitor and process finances effectively for taxpayers. Financial relativities and settings are debated and changed in budgets by changing governments. Taxpayers require simplicity and consistency to plan and enable their working and domestic lives. Workers are happy to pay if it is perceived as fair and manageable. Businesses too often attempt to manipulate information for avoidance and profit. Tax administration needs much greater simplicity for direct accountability. Thirdly Taxpayers are increasingly using card systems ‘plastic money.’ A cashless society with plastic funds makes monitoring cash flows easier through systems authorised by banks and supervised by the Reserve Bank. Cash no longer needs to be legal tender making transactions traceable, accountable and enforceable. ‘Black market’ funds will be difficult to manage. International companies will be taxable in the country of transaction i.e. New Zealand. A cashless society makes revenue gathering accurate and easier to monitor. Fourthly These considerations signal dramatic changes for future tax gathering focussed on transaction monitoring. This will yield fairer, more accurate, simpler and greater revenue delivery that is more difficult to avoid. A TRANSACTION TAX is the way of the future. Conclusion As a small nation, New Zealand would be advised to research and prepare processes for the introduction of TRANSACTIONAL TAX in the medium term estimated at 1% of all transactions. No other tax would be required. Our small economy could be a pilot for TRANSACTIONAL TAX. Such a visionary tax system will be introduced elsewhere. Better to be prepared and engaged than to react to financial influences from much larger economies in a state of international flux. Investigation and reporting could be done by the end of 2019. TRANSACTON TAX then becomes an election issue for 2020. New Zealand financial foresight would deliver greater financial control over our monies and greater autonomy and resilience to shocks. A fairer more responsible, accountable developing society is the likely result at a personal, community, national and international level. Kerry Bevin 26 April 2018.