Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. Tax Working Group submission Summary The current tax system – in combinaton ith eelare beneft abatement rates and the casuaeised eabour market – creates a poverty trap. Depending on the number of income hours worked, people can be financiallr worse of than on welfare parments alone, poteniallr experiencing oveer c0000 ‘ttaxaion’ on their oveerall income. This poveertr trap means a working person in casual minimum-wage emplorment, who is reliant on welfare parments for part of their income, needs to be ideaeey empeoyed bet een 4 to 12 hours a eek to be fnanciaeey beter oe, and mar otherwise havee their oveerall income reduced br a greater amount than ther earn, while also incurring emplorment expenses – such as traveel costs, uniform laundrr, clothing, shoes, equipment, make-up for presentaion. Ther iee not retain any increase in their overaee income unte they are nearey in luee-tme empeoyment – approximatelr 28-300 hours per week. This leveel of income is seveerelr restricivee for people who must run a household on part-ime income alone due to personal circumstances, and exacerbates negaivee outcomes for people in certain demographics. Changes to tax setngs could greatlr improvee liveing standards for those in lower income deciles, reduce inequalitr, and improvee social mobilitr. Main points This is because tax rates for low-income people are: •17% personae income tax + 12% student eoan + 3% Ki isaver = totalling 32 tax deducion – though with casual labour rates including holidar par could efeciveelr be 30.5% income tax. •With no weeklr income, a low-income person would be eligible for Temporarr Addiional upport (TA ), to coveer the high accommodaion costs which are now ‘tnormal’ in the urban areas where emplorment opportuniies are. There has been a stark rise in housing costs oveer the last decade, although the accommodaion supplement has remained staic, resuling in increased hardship and food poveertr (Treasurr reluctant to increase the accommodaion supplement due to perceiveed ‘tlandlord capture’). For example - $37 TA parment on $2400 per week rent. •If the person has eess than 4 hours empeoyment a eek they iee be orse oe fnanciaeey than on welfare alone, as ther will lose enitlement to the TA parment. For example – a single 3 hour shif, minimum wage casual contract, $c6.500×3 hours minus 300.5 income tax = $34.400 net, minus traveel costs $5.500, therefore $28.900. •Once the person works more than 5.75 hours minimum wage ($5,20000 annual income threshold, triggering deducions afer $96 per week), the overaee income deductons amount to over 60%. The main Work and Income New Zealand (WINZ) parment is abated at 300 cents in the dollar, plus 300.5 income tax, and the person will also incur emplorment-related expenses such as traveel costs. •Once the person works more than 12.25 hours, the overaee deducton coued be more than 100%. Ther trigger the next WINZ income threshold ($c00,40000 annual, $20000 per week), resuling in 700 cents abatement in the dollar – while also paring 300 income tax, and incurring emplorment expenses. Tax Working Group Submission April 2018 | Page c •Working bet een 12-28 hours on minimum age, the person may not receive any fnanciae improvement in their circumstances and incur expenses greater than income earned – ther are efeciveelr working for WINZ parment ‘tclawback’. This high leveel of income reducion was confirmed in a quesion to parliament regarding abatement rates – that oveer a certain number of hours, someone mar efeciveelr earn onlr $c per hour, while also incurring emplorment-related expenses to meet those work commitments. The intersecion of goveernment economic policr setngs – paricularlr around tax, welfare, the labour market, educaion, and housing – contributes to poveertr and reduces social mobilitr for those alreadr negaiveelr impacted br structural inequalitr. For example: • ingle people mar need to relr on part-ime income to run a household – the poveertr rates for single-adult households are onlr marginallr beter than child poveertr rates. •Women mar need to work part-ime due to child or other care commitments. •People mar need to work part-ime onlr due to health reasons – the welfare srstem does not support people to not work just because ther havee health issues. •Mature workers mar need to retrain for emplorment, so onlr work part-ime while meeing studr commitments. •The WINZ income abatement srstem is not well suited to the characterisics of shif-work or the casual emplorment arrangements trpical for the ‘tworking poor’. For example, income must be declared each week BEFORE Fridar 6PM eveen though the income week includes aturdar and undar. It is veerr easr to incur an ‘toveerparment’ for undeclared income, automaicallr triggering debt reparments which are automaicallr recoveered at $c00.500 per week. If someone is unable to aford the weeklr debt reparment amounts – which most likelr will come out of moner needed for groceries within a restricted budget – there are obstacles, such as a two-week wait for an appointment and securitr guards restricing access. Weeklr debt reparment amounts can onlr be reduced in an appointment with a client ofcer in a WINZ ofce. •Increases in the minimum wage mar not necessarilr improvee the personal financial circumstances of a person in part-ime work. The WINZ income abatement thresholds remain unchanged and so anr extra income earned is captured br WINZ parment deducions. •Emplorers, in a casualised labour market, mar consider ther havee no obligaion to proveide emplorees with a sustainable standard of liveing – ther determine emplorment as a casual onlr “take it or leavee it’ contract arrangement. An emploree mar havee litle choice or control oveer the number of hours ther can work. Although it might seem ‘teconomicallr raional’ to not work if for no oveerall gain, it mar be imperaivee to work the hours ofered to retain good will with rour emplorer. •Emplorees who undertake educaion to improvee emplorment prospects mar sill be negaiveelr afected br underemplorment, discriminatorr emplorment pracices, and a globalised emplorment market which emplorers can easilr access for ‘tskills shortages’, rather than inveesing in internal staf training. Emplorees par the cost of retraining, poteniallr through student loan reparment tax, and there is no ‘tguaranteed’ professional emplorment upon graduaion. Graduate underemplorment is an increasing global trend, as is the ‘tgig economr’ where career progression is non-existent. For Tax Working Group Submission April 2018 | Page 2 example, being able to bur student textbooks online at a cheaper price was one of the few examples of the market srstem working in mr faveour when I was a student, and so closing this tax ‘tloop-hole’ is an economic decision that would havee socio-economic class impacts. •The housing market appears to be currentlr set to faveour middle-class propertr inveestors who want to increase their personal wealth base – but steep housing costs create food poveertr and hardship for those reliant on low-income wages and an insecure labour market. Recommendations c.Change income tax poeicy to create sociae mobieity out ol the poverty trap and minimum decent eiving standards lor aee Ne Zeaeanders. o, for example, that people in the lower income decile range are not negaiveelr penalised for working addiional hours. People should not be worse of financiallr when ther work – especiallr if ther are near the botom of the income distribuion. ocial mobilitr will allow people to movee upward into the middle income deciles where ther will par more income tax in the future. 2.Assist eo -income peopee ith a GST exempton on lood (preferablr fruit and veegetables, and healthr food howeveer that is defined br public health experts), and some services – for example, medical and dental serveices, optometrists. 3.Use the tax system to make housing more aeordabee lor Ne Zeaeanders – paricularlr for people who are long-term renters or first home burers. Consider a capital gains tax, or some other tax measure that could ameliorate the negaivee impacts of rising house prices from propertr speculaion and foreign inveestment. c.Dis-inceniveise, paricularlr where wealthr foreign inveestment companies are using the propertr and rental market as a war of moveing wealth around the global financial srstem. 2.Being a landlord is a business, proveiding an accommodaion serveice with the intent of earning a profit and increasing rour personal/familr wealth base. But this legiimate ‘tbusiness’ right should not oveer-ride the right of low-income people to afordable accommodaion or protecion from food poveertr, perhaps where low-income working people are forced to make a choice between becoming homeless or household heaing and an adequate weeklr grocerr bill. 4.If possible, make changes in the tax srstem that will protect Ne Zeaeanders lrom potentae luture negatve impacts ol a changing geobae eabour market. I do not wish to present in person to the Tax Working Group. Janet Gudmun, Monday, 30 April, 2018. Tax Working Group Submission April 2018 | Page 3