Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document February 2019 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. Submission to the Tax Working Group Secretariat Response to Interim Report Abstract The interim report indicates that the idea of a Financial Transaction Tax appears to be not well understood by the Tax Working Group. Sothat it can be considered before the final report, I intend to explain why a type of FTT should be considered as a far simpler, more practical and fairer type of tax than we currently have. Many of the best ideas are the simplest ones.New Zealand likes to think of itself as innovative and pioneering so it should be willing to consider a radical shake up to its taxation system. The mention of the Financial Transaction Tax was an improvement onthe last one a decade or so ago which failed to mention FTT apart from a brief reference to a Tobin tax. However, it’s still only a fleeting reference and made no reference to the various forms of FTT, referring to only one form which, I agree, would not be worth consideration in New Zealand. The form of FTT I propose is the Automated Payment Transaction tax (APT). No investigation into the tax system is complete without showing why an APT should be dismissed. Automated Payment Transaction tax explained To understand how APT would work, a good starting place is the New York Times articleON THE CONTRARY; Dreaming Out Loud: One Tiny Little Tax 1 by Daniel Akst from 2003. It describes what was proposed as a simple and fairtax suggested by Edgar L. Feige, a retired economist from the University of Wisconsin. The article is copyright and thus it’s not appropriate for me to includeit in this submission, but it will still be available either directly from the New YorkTimes website, or via a library service. Form of APT for New Zealand environment That article describes a USA environment and so not every detail is applicable to a New Zealand environment. I would suggest some small changes to what Dr Feige proposed: 1. The tax would eliminate GST in addition to income and corporate tax. 2. Dr Feige suggests that 0.6% would be sufficient to cover what is nowcovered by other taxes. It would be levied equally on the payer and the payee. Isuggest levying it all on the payer as explained in paragraph 4 of the sectionSome of the benefits of an APTbelow. (a) To compensate for the loss of tax on cash transactions Dr Feige also sug- gests levying a higher tax rate on cash withdrawals and deposits. I suggest that wouldn’t be necessary given the huge decrease in the number of cash transactions in the last decade, and there’s no indication that wouldreverse. 1 https://www.nytimes.com/2003/02/02/business/on-the-contrary-dreaming-out-loud-one-tiny- little-tax.html – 1 of 5 – The current incentive to avoid GST is far greater. It would be preferable to keep the system as simple as possible. However, if cash again becamemore common, a specific higher rate could be introduced in response. Were that to happen, in that case, itwouldbe appropriate to charge it on deposits as well as withdrawals. 3. The APT would not eliminate excise duties. There is good reason to levy specific taxes on activity that involves undesirable consequences but are impractical to outlaw, such as alcohol, nicotine, sugar and cannabis. Just how those would be levied are separate discussions. How it would work For the purposes of explaining the principle, say the APT rate is 1% and an account holder makes a purchase of $100. 1. The payer’s bank pays $100 to the payee, and an additional payment of $1 to IRD. 2. The payee’s account receives a deposit of $100 where it can earninterest until it is spent. It would incur an APT of $1 at that time. 3. Tax would be levied on every transaction that passes through a bank, or entity that acts in the manner of a bank servicing payments. The only way to avoid it would be to use cash or attempt to set up a payment system outsidethe New Zealand banking system. 4. Banks make payments to IRD at intervals to be decided accordingto the size of the individual accounts and could be as frequently as daily for large ones or even in real time. There is a view that banks should be recompensed for their tax-collecting tasks. Those are minimal in the computerised systemthat is well- developed already, and banks already have access to substantialover-night short- term interest-free loans. That’s not likely to change, but if it does,banks can be compensated by adjusting the size of the payment intervals. 5. Inequities brought about would be eleviated or eliminated by specific payments such as the present housing allowance payable to beneficiaries. (a) For example, donations to registered charities would also incur tax which would be considered unfair. That can be offset simply by IRD paying the amount of tax (simply calculated) to the charity. The net result is that the charity receives the amount that the donor’s account has deducted from it. To make it more like the net result of the present system in which IRD effectively subsides the charity by the amount of the tax deduction, IRD could pay a multiple of the APT it collects from donors. That multiple could be calculated, using simple arithmetic, to have a similar net result. – 2 of 5 – Some of the benefits of an APT Using a system as radically different from what tax experts are familiar with could appear daunting. It would be necessary to phase in the change over a number of years, beginning with a very low rate of APT while lowering and eventually eliminating GST, income tax, etc. When the change is complete a large number of benefits would arise. 1. Very simple to set up and cheap to administer. Banks are already set up to do nearly everything necessary so scarcely any new investment willbe required. Whatever is required will be several orders of magnitude less complicated than what is required with the way tax is structured at present. (a) Tax law would become immeasurably simpler. I could envision it getting to the stage whereby it would all fit into a single volume. Businesses couldget on with business instead of being concerned about whether it is structured to make best use of tax laws. 2. GST has become popular with governments as a form of revenue-raising because it is relatively simple to arrange, and not easy to avoid. APT is even simpler and fairer than GST – to the extent of eliminating the need for a return to be filled in. Hence the term “automated”. An APT would also constitute a much lower rate than GST and so there would be less incentive to attempt to avoid or evade it. 3. Gone will be the incentive to invest in housing that has no capital gains tax in preference to services or products that benefit the economy. The result will be less investment speculating in the housing market and more in productiveindustries. (a) A CGT is not effective at reducing that speculation and resulting instability. Trying to devise a fair form of CGT is fraught with problems as can be seen by the complicated regulations in Australia. Even professional accountants cannot tell how the Australian Tax Office will rule on rather simple cases. The ATO even reserves the right to change its ruling at a later date. 4. Payments for purchases abroad would incur the same tax as those made in New Zealand. As well as eliminating unfair competition for NZ businesses, itwould eliminate the need for offshore supplier registration, and also collecttax on pur- chases less than $400. Levying all the tax on the payer instead of splitting it with the payee eliminates the problem that would otherwise arise collectingtax from an offshore supplier. That might be considered unfair but it would affect everyone equally and is an insignificant price to pay for the simplicity it provides. 5. Because everyone spending money will be paying tax, and at the same rate, there will be less inequality. The more money spent by a taxable entity, the more tax it will pay. Dr Feige has been quoted 2 as describing an APT as “. . . a public brokerage fee accessed by the government to pay for the provision of themonetary, legal and political institutions that protect private property rights and facilitate market trade and commerce.” Whether or not the attribution to Dr Feige is correct, I consider it to be an apt description. 2 http://blog.heartland.org/2014/05/rethinking-taxation-the-automated-payment-transaction-tax/ – 3 of 5 – 6. Though not (yet) an issue in New Zealand, high-frequency trading of financial instruments would never get started. That’s to be applauded sinceit would mean that New Zealand would not get into the legal wrangling over the question as to whether high-frequency trading constitutes insider trading. There are others with large amounts of initial capital who don’t require ultra fast network cabling and computer algorithms designed to change market positions at millisecond or even microsecond intervals. It is still possible to “make”money by exploiting arbitrage margins that are available on forex and futuresmarkets. But it requires what is considered “work” which can result in money for the trader but produces no benefit to the economy. If APT were charged on those trades, there would be no profit, sothe market would cease. (a) People who make money from that type of business produce no benefit to the tax-payer yet they’re able to consume large amounts of what isproduced by the “real” businesses. That is part of the reason why there is insufficient money to pay aged-care and other low-paid workers an income thatis able to keep pace with inflation. (b) In a recent discussion about daylight saving on BBC World Serviceradio, a view was expressed that because of the disruption to body clocks when the clocks are changed, millions of dollars are “lost” on the financial markets. By a “loss”, it was meant a potential profit that was not taken advantage of, though nothing was actually lost. Removing such a distortion from the economy would have a not insignificant benefit. 7. Trans-national corporations which currently avoid income tax by shifting profits to their low-tax country affiliates through an accounting fiction would be paying APT on those transfers. The benefit to them would be substantiallyreduced or eliminated, while IRD would receive an APT as well as on each transfer within New Zealand. It would not be receiving income tax on the salaries of staff, but those are small in magnitude compared with the turnover of the businesses. 8. An APR would be very difficult to avoid. Using cash would avoid the APT but that would be a very small proportion of the transactions. Cash has to pass through the banking system at some stage, at which point, measures can be taken if it becomes necessary to respond to large amounts of tax evasionthrough the use of cash. Such measures were described in paragraph 2 (a) of the sectionForm of APT for New Zealand environmentabove. The Pushback A small but influential number of people who are doing well out of the current system will resist the idea of an APT tax. They will have substantial resources of finance and skilled staff or consultants who would make strenuous measures to avoid it. Trans-national Corporations In recent years, attention has been drawn to the fact that largetrans-national businesses typically pay minimal tax by virtue of the accounting practice of charging internal – 4 of 5 – “fees” resulting in movements of money from high tax countries to low tax countries. Fictitiously high profits are made in low tax countries and fictiously low ones in high tax countries. It’s completely legal but it’s unfair competion for local businesses. 1. Expect such businesses to resist the introduction of an APT since they would be less profitable. They would prefer the current system partly because it is difficult to make rules that can be adopted internationally that can curtail those practices. (a) Expect them to lobby against a change to an APT tax. They already have supporters such as Ireland which even disagreed with a European Union Commission decision that Apple had under-paid its tax to the tune of¤13.2 billion. (b) Expect them to devise new methods of transferring money within their or- ganisations that are separate from the banking system, such as block chain technology. Taxation Consultants Businesses in New Zealand that make their income by advising tax-payers how to avoid tax are operating entirely legally. So too, are those who structure their business to incorporate that advice. It’s important for them to limit expenditure wherever legally possible or at least keep abreast of what techniques their competitors use. While tax consultants benefit their clients’ profitability, the tax avoidance industry does not ac- tually produce anything for the economy. 1. Expect them also to be opposed to an APT. IRD staff are also not likely to be in favour of making the tax system so simple it will require far fewer people to run it. (a) It is very difficult to make a radical change such as an APT when a substan- tial industry has the ear of government. Conclusion An APT would not be a perfect solution to every problem encountered in devising a fair tax system, but it obviates many of them and comes close to a fair resolution for nearly all of the rest of them. Though there would be a very strong lobby against the idea of APT, that’s no reason not to consider it. There was strong opposition to women’s suffrage, same-sex marriage and even MMP, yet change did happen. No change will happen if the subject isn’t discussed. I make this submission with the aim of starting that discussion. Patrick Connolly 22nd October 2018 – 5 of 5 – \[1\]