Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document February 2019 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. 3632645 v1 1 of 2 1 November 2018 Tax Working Group Secretariat By email P O Box 3724 WELLINGTON 6140 Email: submissions@taxworkinggroup.govt.nz INTRODUCING A "SAME OR SIMILAR" BUSINESS TEST IN THE TAX LOSS CARRY-FORWARD RULES Introduction 1.The Tax Working Group ("TWG") stated in its Interim Report that it will make recommendations in its Final Report as to options that could enhance business productivity. One option mentioned in the Interim Report (at page 106) concerns the tax loss continuity rules: The \[Tax Working\] Group believes the existing loss continuity rules are appropriate for most companies, but may not be working well for small start-up firms. These firms require equity capital to grow, but are often inherently loss-making. The existing loss continuity rules may be constraining their ability to grow through additional equity capital. Any relaxation of the rules would need to be carefully calibrated to ensure that the change does not facilitate trading in losses among larger firms. 2.The current loss continuity rules are not, in our view, appropriate. The current rules are a barrier to businesses (large and small) raising the additional capital they need in order to grow. 3.We submitted to the TWG on 27 April 2018 regarding a proposal to improve the current policy settings. The proposal is to supplement the current rule (requiring 49% continuity of ownership to carry forward tax losses) with a rule that losses can also be carried forward so long as the company's business (regardless of size) remains the same or similar. Submission 4.The TWG should recommend this proposal as: (a)The proposal would remove a barrier that inhibits large and small businesses from raising new capital. In a recent speech, the Secretary of the Treasury observed that "the question of properly functioning markets isn't simply about whether big or small firms can compete. It's about all markets and whether they are functioning well." 1 1 Gabriel Makhlouf, Secretary of the Treasury "Improving Living Standards: We Need to Talk About Productivity" (Queenstown, 7 September 2018). 3632645 v1 2 of 2 (b) The proposal would make the tax system more neutral, by reducing the asymmetric tax consequences of successful risk taking (resulting in profit on which tax is paid) compared to unsuccessful risk taking (resulting in a loss that not only does not result in a refund, but may have no value if a change of ownership occurs). (c) Inland Revenue officials have already undertaken work regarding both the substantive proposal and possible implementation costs, and have estimated the cost at between $30 million and $60 million per annum. By comparison, the Government intends to spend over $1 billion over four years on its R&D tax credit package. The proposed same or similar business test for carrying forward tax losses would represent, at a relatively modest cost, an important companion reform to the R&D tax credit package, and would remove an impediment to businesses accessing additional capital in order to grow. (d) Implementing the proposal would bring New Zealand into line with the rules in comparable countries. 5. We would be happy to provide further information or meet with the TWG if that would assist. Yours faithfully Stephen Summers Economist, Business New Zealand Suse Reynolds Executive Director, Angel Association New Zealand Inc Colin McKinnon Executive Director, New Zealand Private Equity and Venture Capital Association John Payne Convenor, Corporate Taxpayers Group \[1\] \[1\] \[1\] \[1\]