Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. Tax Submission: 1/ Get rid of all racially based Taxation and Charitable status Taxation laws and policies. Tax policy primarily should be about gathering and redistributing revenue in a fair and equitable manner The Government vocalizes on the success of the $50 Billion growing Maori business and their growing entrepreneurial base yet it openly gives preferential advantage with tax exemptions and allowing them dubious charitable status. There is also a lack of accountability around businesses posing as charities, of individuals being paid too much, and that too little was being distributed. "A review of the charitable status area should cover both the non-profit sector and charitable sector, for example Māori trusts, unions, lobby groups, environmental groups, sporting clubs." Britain amended this charitable tax loophole in the 1920s and ACT party leader David Seymour wants New Zealand to catch up and do the same. The Government also has a ridiculous policy of “engaging with Maori” so it can be told that they don’t want to pay tax. The act of “engaging with Maori” is also a false notion as the only engagement is with tribal elite, advocates of Tribal Governance. They do not represent the majority of Maori people Being a “Maori business” is not an excuse for underperforming and not paying tax. The racially divisive policy giving a Maori business tax concessions is an insult to all New Zealanders. Such incentives are not advanced to any of the other ethnic groups in NZ. Taxes are not collected from Non Maori organizations to be distributed to the untaxed Maori. To single out one group is racist to say the least! Comment by Dr the Hon Lockwood Smith “It does confirm privilege under our tax laws, purely on the basis of race”. Michael Cullen’s Labour Government has further entrenched racism in tax laws instead of eliminating it Cullen’s Labour Government introduced the discounted Maori Authority business tax rate (now 17.5 percent) and changed the law to enable billion-dollar tribal corporations to register as charities and avoid paying tax. These anomalies gives wealthy Maori businesses a significant competitive advantage. Cullen’s Labour Government appears to be considering additional tax benefits and exemptions for Maori business. The tribal elite has also convinced National to make advantageous policy changes, such as introducing co-governance arrangements at central and local government level, and funding tribal groups to claim New Zealand’s entire coastline. They now appear to have convinced Labour to give them yet more tax favours. It must be noted that none of these racially discriminatory policies have not made any difference to the standing of Maori People. It just allows the already wealthy Tribal Elite to get richer at the expense of every other ethnicity in NZ! Get rid of all racially based Taxation and Charitable status Taxation laws and policies. http://www.stuff.co.nz/waikato-times/news/5130429/Super-rich-tribes-pay-no-tax https://www.stuff.co.nz/business/96742698/How-some-New-Zealand-business-make-billions-and-pay- no-tax https://www.hobsonspledge.nz/tribal\_tax\_exemption\_must\_go?utm\_campaign=midweek\_update2&ut m\_medium=email&utm\_source=hobsonspledge https://thespinoff.co.nz/atea/04-04-2018/maori-and-the-tax-working-group-how-do-we-make-the- system-more-fair/ https://www.nzcpr.com/a-tax-sham/ 2/ Keep our taxation system simple! Leave the present policies on land tax and capital Gains tax alone! Remove all racially divisive Policy and Laws. Remove all charitable institutions from tax exemption status. Keep the taxation rates as simple as possible. Use policy and procedure to accomplish the behavioral modifications. Leave property taxes as they are. Under the current law, a capital gains tax on rental housing already exists and anyone buying a house purely to capture the gains of a rising property market will pay tax on the profit – if they are not captured by the five-year bright line test then they will be by the intention test. Capital gains taxing on a yearly basis will just allow the cost to be more easily passed on to renters. If rental housing is not profitable the investor will need to charge more to make it worth their while or move to a different form of investing. The only people that will be affected are the renters. Keep our taxation system simple! Leave the present policies on land tax and capital Gains tax alone! 3/ Fuel Tax is already 50% of the cost of fuel. Leave it alone and open the books so the public can see that revenue collected for road infrastructure is spent on roads! 4/ Stop referring to the Maori Economy! Stop referring to Te Ao Maori and the future! They is a racially divisive, meaningless statistics based on false premises. The fact is that anyone with the infinitesimally smallest portion of Maori heritage can claim to be Maori or not. It does not include people with Maori blood that list themselves as European. It also has absolutely no meaning as it does not include reference to any other economy. It is a meaningless, false, representation of success. What contribution do the Chinese make to the economy, the Indians, the Asians or Non Maori Europeans, others? Why doesn’t the government measure that and support these Ethnic Economies with equal fervor? Why does the Government want a separate racially divisive taxation system for the Maori economy? Stop referring to the Maori Economy! Stop referring to Te Ao Maori and the future! They is a racially divisive, meaningless statistics based on false premises. 5/ Stop using Maori words intermingled within an English written document! It is confusing as 98% of readers have no knowledge of this language and you will not teach anyone using one word at a time. You are introducing errors in interpretation.