Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document February 2019 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. L evel 1, 56 Victoria Street, Wellington Central, Wellington, PO Box 10612, Wellington 6423 2 9 October 2018 Hon Sir Michael Cullen Chair of the Tax Working Group PO Box 3724 Wellington 6140 New Zealand Dear Hon Sir Michael Response to Interim Report of the Tax Working Group In principle Spirits New Zealand supports the Tax Working Group’s (TWG) interim position recommending a review of the current structure of the excise system as applied to beverage alcohol. 1 We believe that the current system is complex and does not properly reflect externalities by beverage alcohol type. A system based on the volume of alcohol in beer, wine and spirits would be preferred as long as the assessment of this structure properly takes into account the true impact of each category. If this was the case then we believe we would see a flattening of excise levels without a reduction of tax take. Although we understand the TWG’s position to separate a review of the structure of the excise system from the level of excise applied we would contend that the two are inexorably linked and that they would need to be considered in parallel. We are aware, therefore, of a set of views put forward by, in particular, Alcohol Healthwatch purporting to make a case for a marked increase in the tax levied through alcohol excise. We do not intend to make a point by point rebuttal of their submission at this time but refer the TWG to our original submission that points out that evidence suggests the relationship between consumption and price is complex. Because of the linear nature of excise the impact of tax increases will have different impacts on different cohorts within a drinking population with light to moderate consumers reducing consumption significantly more than heavy drinkers. This position is supported by a most recent paper by Pryce, Hollingsworth and Walker (2018) 2 published after the first round of submissions had closed. In the conclusion to this paper the authors’ state: The results suggest that price-based policies may not be effective at reducing consumption amongst heavy drinkers without penalising lighter drinkers. 1 Tax Working Group Interim report pp 75 - 78 2 Pryce, R., Hollingsworth, B., & Walker, I. (2018). Alcohol quantity and quality price elasticities: Quantile regression estimates. European Journal of Health Economics. doi:10.1007/s10198-018-1009-8. \[1\] And in addition: If the price of alcohol increases by 10%, the lightest quartile of drinkers reduce their consumption by 7.1% compared to 3.5% for the heaviest quartile of drinkers. And lastly on this matter we note that the above comment has a cost/benefit implication based on the devised public health benefit of a reduction in heavy drinking as opposed to the impact on lighter drinkers and so on. We would point out that some groups often reference the public health cost of heavy drinking based on a recently (re) published review of externalities by BERL. We note this review has received some level of criticism from other economists 34 We acknowledge the TWG’s work to date in this area and, if government proceeds with a review, will expand in some detail on the brief comments made here. Yours sincerely Robert Brewer Chief Executive Spirits New Zealand Inc 3 https://nzinitiative.org.nz/reports-and-media/opinion/the-alcohol-cost-zombie-has-returned/ 4 https://lancewiggs.com/2009/07/03/fix-the-berl-report-on-alcohol-and-drugs/ \[1\] \[1\]