TAX AND TE AO MĀORI A simple glance at our population tells us that Māori will play an important role in Aotearoa’s economic future. As citizens, taxpayers, business owners, and kaitiaki – we need to hear your views and ideas. The Tax Working Group’s job is to come up with a tax system that will support the Aotearoa of the future. Tax is all about how we organise our collective resources. It’s a big kaupapa so that’s why it’s important your voices are heard before we present recommendations to Ministers. We want to hear what matters to you, your whānau and your mokopuna. The mahi of this Group is relevant to all whānau. Whether you: pay tax on your income own a businesshave thoughts on housing in Aotearoa feel like the tax system needs to change to support your tamariki and mokopuna in the future have interests in Māori land have views on taonga assets like land or water WHAT MATTERS TO YOU? WHY IS THIS OPPORTUNITY DIFFERENT? The Tax Working Group wants to hear your views and is especially keen for tangata whenua to play an active role in this year’s discussions. We will have an increasingly older Pākehā population that will be dependent on a larger and younger proportion of working age Māori. Your voice matters. This group is focused on fairness, balance and how to ensure the system keeps pace with changes in our world. Māori voices need to be heard – and the group is listening. Everyone’s kōrero is crucial - from our rangatahi to our kaumātua. The Group needs to know how tax affects you. What works? What hurts? What might help you get ahead? What’s just plain hōhā? The Māori economy is a growing force with an estimated asset base worth $50 billion. This is a powerful engine of the New Zealand economy so your voice matters. Disparities persist - 44% of those deemed eligible for social housing are Māori. That’s a lot of whānau for whom owning their own home is a distant prospect. Your voice matters. It’s a chance to talk about what it means to have more than one job or to have a short-term contract. Does the tax system make this easy for you? You can also tell the Group whether parts of the tax system need to better incorporate the view of te ao Māori. What should the Tax Working Group keep in mind when considering how taxes affect taonga assets like land. You could suggest ways in which tikanga Māori might help the tax system be more future-focused. $50b44% Find out more at: taxworkinggroup.govt.nz THIS IS AN IMPORTANT KAUPAPA TO GET RIGHT FOR OUR FUTURE. HERE’S YOUR CHANCE TO HAVE YOUR SAY AND MAKE A DIFFERENCE ON THE FUTURE OF TAX. Making your voice heard is easy and you don’t need to be a tax expert to take part. This is your tax system and this is your conversation. There’s no need to come up with a magic solution – although if you have one – please share. It’s more important that we hear your concerns, your ideas and your perspectives. The Tax Working Group is looking forward to hearing from you as it considers how to make the tax system more balanced, fair and future-focused. Read the Future of Tax – Submissions Background Paper on our website. It’s worth your time and has much more information and questions to consider. Find out more at: taxworkinggroup.govt.nz HOW TO CONNECT WHAT HAPPENS TO MY SUBMISSION SUBMISSIONS Visit the \`Have Your Say’ section on the website, watch the five videos and respond in the comment boxes below. Want to make a more detailed submission? Send your thoughts to: submissions@taxworkinggroup.govt.nz Post your thoughts to: Tax Working Group, PO BOX 3724, Wellington 6140 Have your say before submissions close on April 30. Your views will be considered by the Tax Working Group and could influence its interim report due by September 2018. Final recommendations will be made to Government in February 2019. MARK YOUR DIARY Submissions close April 30 so make sure you don’t delay! Have your say today. 30 APRIL Stay up to date and connect with the Tax Working Group on Facebook and Twitter If you would like a Tax Working Group member to speak at your hui or event contact: secretariat@taxworkinggroup.govt.nz SOCIAL MEDIA AND EVENTS HOW TO HAVE YOUR SAY VISIT TAXWORKINGGROUP.GOVT.NZ MAKE SURE YOU HAVE YOUR SAY ON THE FUTURE OF TAX.