Tax Working Group Public Submissions Information Release Release Document September 2018 taxworkingroup.govt.nz/key-documents Key to sections of the Official Information Act 1982 under which information has been withheld. Certain information in this document has been withheld under one or more of the following sections of the Official Information Act, as applicable: \[1\] 9(2)(a) - to protect the privacy of natural persons, including deceased people; \[2\] 9(2)(k) - to prevent the disclosure of official information for improper gain or improper advantage. Where information has been withheld, a numbered reference to the applicable section of the Official Information Act has been made, as listed above. For example, a \[1\] appearing where information has been withheld in a release document refers to section 9(2)(a). In preparing this Information Release, the Treasury has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act. 1 From: Sent:Friday, 23 February 2018 11:26 AM To: Subject:RE: Capital gains tax - zoning Good morning Jean-Paul, Your email of 3 December 2018 to Hon Phil Twyford, has been referred to the Minister of Revenue for reply. On behalf of Hon Stuart Nash, Minister of Revenue, thank you for taking the time to write. Your letter has been provided to the Minister for his consideration, You can expect a response in the near future. Kind regards Fro m: Jean-Paul Thull Sent: Sunday, 3 December 2017 3:28 PM To: Hon Phil Twyford Subject: Capit al gains tax - zoning http://www.nzherald.co.nz/auckland-council/news/article.cfm?c\_id=1503784&objectid=11948676 Dear Minister Twyford I applaud your enthusiasm taking the bull by the horns. While it may take a while to fix things, you recognised well that we need to stop property investment as a way to make money without creating any innovative benefits to NZ. Capital gains tax As you may recall, I raised the idea of 10 year capital gains tax, allowing anyone to get into the property market to be carefully considering the idea versus putting investments into NZX/ASX or other more direct productive ventures. Why 10 years instead of 5? In many cases an investor will not be required to invest too much into a rental property but that dramatically changes when it comes to 10 years >> this would lead to renovate and upgrade our poor housing standards across the board. I believe any intelligent person will understand this and YES it may also mean rising rents.... Which could be mitigated by fiscal advantages to be set. You could look at reducing GsT to 5% for improvements (material only) that contributes to thermal benefits or lowering operating costs of a rental property. PV (Photovoltaic) for 3kw is now less than $10k to install but gives the occupant the opportunity to dramatically lower their energy bill, as you will agree that a heat pump ($8 per day in winter) is a major cost factor and just providing a heat pump is not going to make the home warmer if not in use and providing extra financial support to some may end up in smoke, drugs or booze but free heat does not buy these items. We also need to stop building materials increasing in price 5-10% per year as really crazy and not justified. Zoning \[1\] \[1\] \[1\] \[1\] \[1\] 2 Zoning and individual rezoning applications to differ from original city/district plans have led to much of the transport disaster we are facing and a tram to the airport is not going to fix this if you look at other cities around the world. Put a BRT system in place by removing all car parks along the designated route with quality Volvo hybrid buses and priority signalling at all intersections and you will achieve similar to a fraction of the price. The constant rezoning of NZ cities loses the effect of the gravity model where you can plan for mass public transit in peak times... the CBD in Akl is though working relatively well and perhaps removing access by private vehicles to the CBD or a congestion charge is an option to consider by providing free orbiter buses and other buses within the CBD. Look at park and ride 30 -20- 10- 5km out of the city.....continue what National decided on southern rail link, look at fast rail service between Hamilton- Akl and Warkworth and settle any new residential areas along that corridor.... Something I have been suggesting to Simon Bridges for many years. Anything outside the perimeter of 1km both sides of such a railway should be kept agricultural land and let’s concentrate on TOD Transit orientated Development. Regards Jean-Paul