Understanding attitudes towards business data secrecy - A telephone survey among business audiences Quantitative Report May 2016 UMR Research Information Sharing Survey Inland Revenue | Te Tari Taake Classification: \[Insert\] Disclaimer The views, opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the views of Inland Revenue. Inland Revenue has made every effort to ensure that the information contained in this report is reliable, but does not guarantee its accuracy or completeness and does not accept any liability for any errors. The information and opinions contained in this report are not intended to be used as a basis for commercial decisions and Inland Revenue accepts no liability for any decisions made in reliance on them. Crown copyright ©. This paper by Inland Revenue is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 New Zealand Licence. Please note that the Inland Revenue emblem and logo may not be used in any way which infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act 1981 or would infringe such provision if the relevant use occurred within New Zealand. Attribution should be in written form and not by reproduction of this emblem. If you publish, distribute or otherwise disseminate this work to the public without adapting it, the following attribution to Inland Revenue should be used: "Source: Inland Revenue and licensed by Inland Revenue for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 New Zealand Licence." If you adapt this work in any way or include it in a wider collection, and publish, distribute or otherwise disseminate that adaptation or collection to the public, the following style of attribution to Inland Revenue should be used: "This work is \[based on/includes\] Inland Revenue's research and evaluation activities which \[is/are\] licensed by Inland Revenue for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 New Zealand Licence." ISBN: 978-0-478-41840-8 Information Sharing Survey Inland Revenue | Te Tari Taake Classification: \[Insert\] Table of contents Context for this research ....................................................................................................... 1 Executive summary ............................................................................................................... 2 Introduction and methodology ........................................................................................... 10 Support for and comfort with sharing information .............................................................. 15 Information sharing in different scenarios ........................................................................... 28 View of Inland Revenue Non-Government Organisations and Business Information ........... 47 Appendix A .......................................................................................................................... 53 Appendix B .......................................................................................................................... 54 Information Sharing Survey \[1\] Context for this research One of the New Zealand government’s objectives is to unlock the value of the information it holds on behalf of citizens and businesses so it can be used to improve the economic and social wellbeing of New Zealanders. This includes agencies reusing information to improve the quality and speed of services to customers. IR understands that its customers are sensitive about how increased information sharing would affect their right to confidentiality. Therefore, as part of its policy development, IR has conducted multiple research projects in the last seven years to gather the opinions of the general public, businesses, and tax professionals. These earlier studies have focused on understanding the circumstances and safeguards that would make increased information sharing acceptable, and the impact of increased information sharing on the integrity of the tax system. These studies showed that people generally accept information sharing between government departments, as long as: strong protocols are in place; there is a definite improvement in customer service, and/or; a specific need is being addressed such as combating crime. However, one finding from our prior research was that the business community had particular concerns about commercially confidential business information being potentially being exposed outside of IR. IR wanted to explore this further, in particular, to understand the impact on businesses views of (i) the purpose that the information would be used for (for example gaining insights to contribute to a more productive economy) and (ii) what type of organisation would be accessing it. This study was, therefore, undertaken to get a deeper understanding of the business community’ views. We explored how the business community’s attitudes differ depending on whether IR shares information with government or non-government organisations. We also explored how the type of information being shared and the aim of the information sharing affect these opinions. Information Sharing Survey \[2\] Executive summary Within government, there has been increasing focus on improving access to data held by government departments that could potentially help improve people’s economic and social wellbeing. Regarding the possible value in widening this sharing outside of government departments, prior research with business owners indicated they have concerns about this widening. The research findings outlined in this report are aimed at further clarifying this aspect of public opinion, and adds to Inland Revenue’s understanding of attitudes towards data sharing. Overall support for Inland Revenue sharing business data with government and non- government organisations Overall support for sharing of business data by Inland Revenue is highest when sharing this information with other government departments (46% total support) and also with university researchers working on government projects (41%) 1 . Support declined significantly if university researchers (19%) or consulting companies (14%) were working on projects for private companies indicating that who the project was for was an important consideration in data sharing. An SME interviewed during cognitive testing explained that while he was supportive of data sharing for New Zealand’s benefit he did not want his IR data shared with private companies 2 . A microbusiness owner who was interviewed was very positive about sharing data, opining that transparency was likely to benefit not only researchers and government departments but other businesses as well 3 . 1 The questionnaire included a number of 5-point-scale questions which asked respondents for their level of support/agreement/comfort for various statements. In all of these questions 1=strongly against or disagreeing with the statement and 5=strongly for or agreeing with the statement. Percentages for agreeing strongly were calculated from the number of respondents selecting 4 or 5 and opposing were 1 or 2. 2 SME interview, March 2016.\[ Five cognitive interviews were conducted at the beginning of this project as well as eight in-depth interviews with key stakeholders (both internal IRD and external tax experts).\] 3 Interview with microbusiness owner, March 2016 SMEs - less supportive of IR sharing information with consulting companies working on projects for private sector companies than other business groups. (note small sample size) Support for IR sharing business data with university researchers is relatively strong when working on government projects and less so if working on private company projects. Support for business data sharing is less strong for consulting companies working on private sector projects. Support for sharing business information with the general public was very weak. Information Sharing Survey \[3\] Increased support for data sharing Support rose for business data sharing by Inland Revenue when business respondents had the opportunity to consider the risks and benefits of information sharing. Business support increased the most for university researchers working on projects for private companies (30%, up 11 percentage points) and university researchers working on government projects (51%, up 10 percentage points). For consulting companies working on projects for private companies (19%, up 5 percentage points) and government projects (34%, up 7 percentage points) there was less support. Businesses are therefore more comfortable data sharing for government projects. Significant enterprise - more in favour of data sharing with government departments and university researchers for a government project. Less supportive for data sharing with consulting companies working on projects for private sector companies than other business group. Micro-businesses - less supportive of sharing business information with university researchers working on projects for private companies. Self-employed - there were no significant differences compared to other business groups. (note small sample size) Sharing business data with non-government organisations with safeguards There are indications that having safeguards in place lifts support for sharing business information with non-government organisations. Anonymised data: If all financial and business information was anonymised and no individual business was identifiable, 40% of respondents support business data sharing with non-government organisations. Nonetheless a majority of business respondents still opposed Inland Revenue sharing business data with the general public even if anonymised. Purpose of data sharing: The majority of business respondents supported sharing of business data by Inland Revenue if:  The sharing of the information would aid Government policy and decision-making.  The sharing of the information would help a particular business sector grow. However, they were less likely to support business data sharing if the benefit was to a specific business. The owner of an SME who was interviewed was concerned that increased data sharing might give competitors an advantage, locally, nationally and even internationally, especially if overseas countries did not have the same tax reporting requirements as New Zealand. 4 4 Interview with SME, March 2016 Information Sharing Survey \[4\] How comfortable businesses are with information sharing Business respondents were most comfortable with Inland Revenue potentially sharing anonymised individual business information with other government departments, (50% comfortable,) and with university researchers (45%). One not-for-profit interviewed, a charity, was very willing to share their information, pointing out everything was readily available from the Charities Commission 5 . Not-for-profits most supportive of data sharing with all organisations including the general public. Types of information businesses are comfortable with IR sharing To explore how different types of business information being shared with different non- government and government organisations impacted on levels of support for Inland Revenue business data sharing, four scenarios were tested with business respondents:  Scenario one - Inland Revenue sharing small business information with university researchers.  Scenario two - Inland Revenue sharing large corporation information with business and economic consulting groups.  Scenario three - Inland Revenue sharing small business information with government departments.  Scenario four - Inland Revenue sharing large business information with the general public. 6 Business information that could potentially be shared included taxable income, tax paid by business, level of tax debt, employee numbers, GST return data, broad geographic location, profit and loss. In all four scenarios the respondents were more willing to share general information like ‘broad geographic information’ (between 70% and 85%) and ‘employee numbers’ (between 67% and 82%) 7 . More sensitive information such as ‘profit and loss’ was the type that respondents were least comfortable sharing (between 42% and 65%). 5 Interview NFP charity, March 2016 6 The four scenarios were tested with sub-samples within the total sample due to questionnaire length and the need to reduce respondent burden. 7 Broad geographic information was individually interpreted by each respondent - no definition was applied during the survey. Support for IR sharing business data with university researchers is relatively strong when working on government projects and less so if working on private company projects. Support increases when risks and benefits are explored for business data sharing for university researchers working on projects for private companies. Support for business data sharing is less strong for consulting companies working on private sector projects and the general public. Information Sharing Survey \[5\] One of the issues raised in the cognitive testing was that the financial information may be misinterpreted, for example, carrying tax debt may be perceived as a negative if the reasoning behind this was not fully understood 8 . Businesses were therefore less comfortable sharing sensitive or specific information types. Scenario summary table: information and sharing Scenarios Type of information Purpose for the sharing Information sharing (%) Comfortable sharing Scenario one University Researchers Small business Grow sector locally and internationally 65% plus Share all Scenario two Consulting group Large corporation Increase profitability and efficiency 51% plus Share all Less comfortable sharing Profit and Loss Scenario three Government Departments Small business Grow sector locally and internationally 57% plus Share all Least comfortable sharing tax debt Scenario four General public Large business Increase profitability and efficiency 38-44% Share general location and employee numbers only (67% plus) Respondents were generally more comfortable sharing small business information with university researchers and with other government departments. Benefits of information sharing Main benefit: Respondents thought that the main benefit for New Zealand business overall if non-government organisations were given access to anonymised individual business information was an ‘improvement in business productivity and/or efficiency’ (16.5%). The microbusiness owner interviewed felt that the more information available, the better, in order to improve business 9 . 8 Interview self-employed, March 2016 9 Interview micro-business owner, March 2016 There are indications that safeguards make a difference if sharing with non-government organisations; although not with the general public. There is less support if the benefit of the data sharing is for a specific business. Business respondents indicated they are comfortable in sharing ‘Employee numbers’ with non-government organisations; they are less comfortable sharing profit and loss information. Information Sharing Survey \[6\] Scenario benefits: The perceived benefits of sharing the anonymised business data by respondents varied depending on the scenario:  Scenario one (university researchers) - ‘improved information is made available to small businesses in your industry who are then able to make better investment decisions’ (60%).  Scenarios two and three (consulting groups and government departments) - ‘government is more informed about businesses in your industry sector and is able to provide better support to businesses to grow internationally’ (48% and 56% respectively).  Scenario four (general public) - ‘improved information is made available to members of the general public which encourages New Zealanders to invest in your industry sector’ (37%). Risks of information sharing Main risk: Respondents thought that the main risk to New Zealand business overall if IR gave non-government organisations access to anonymised individual business information was that it could result in a ‘breach of individual business privacy’ (39%). The problem of keeping data anonymised in a small country like New Zealand was one of the issues raised by both a self-employed business owner and a tax expert. Drilling down to regional and territorial authority level data or using high value data sets could allow larger businesses to be re-identified 10 . Scenario risk: For each of the four scenarios, if non-government organisations were given access to anonymised individual business information, the risk respondents thought most likely to occur was ‘there is potential for misuse of the data e.g. by the media’ ranging from 54% in scenario one to 69% in scenario four. Views of Inland Revenue and non-government organisations Most respondents (69%) have trust and confidence in the Inland Revenue indicating IR is seen by the majority of respondents as a safe and responsible custodian of business data. Issues of client confidentiality were a predominant concern of the not-for-profits who were interviewed and worked in a sensitive area. The trust component in relationship between IR and this not-for-profit for keeping their data safe was vital for data sharing 11 . However, respondents’ trust and confidence in university researchers (38%) and consulting companies (18%) in using anonymised business information, was significantly less when compared to the Inland Revenue. 10 Interview 1st March with tax expert and self-employed, March 2016 11 Interview with not-for-profit, March 2016 Information Sharing Survey \[7\] Views on current information sharing and ownership of business information Forty-four percent of all respondents believe that the IR does not currently share any financial and business information it holds about individual businesses with non- government organisations. Nearly all respondents (91%) agree with the statement that they own their business and financial information and 79% agree with the statement that their consent is needed for this information to be shared with non-government organisations such as universities and private business organisations. The evidence suggests that ownership and consent are likely to be significant considerations for businesses when data sharing. The following summary table also highlights any significant differences between individual business types and the overall figure.  The majority of respondents have trust and confidence in IR.  Almost half of the respondents believe IR does not share any financial and business information it holds.  Business and financial information is viewed by nearly all respondents as the property of the business owner.  Over three-quarters of respondents want a consent requirement for business and financial information to be shared with non-government organisations. Information Sharing Survey \[8\] Significant Enterprises SMEs Microbusinesses Self-employed Not-for-profit Overall support for information sharing (before being prompted on potential risks and benefits) Significantly less supportive for sharing with consulting companies working on private projects. Generally low support relative to other groups Generally the highest level of support Overall support for information sharing (after being prompted on potential risks and benefits) Significantly less supportive of sharing with university researchers and consulting companies working on private projects Significantly less support for sharing with university researchers working on private projects Highly supportive relative to other groups for sharing with university researchers working on private projects Generally highly supportive still Support with safeguards - sharing with non-government organisations Equal lowest support for both safeguards Equal lowest support for both safeguards Significantly more supportive for both safeguards Support with safeguards - sharing with members of the general public lowest support for both safeguards Significantly more supportive for both safeguards Support for sharing in certain situations Second highest level of support for aid Govt. policy, lowest in other two situations Highest level of support for sharing to aid a particular business sector to grow Highest level of support for aiding Govt. Policy, and aid one specific business Level of comfort with information sharing Significant enterprise more comfortable than other groups to share with other Govt. departments Generally lower level of comfort than other groups Generally lower level of comfort than other groups (except SMEs) Not-for-profit significantly more comfortable with sharing with members of the general public Information Sharing Survey \[9\] Trust and confidence in how Inland Revenue uses business information Significantly more trust and confidence Lowest level of trust and confidence Awareness of Inland Revenue sharing information with non- government organisations Highest level saying inland revenue does not share information Highest level think Inland Revenue does, or probably does share information Trust and confidence in how university researchers would use shared information Highest level trust and confidence in how information would be used Trust and confidence in how consulting companies would use shared information lowest level trust and confidence in how information would be used Highest level trust and confidence in how information would be used Consider information is owned and belongs to them Significantly lower agreement Consent needed to share information Very similar and high agreement across the board Note: the table identifies where there are significant differences between individual business types and the overall figure. It also identifies which business types have the highest or lowest level relative to the other types where appropriate, even if the differences are not significant from the overall figure. Generally the significant differences are among the ‘significant enterprise’ and ‘not-for-profit’ groups. There were no significant differences between the ‘self-employed’ group and the overall figure, but this is a result of the fact that the self-employed business sector makes up 66.59% of the weighted ‘all’ figure, hence the results in the ‘self-employed’ group drive the results in the ‘all’ figure. A similar reasoning can be applied to the ‘microbusiness’ group which makes up 23.78% of the weighted ‘all’ figure. Information Sharing Survey \[10\] Introduction and methodology Within government, there has been a considerable focus on improving access to data about people for research and analysis. Frameworks and practices for the release of businesses’ data are less advanced. Improving access to businesses’ data involves resolving issues around the use of commercially sensitive data. In this research, ‘commercially sensitive’ means that the data could lead to: i. A business being financially disadvantaged, and, or ii. Other entities gaining a financial or other benefit. For IR, it also involves consideration of the impact of wider access on the integrity of the tax system, specifically whether greater access to data that businesses are required to provide to Inland Revenue for tax purposes may impact on businesses’ willingness to provide this data to Inland Revenue. Previous research with business has shown that they dislike the idea of Inland Revenue sharing businesses’ information with private-sector companies. Sharing information with government agencies was more acceptable as long as information sharing matched businesses’ expectations of the purpose for this sharing. This research is to support IR’s understanding of businesses’ attitudes towards wider data sharing. Objectives The study was designed to explore:  Level of comfort and support for Inland Revenue business data sharing with a range of government and non-government organisations.  What types of information does business consider acceptable to share.  Which government and non-government organisations/ general public is business comfortable sharing with.  Impact of wider data sharing on the integrity of the New Zealand tax system. Information Sharing Survey \[11\] Method Questionnaire design The research design included a prior round of eight stakeholder interviews that included internal Inland Revenue staff, other interested government staff and external business community representatives. The findings from these interviews were then reported on in an internal Inland Revenue workshop where key areas for the telephone questionnaire were explored and developed. The resultant draft questionnaire underwent a round of cognitive testing (n=5) and also refinement with input from the Inland Revenue research team. The questionnaire included four hypothetical information-sharing scenarios designed to test a range of options for business data sharing that highlighted potential business benefits, types of information to be shared and differentiated with who this business information would be shared. Due to the complexity and length of the questionnaire half of the sample were asked scenarios one and two and the other half of the sample were asked scenarios three and four. Key audiences The survey was designed to gather the opinions of a range of business owners and managers about the sharing and other new uses of information collected. In order to have views from all business types the sampling regime was designed in such a way so that each business type sub-group had at least 100 respondents. However, due to time constraints and telephone sample issues, only 80 surveys were completed for Significant Enterprises. The table below shows the number of surveys achieved for each sub-group as well as the true population. The total survey sample (n=480) represented 0.04% of the total number of businesses (n=1,261,500) in the true population count. Information Sharing Survey \[12\] TRUE POPULATION VS. ACTUAL NUMBER OF SURVEYS 12 Population counts have been provided by Inland Revenue True population count True population proportion Total sampled Total businesses in survey n= % n= % Significant Enterprises 4,500 0.36 80 1.7 SMEs 100,000 7.93 100 0.1 Microbusinesses 300,000 23.78 100 0.03 Self-employed 840,000 66.59 100 0.01 Not-for-profit 17,000 1.35 100 0.59 TOTAL 1,261,500 100 480 0.04 For tables contained in the body of this report the All figure has been weighted to be representative of businesses as a whole and the individual business types have been left unweighted to show actual sub-sample sizes. Fieldwork and margin of error Fieldwork was conducted from the 21st April to the 10th of May 2016. The margin of error for a 50% figure at the 95% confidence level for a sample size of 480 is +4.5%.  The margin of error for a 50% figure at the 95% confidence level for a sample size of 239 is +6.3%.  The margin of error for a 50% figure at the 95% confidence level for a sample size of 241 is +6.3%.  The margin of error for a 50% figure at the 95% confidence level for a sample size of 100 is +9.8%.  The margin of error for a 50% figure at the 95% confidence level for a sample size of 80 is +11%. All fieldwork was conducted using the Quancept survey system which is a leading Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing system. It is known for its power and flexibility, as well as the ease of use for supervisors and interviewers. It works in conjunction with a fully customizable sample management system, as well as a predictive dialler. 12 The survey was carried out in two waves to shorten the overall length. Numbers for each sub-group by wave can be found in the Appendix. Information Sharing Survey \[13\] Sample make-up BUSINESS DEMOGRAPHICS Unweighted % Weighted % Base: n= 480 480 Including yourself. How many employees are currently working in your organisation? 1-2 employees 37.3 57.9 3-5 employees 19.2 19.1 6-9 employees 11.9 8.0 10-19 employees 11.0 6.6 20-49 employees 7.1 4.2 50-99 employees 2.7 0.6 100-249 employees 2.3 1.5 250-499 employees 2.5 0.1 500 or more employees 2.5 - Unsure/ Refused 3.5 2.0 Information Sharing Survey \[14\] Sample make-up continued BUSINESS DEMOGRAPHICS Unweighted % Weighted % Base: n= 480 480 What type of business is your organisation? \[Statistics NZ codes\] Primary (A: Agriculture/ Forestry/ Fishing - B: Mining) 15.2 17 Secondary (C: Manufacturing - D: Electricity/ Gas/ Waste/ Waste - E: Construction) 11.9 13.3 Trade (F: Wholesale trade - G: Retail trade - H: Accommodation/ Food services I: Transport/ Postal/ Warehousing) 14.8 19.3 Professional services (J: Information media & telecommunications - K: Financial & Insurance - L: Rental/ Hiring/ Real Estate - M: Professional/ Scientific/ Technical - N: Administrative & Support) 31.5 33.9 Social/ Other Services (O: Public administration/ Safety - P: Education & Training - Q: Healthcare & Social assistance - R: Arts & Recreation - S: Other Services) 25.8 15.2 Refused 0.8 1.3 Can you please provide an estimate of your company's annual turnover? Less than $60,000 11.7 19.8 $60,000 - $99,000 8.5 11.7 $100,000 - $249,999 13.5 13.7 $250,000 - $499,999 6.7 5.4 $500,000 - $749,999 4.0 2.9 $750,000 - $999,999 4.6 3.6 $1 million but less than $2 million 7.3 5.4 $2 million but less than $3 million 4.6 2.3 $3 million but less than $4 million 2.5 1.4 $4 million but less than $5 million 1.0 0.3 $5 million but less than $10 million 1.7 1.5 $10 million but less than $20 million 1.2 0.2 $20 million but less than $50 million 2.5 0.1 $50 million but less than $100 million 2.1 0.9 $100 million or more 3.1 0.1 Unsure 9.8 14.9 13 Refused 15.2 15.8 13 The percentages for those who were unsure (9.8% unweighted, 14.9% weighted) and refused (15.2% weighted, 14.9% unweighted) were quite high, indicating concerns among some respondents at sharing annual turnover information with IR and a research company. Information Sharing Survey \[15\] Support for and comfort with sharing information Overall support Sharing information with government and government projects garners the best support from business Respondents were asked how much they support, in principle, Inland Revenue sharing anonymised business information with a range of different groups.  In general, the highest level of support for information sharing was with groups that are government related.  The highest level of support was for Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with other government departments (46%). o 41% supported Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with university researchers working on government projects, however, only 19% supported sharing with university researchers working on projects for private companies. o 27% supported Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with consulting companies working on government projects, although there was only 14% support for Inland Revenue sharing with consulting companies working on private company projects.  The lowest level of support was for sharing anonymised individual business information with members of the general public (9%). Figure 1: Level of support for Inland Revenue business data sharing Information Sharing Survey \[16\] Sub-group differences  Not-for-profit businesses gave the highest level of support for Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with each group.  Significant enterprises had the second highest level of support for the following groups: o 55% support for Inland Revenue sharing information with other government organisations. o 31% support for Inland Revenue sharing information with consulting companies working on projects for the government. o 21% support for Inland Revenue sharing information with university researchers working on projects for private companies.  Micro-businesses had the second highest level of support for university researchers working on government projects at 48%.  SME’s were significantly less supportive of Inland Revenue sharing information with consulting companies working on projects for private companies (7% support). Table 1: Level of support for Inland Revenue data sharing - by sub group SUPPORT OR OPPOSE INFORMATION SHARING WITH THE FOLLOWING ORGANISATIONS OR GROUPS – SUMMARY (TOTAL SUPPORT 4+5) Using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means you strongly oppose, 5 means you strongly support in principle how much do you support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with: All % Significant Enterprises % SMEs % Micro- businesses % Self- employed % Not-for- profit % Base: n= 480 80 100 100 100 100 Other Government departments 46 55 42 44 47 58 University researchers working on Government projects 41 44 42 48 38 52 Consulting companies working on projects for the Government 27 31 26 30 26 42 University researchers working on projects for private companies 19 21 16 20 19 23 Consulting companies working on projects for private companies 14 11 7 10 16 16 Members of the general public 9 6 7 6 10 17 Base: All respondents Information Sharing Survey \[17\] After considering potential risks and benefits of sharing anonymised individual business data; support increases across all organisations/ groups tested albeit marginally for general public and with other government departments After being exposed to potential risks and benefits through four separate scenarios of information sharing in action, respondents were asked to state their level of support for sharing anonymised individual business information.  Overall support has risen, albeit increases in support for some groups were marginal. o Around half of respondents support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised business information with university researchers working on government projects (51%, increase in support of 10%) and other government departments (47%, increase in support of 1%). o Over a third of respondents (34%, increase in support of 7%) support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised business information with consulting companies working on projects for the government. Thirty percent of respondents support anonymised business information being shared with university researchers working on projects for private companies, an increase in support of 11%. o Around one in five respondents (19%, increase in support of 5%) support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised business information being shared with consulting companies working on projects for private companies.  There was little change for sharing with the general public with 10% support for Inland Revenue sharing anonymised business information (increase in support of 1%).  The two largest changes in support were for Inland Revenue sharing information with university researchers; both with university researchers working on projects for private companies and working on projects for government projects. Table 2: Comparison Table - Level of support for Inland Revenue business data sharing BEFORE AND AFTER considering potential benefits and risks ALL: COMPARISON OF SUPPORT FOR INLAND REVENUE SHARING ANONYMISED INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS INFORMATION In principle, using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means you strongly oppose, 5 means you strongly support. How much do you support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with....: Pre risks and benefits Post risks and benefits Difference in support TOTAL 1 + 2 (Oppose) % 3 % Total 4 + 5 (Support) % TOTAL 1 + 2 (Oppose) % 3 % Total 4 + 5 (Support) % (Post - Pre) % University researchers working on projects for private companies 51 30 19 42 28 30 +11 University researchers working on Government projects 33 25 41 30 19 51 +10 Consulting companies working on projects for the Government 41 31 27 38 27 34 +7 Consulting companies working on projects for private companies 60 24 14 53 28 19 +5 Other Government departments 27 26 46 27 26 47 +1 Members of the general public 76 15 9 74 16 10 +1 Base: All respondents (n=480) Information Sharing Survey \[18\] Sub-group differences  Significant enterprises gave significantly lower support for Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with university researchers working on projects for private companies (16%). o For significant enterprises the support for Inland Revenue sharing with university researchers working on private sector projects also decreased 5% compared to their support before the scenario questions, while overall support increased 11%.  Significant enterprises also gave significantly lower support for Inland Revenue sharing information with consulting companies working on projects for private companies (11%). o Their support was unchanged from their pre-scenario question support, however overall support after the scenario questions went up 5 percentage points.  Micro-businesses showed significantly lower support for Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with university researchers working on projects for private companies (21%).  While the overall support for university researchers working on projects for private companies increased by 11% (pre vs post scenario question support), this change was driven almost entirely by a 15% increase in support by the self-employed group.  Not-for-profits had the highest level of support for all groups (except one), however there was not a lot of change in their level of support before and after the scenario questions 14 . Table 3: Level of support for Inland Revenue business data sharing AFTER considering potential benefits and risks - sub- group differences SUPPORT FOR INLAND REVENUE SHARING ANONYMISED INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS INFORMATION – SUMMARY (TOTAL SUPPORT 4+5) Now that you have had a chance to think about the RISKS AND BENEFITS of sharing anonymised business information, I would like to ask you again. In principle, using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means you strongly oppose, 5 means you strongly support. How much do you support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with....: All % Significant Enterprises % SMEs % Micro- businesses % Self- employed % Not-for- profit % Base: n= 480 80 100 100 100 100 University researchers working on Government projects 51 46 46 45 53 53 Other Government departments 47 51 50 41 48 55 Consulting companies working on projects for the Government 34 33 36 34 35 40 University researchers working on projects for private companies 30 16 25 21 34 28 Consulting companies working on projects for private companies 19 11 18 18 19 20 Members of the general public 10 7 10 7 11 21 Base: All respondents 14 Not-for-profits are more used to transparency due to the need to secure funding and are therefore less worried about commercial sensitivity. Information Sharing Survey \[19\] Support with safeguards and in certain situations There is some support for sharing information with non-government organisations with safeguards in place  Two in five respondents (40%) support Inland Revenue sharing information with non- government organisations if all financial and business information will be anonymised and no individual business will be identifiable.  Over a third of respondents (37%) support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised business information with non-government organisations if the safeguards meet the standards for privacy similar to the Privacy Act for individuals.  Conversely, around a third oppose sharing business data with non-government organisations even with safeguards.  Note there appears to be some lift in support when compared to results ‘support for Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with other non- government organisations’ see Figure 1. Figure 2: Level of support for Inland Revenue business data sharing with non-government organisations with safeguards Information Sharing Survey \[20\] Sub-group differences  Not-for-profits were significantly more supportive about Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with non-government organisations than the whole sample for both safeguards (58% and 49% respectively).  Micro-businesses (41%) and self-employed (40%) were also fairly supportive if all financial and business information will be anonymised and no individual business will be identified.  The least supportive were significant enterprises and SME’s at 36% respectively.  Micro-businesses (38%) and self-employed (38%) were fairly supportive if the safeguards meet the standards for privacy similar to the privacy act for individuals.  The least supportive were significant enterprises and SME’s at 33% respectively. Figure 3: Level of support for Inland Revenue business data sharing with non-government organisations with safeguards - sub-group differences Information Sharing Survey \[21\] There is low support for sharing information with members of the general public  Around one in five respondents support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised business information with members of the general public if the following safeguards are in place: o ‘All financial and business information will be anonymised and no individual business will be identifiable’ (23%). o ‘The safeguards meet the standards for privacy similar to the Privacy Act for individuals’ (22%).  However, a majority are opposed/ neutral regarding Inland Revenue business data sharing with the general public even with safeguards in place. Figure 4: Level of support for Inland Revenue business data sharing with general public with safeguards Information Sharing Survey \[22\] Sub-group differences  Not-for-profits were significantly more supportive about Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with members of the general public than the whole sample for both safeguards at 43% and 40% respectively.  Other groups were less encouraging. A quarter of microbusinesses and 23% of SME’s were supportive if all financial and business information will be anonymised and no individual business will be identifiable.  Only 22% of microbusinesses and 21% of SME’s and self-employed were supportive if the safeguards meet the standards for privacy similar to the privacy act for individuals. Figure 5: Level of support for Inland Revenue business data sharing with general public with safeguards - sub-group differences Information Sharing Survey \[23\] Highest support was for sharing business and financial information to aid Government policy and decision-making AND to help a business sector grow  Over half of respondents supported Inland Revenue sharing anonymised business and financial information in the following situations: o ‘The sharing of the information to aid Government policy and decision-making’ (56%). o ‘The sharing of the information to help a particular business sector grow (e.g. grow local or international market)’ (53%).  A third of respondents (32%) supported Inland Revenue sharing anonymised business and financial information to aid one specific business (e.g. help them develop an innovative product or move into a gap in the market), conversely, a third opposed and a third were neutral. Figure 6: Level of support for Inland Revenue business data sharing in the following situations Information Sharing Survey \[24\] Sub-group differences  Not-for-profits were the most supportive of the sharing of business and financial information if it is to aid government policy and decision making at 73%.  Significant enterprises had the second highest level of support for sharing information if it was to aid government policy and decision making (66% support); however, they had the lowest level of support in the remaining two situations. o 49% support if sharing the information will help a particular business sector grow (53% for all). o 26% support if sharing the information will aid one specific business (32% for all).  Microbusinesses (57%) had the highest level of support for the sharing of information to help a particular business sector grow.  There was less support overall (32%) for the sharing of information to aid one specific business with not-for-profits showing the most support on 39%, followed by a third of SME’s. Figure 7: Level of support for Inland Revenue business data sharing in the following situations - sub-group differences Information Sharing Survey \[25\] Level of comfort with information sharing Businesses are most comfortable with sharing information with other government departments and university researchers  Half of businesses said they were comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with other government departments. o 45% of businesses also said they were comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing anonymised information with university researchers.  Businesses were much less comfortable with the idea of Inland Revenue sharing anonymised information with either consulting companies (20%) or members of the general public (12%).  Significant enterprises were more comfortable than the other four business groups with having Inland Revenue share anonymised information with other government departments (57%).  Not-for-profits were more comfortable than the other four business groups with Inland Revenue sharing anonymised information with university researchers (50%) and members of the general public (22%).  Self-employed business people were more comfortable than the other four business groups with having Inland Revenue sharing anonymised information with consulting companies (23%). Figure 8: Level of comfort with Inland Revenue sharing business data with the following organisations Information Sharing Survey \[26\] Businesses are most comfortable sharing employee numbers; least comfortable sharing profit and loss information Businesses who had already stated they were comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information were asked their level of comfort on sharing specific information types.  The level of comfort was greatest for sharing the tested information types with other government departments.  Generally, ‘employee numbers’ was the information type businesses were most comfortable with Inland Revenue anonymising and sharing, while ‘profit and loss’ was the type of information businesses were least comfortable with Inland Revenue anonymising and sharing.  However, the majority of businesses (who were already comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information) were also comfortable sharing all information types tested with Government, university researchers and consulting companies and to a lesser extent the general public. Figure 9: Level of comfort with Inland Revenue sharing the following specific information type with the following organisations 15 15 The base also includes neutrals. Margins of error at 95% confidence are: n=342 5.3%, n=327 5.4%, n=224 6.5%, n=115 9.1% Information Sharing Survey \[27\] Lower support for information sharing with non-government organisations working on private sector projects compared with government projects When we narrow down how the non-government organisation will use the shared information we see clear differences between how comfortable businesses are sharing information and their actual support for sharing information.  While 45% of businesses are comfortable having Inland Revenue sharing anonymised information with university researchers, only 19% before the scenario questions actually support Inland Revenue sharing information with university researchers if they are working on private sector projects. o If the university researcher is working on a government project support for information sharing increases to 41% before the scenario questions.  While 20% of businesses are comfortable having Inland Revenue sharing anonymised information with consultancy companies, a larger percentage (27% before the scenario questions) would support Inland Revenue sharing information with consultancy companies if they were using it to work on government projects. o In contrast there is only 14% support (before the scenario questions) for sharing information with consultancy companies working on private sector projects. Table 4: Comparison Table - Level of comfort and support for Inland Revenue business data sharing for Government vs private sector projects Level of comfort with information sharing vs support for it Using a scale where 1 means not comfortable at all and 5 means very comfortable, how comfortable are you with Inland Revenue potentially sharing anonymised individual business information with: Using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means you strongly oppose, 5 means you strongly support. How much do you support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with: Using a scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means you strongly oppose, 5 means you strongly support. how much do you support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with: After scenario questions All % of 4+5 (comfortable) All % of 4+5 (support) All % of 4+5 (support) Base: n= 480 480 480 Other government departments 50 46 47 University researchers 45 - - --Working on government projects - 41 51 --Working on private sector projects - 19 30 Consultancy companies 20 - - --Working on government projects - 27 34 --Working on private sector projects - 14 19 Members of the general public 12 9 10 Base: All respondents Information Sharing Survey \[28\] Information sharing in different scenarios The survey was intentionally split into two sub-groups (waves) and each wave was presented with two different scenarios. The four scenarios are outlined below, wave one (n=216) was presented with scenarios one and two, while wave two (n=264) was presented with scenarios three and four. Scenario one: Small business information shared with university researchers In the first scenario respondents were presented with a situation where anonymised business and financial information on small businesses could be used by university researchers. The information would be shared with the industry sector to support and grow the sector locally and possibly internationally. Scenario two: Large corporate information shared with business and economic consulting group In the second scenario respondents were presented with a situation where individual business information could be shared with the private sector such as business and economic consulting companies. In this scenario business information from a number of large corporations in their sector could be used to identify the key drivers of profitability and efficiency, for example, looking at the impact of capital and the use of labour. This could be shared with those businesses not doing so well to help them increase profitability and efficiency. Scenario three: Small business information shared with government departments In the third scenario respondents were presented with a situation where business and financial information could be used by other government departments. In this scenario business information on small businesses, employing five or less employees, is used to identify the potential for growth locally and internationally. Scenario four: Large business information shared with general public In the fourth scenario respondents were presented with a situation where anonymised business and financial information on large businesses could be shared with members of the general public. In this scenario business information from a number of large corporations in their sector could be used to identify the key drivers of profitability and efficiency, for example, looking at the impact of capital and the use of labour. This could be shared with those businesses not doing so well to help them increase profitability and efficiency. Information Sharing Survey \[29\] Types of information businesses are comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing Broad geographic location and employee numbers are the types of information businesses are most comfortable with sharing across all four scenarios  The sharing of broad geographic location information rated highly for all four scenarios (85%, 75%, 84%, and 70% for scenarios one through four respectively).  This was followed by employee numbers with a significant majority stating they were comfortable with sharing it for all four scenarios (82%, 75%, 80%, and 67%, for scenarios one through four respectively).  Respondents were least comfortable with sharing profit and loss information o Rating lowest of all the information types for scenarios one and two, and the second lowest for scenarios three and four.  However, the majority stated ‘Yes’ to sharing all information types tested with university researchers, consulting companies and other government departments. We note that there were lower majorities for the sharing of financial information and more specifically sharing with consulting companies.  Respondents were least comfortable with sharing large business information with the general public. (scenario four) o On average respondents who said ‘yes’ to being comfortable with sharing each type of information in scenario four was 14% lower than the next lowest response from the other three scenarios (which in every case was scenario two). o The difference was lowest for broad geographic information (5% lower), and highest for GST return data (23% lower).  They were more comfortable sharing information with university researchers and other government departments. o Scenarios one and three received the top two percentages of ‘yes’ responses for each type of information discussed. Information Sharing Survey \[30\] Table 5: Comparison Table - Information type and with who 16 COMPARISON OF SCENARIOS ONE THROUGH FOUR – (PERCENTAGE OF ‘YES’) Which of the following types of information about... in your industry sector would you be comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing with ...? Percentage of ‘Yes’ Scenario one: Small business information shared with university researchers? Scenario two: Large corporation information shared with consulting companies? Scenario three: Small business information shared with other government departments? Scenario four: Large business information shared with members of the general public? All % All % All % All % Base: n= 216 216 264 264 Broad geographic location 85 75 84 70 Employee numbers 82 75 80 67 Taxable income 73 58 69 40 Tax paid by the business 74 59 68 44 GST return data 74 61 63 38 Profit and Loss 65 51 63 42 Level of tax debt 70 54 57 38 Base: All wave one respondents for scenario one and two all wave two respondents for scenario three and four 16 The margin of error for a 50% figure at the 95% confidence level for a sample size of: n=264 is ±6.0% n=216 is ±6.7% Information Sharing Survey \[31\] Scenario one: Small business information shared with university researchers Businesses most comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing broad geographic information and employee numbers for small business with university researchers, solid majority comfortable with all information types being shared, they were least comfortable with profit and loss information being shared Respondents were asked which types of information about small businesses in their industry sector they would be comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing with university researchers.  The vast majority of respondents stated that they were comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing broad geographic location (85%) and employee numbers (82%).  Around three-quarters of respondents indicated they were comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing the tax paid by the business (74%), GST return data (74%), taxable income (73%) and the level of tax debt (70%).  Just below two-thirds of respondents (65%) were comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing profit and loss information about small businesses with university researchers. Figure 10: Sharing specific information about small business with university researchers Information Sharing Survey \[32\] Scenario two: Large corporate information shared with business and economic consulting group Businesses most comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing broad geographic information 17 and employee numbers for small business with consulting companies, they were less comfortable with financial information and least comfortable with profit and loss information being shared  Three-quarters of respondents (75%) stated they were comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing large businesses employee numbers and broad geographic location information with consulting companies.  Around three in five respondents were comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing the following information about large businesses with consulting companies; GST return data (61%), tax paid by businesses (59%) and taxable income (58%).  A little over half of respondents claimed to be comfortable with the following information about large businesses being shared with consulting companies; level of debt (54%) and profit and loss (51%) 18 . Figure 11: Sharing specific information about large corporates with business and consulting groups 17 Broad geographic information was individually interpreted by each respondent - no definition was applied during the survey. 18 This information is available publically through shareholder information if the business is listed on the stock exchange. Information Sharing Survey \[33\] Scenario three: Small business information shared with government departments Strong support for all tested business information about small business being shared with other government departments Looking at small business information:  A significant majority of respondents indicated they are comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing the broad geographic location (84%) and the employee number (80%) with other government departments.  Over two-thirds of respondents stated they were comfortable with sharing taxable income (69%) and tax paid by the business (68%) with other government departments.  Just under two-thirds of respondents claimed they were comfortable with sharing the GST return data (63%) and profit and loss (63%) with other government departments.  While rating lowest, a majority (57%) indicated they were comfortable with the level of tax debt information on small businesses being shared with other government departments. Figure 12: Sharing specific information about small business with other government departments Information Sharing Survey \[34\] Scenario four: Large business information shared with the general public Businesses are most comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing broad geographic information and employee numbers of large business with members of the general public. They are not comfortable sharing financial information about large businesses with the general public Looking at large business information:  Over two-thirds of respondents claimed to be comfortable with Inland Revenue sharing broad geographic location (70%) and employee numbers (67%) of large businesses with members of the general public.  Less than a majority were comfortable sharing financial information about large businesses with the general public. Figure 13: Sharing specific information about large business with the general public Information Sharing Survey \[35\] Benefits of information sharing Perceived benefits include improvements to productivity, efficiency, sustainability, growth, government decision making, and the community generally Respondents were asked what they think would be the main benefits for New Zealand businesses overall if non-government organisations like university researchers and consulting companies were allowed to access anonymised individual business information.  The most common response was along the lines of ‘improving business productivity and/or efficiency’ (17%) and ‘improvements to New Zealand business and communities in generally’ (15%).  Thirty percent of respondents were not sure what the benefits would be, or thought it ‘depends’.  Another 13% said that there would be no benefits from non-government organisations being given access to anonymised individual business information. Table 6: Benefits of information sharing PERCEIVED BENEFITS OF INFORMATION SHARING What do you think would be the main BENEFITS for New Zealand businesses overall if non- government organisations like university researchers and consulting companies were allowed to use this information? All % Base: n= 480 Improve business productivity and / or efficiency 16.5 Improve New Zealand business and communities generally 14.7 Improve sustainability and business growth in some sectors 9.9 Improve Government decision-making 8.1 Greater understanding of NZ businesses/ More accurate information 4.5 Provides benchmarks for industries 4.3 Innovation and development of new products and services 2.7 Ability to analyse data/ Statistical analysis 2.2 Less tax/ Fairer tax system 2.2 Help New Zealand businesses to be more competitive internationally 2.0 Use data for forecasting 1.7 Prevent tax evasion 1.1 Lower compliance costs 0.7 Greater transparency 0.7 Data could be used for educational purposes (e.g. new businesses) 0.6 Marketing/ demographic information available/ Targeting markets 0.2 Unsure/ Depends 29.2 None 13.3 Base: All respondents; multiple response Information Sharing Survey \[36\] Likelihood of benefit generally higher in scenario one and scenario two, where information is shared with university researchers and other government departments  The main benefits that had some traction were regarding better investment decisions for small/large businesses and government being better informed and able to support small/large businesses to grow.  The least likely perceived benefits were: o Members of the general public were supportive of Government programmes that support large businesses to grow internationally. o Efficiencies identified that leads to increased profitability for small/large businesses in their industry sector. o New products and services being identified that entrepreneurial members of the general public can develop to support their industry sector to grow. Table 7: Comparison Table –Potential benefits and with who COMPARISON OF SCENARIOS ONE THROUGH FOUR – (PERCENTAGE ‘LIKELY’) If Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about ... in your industry sector with ...; how likely do you think the following BENEFITS might occur, using a scale from 1 to 5 where 1 means extremely unlikely and 5 means extremely likely. (Percentage 4+5) Scenario one: Small businesses information shared with university researchers? Scenario two: Large businesses information shared with consulting companies? Scenario three: Small businesses information shared with other government departments? Scenario four: Large businesses information shared with members of the general public? All % All % All % All % Base: n= 216 216 264 264 Improved information is made available to (small/large) businesses in your industry sector who are then able to make better investment decisions 60 43 55 - Improved information is made available to members of the general public which encourages New Zealanders to invest in your industry sector - - - 37 Government is more informed about (small/large) businesses in your industry sector and is able to provide better support to (small businesses/large business to grow internationally). 57 48 56 - New products and services are identified that help (small/large) businesses in your industry sector to grow 51 36 45 - New products and services are identified that entrepreneurial members of the general public can develop to support your industry sector to grow - - - 35 Efficiencies identified that leads to increased profitability for (small/ large) businesses in your industry sector 43 34 39 - Lower compliance costs for small businesses in your industry sector - - 36 - Members of the general public are supportive of Government programmes that support large businesses to grow internationally - - - 25 Base: All wave one respondents for scenario one and two all wave two respondents for scenario three and four Information Sharing Survey \[37\] Scenario one: Small business information shared with university researchers Businesses thought the most likely benefit would be small businesses being able to use improved information to make better business decisions, followed by improved government support to small business Respondents were asked how likely possible benefits were to occur from Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information about small businesses in their industry sector with university researchers.  Three out of five respondents (60%) indicated that ‘Improved information is made available to small businesses in your industry sector who are then able to make better investment decisions’ was likely to occur.  A slightly smaller proportion (57%) thought that ‘Government is more informed about small businesses in your industry sector and is able to provide better support to small businesses’ was likely to occur.  Around half of respondents (51%) indicated that ‘New products and services are identified that help small businesses in your industry sector to grow’ was a likely benefit of information sharing by Inland Revenue.  Less than a majority (43%) considered that ‘Efficiencies identified that leads to increased profitability for small businesses in your industry sector’ was a likely benefit of Inland Revenue sharing anonymised business information with university researchers. Figure 14: Benefits from sharing small business with the university researchers Information Sharing Survey \[38\] Scenario two: Large corporate information shared with Business and Economic Consulting group Less than a majority of businesses considered the benefits tested were likely to occur. The most likely benefit would be improved government support to large business as a result of them being better informed Respondents were asked how likely possible benefits were to occur from Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information about large corporates in their industry sector with consulting companies.  Just under half of respondents (48%) indicated that ‘Government is more informed about large businesses in your industry sector and is able to provide better support to large businesses to grow internationally’ was a likely benefit of Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information about large businesses with consulting companies.  Around two in five respondents (43%) claimed that ‘Improved information is made available to large businesses in your industry sector who are then able to make better investment decisions’ was a likely benefit of this information sharing.  Over a third of respondents indicated that they believed the following benefits of Inland Revenue sharing business information about large businesses with consulting companies were likely; ‘New products and services are identified that help large businesses in your industry sector to grow’ (36%) and ‘Efficiencies identified that leads to increased profitability for large businesses in your industry sector’ (34%). Figure 15: Benefits from sharing corporate business information with the consulting companies Information Sharing Survey \[39\] Scenario three: Small business information shared with Government departments A small majority of businesses thought the most likely benefits would be improved government support to small business as a result of them being better informed, and small business being able to make better investment decisions because of improved information Respondents were asked how likely possible benefits were to occur from Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information about small businesses in their industry sector with other government departments.  Over half of the respondents indicated that ‘Government is more informed about small businesses in your industry sector and is able to provide better support to small businesses’ (56%) and ‘Improved information is made available to small businesses in your industry sector who are then able to make better investment decisions’ (55%) were likely (4 + 5 - extremely likely) benefits that might occur  Around two in five respondents indicated that ‘New products and services are identified that help small businesses in your industry sector to grow’ (45%) and ‘Efficiencies identified that leads to increased profitability for small businesses in your industry sector’ (39%) were likely benefits.  Over a third (36%) stated that ‘Lower compliance costs for small businesses in your industry sector’ is a likely benefit. Figure 16: Benefits from sharing small business information with other government departments Information Sharing Survey \[40\] Scenario four: Large business information shared with General public Businesses thought the most likely benefit would be encouraging New Zealanders to invest, followed by entrepreneurial members of the general public developing new products and services as a result Respondents were asked how likely three possible benefits were to occur from Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information about large businesses in their industry sector with members of the general public.  Generally, the tested benefits rated low and were seen as less likely to occur compared to the other scenarios tested.  Over a third of respondents indicated that the following benefits were likely to occur if Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about large businesses with the general public: o ‘Improved information is made available to members of the general public which encourages New Zealanders to invest in your industry sector’ (37%) o ‘New products and services are identified that entrepreneurial members of the general public can develop to support your industry sector to grow’ (35%).  A quarter of respondents (25%) stated ‘Members of the general public are supportive of Government programmes that support large businesses to grow internationally’ was a likely benefit. Figure 17: Benefits from sharing small business information with the general public Information Sharing Survey \[41\] Risks of information sharing Perceived risks all related to privacy breaches and misuse of data Respondents were asked what they considered would be the main risks for New Zealand businesses overall if non-government organisations like university researchers and consulting companies were allowed to access anonymised individual business information.  The main risks were in relation to possible breaches of individual business privacy (39%).  19% thought the main risk would be the possibility of their own business being disadvantaged i.e. their competitors might get access to their personal business information.  16% were worried about the potential for the data to be misused by the media, while another 14% were concerned about potential data breaches. Table 8: Perceived risks of information sharing PERCEIVED RISKS OF INFORMATION SHARING What do you think would be the main RISKS for New Zealand businesses overall if non-Government organisations like university researchers and consulting companies were allowed to use this information? All % Base: n= 480 Breach of individual business privacy 39.0 May disadvantage my business (my competitors might get access to this information 19.0 Misuse of the data by the media 16.0 Data breaches 13.9 Low confidence that Inland Revenue will keep my business information confidential 6.0 General misuse of data 4.3 Skewed data/ Biased data 3.2 Impact on quality tax information provided to Inland Revenue 0.7 Being targeted by sales people 0.5 Information being used overseas/ Not directly benefiting NZ 0.3 Corruption 0.1 Unsure/ Depends 16.0 None 11.1 Other 1.0 Base: All respondents; multiple response Information Sharing Survey \[42\] Likelihood of risks are generally higher for sharing information with members of the general public; followed by sharing information with other government departments  The main risks of sharing both small and large business information with university researchers, consulting companies, other government departments and the general public was the potential for misuse of the data.  In addition, privacy and data breaches were a concern for sharing of small business information with other government departments and sharing large business information with the general public.  The least likely risks were: o That it would lead to the withholding of information from Inland Revenue by businesses o That there would be more tax evasion by business. Table 9: Comparison Table – Perceived risks of information sharing and with who COMPARISON OF SCENARIOS ONE THROUGH FOUR – (PERCENTAGE ‘LIKELY’) If Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about ... in your industry sector with ...; how likely do you think the following RISKS might occur, using a scale from 1 to 5 where 1 means extremely unlikely and 5 means extremely likely. (Percentage 4+5) Scenario one: small businesses information shared with university researchers? Scenario two: large businesses information shared with consulting companies? Scenario three: small businesses information shared with other government departments? Scenario four: large businesses information shared with members of the general public? All % All % All % All % Base: n= 216 216 264 264 There is potential for misuse of the data e.g. by the media 54 56 64 69 Someone could identify who is who when looking at individual business data even if anonymised 42 44 37 43 This would lead to privacy breaches and data leaks by the people and organisations Inland Revenue is sharing the information with 40 41 53 58 Some businesses may be disadvantaged if data is shared 38 35 48 54 This would lead to a loss of confidence in Inland Revenue 38 40 46 52 This would lead businesses to withhold information from Inland Revenue 37 34 46 50 This would result in more tax evasion by businesses 15 19 19 30 Base: All wave one respondents for scenario one and two all wave two respondents for scenario three and four Information Sharing Survey \[43\] Scenario one: Small business information shared with University Researchers Businesses thought the most likely risk would be the potential for the misuse of data Respondents were then asked how likely certain risks were to occur if Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about small businesses with university researchers.  Over half of the respondents (54%) indicated that ‘There is potential for misuse of the data was a likely risk that might occur from Inland Revenue sharing information.  Around two in five respondents indicated that the following risks might occur if Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information; ‘Someone could identify who is who when looking at individual business data even if anonymised’ (42%) and ‘This would lead to privacy breaches and data leaks by the people and organisations Inland Revenue is sharing the information with’ (40%).  Over a third of respondents claimed that the following risk might occur; ‘some businesses may be disadvantaged if data is shared’ (38%)  There was some likelihood of risks to Inland Revenue with: o 38% stating ‘This would lead to a loss of confidence in Inland Revenue’. o 37% stating ‘This would lead businesses to withhold information from Inland Revenue’. o However only 15% considered ‘This would result in more tax evasion by businesses’. Figure 18: Risks from sharing small business information with university researchers Information Sharing Survey \[44\] Scenario two: Large corporate information shared with Business and Economic Consulting group Businesses thought the most likely risk would be the potential for the misuse of data Respondents were then asked how likely certain risks were to occur if Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about large businesses with consulting companies.  Similar to scenario one, ‘There is potential for misuse of the data e.g. by the media’ was the top risk amongst respondents with over half of respondents (56%) indicating that it is likely (4 + 5 - extremely likely) that this risk might occur.  Around two in five respondents indicated that the following risks were likely to occur if Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information with consulting companies; ‘Someone could identify who is who when looking at individual business data even if anonymised’ (44%), ‘This would lead to privacy breaches and data leaks by the people and organisations Inland Revenue is sharing the information with’ (41%).  Just over a third indicated that ‘some businesses may be disadvantaged if data is shared’ (35%).  There was some likelihood of risks to Inland Revenue with: o 40% stating ‘This would lead to a loss of confidence in Inland Revenue’. o 34% stating ‘This would lead businesses to withhold information from Inland Revenue’. o 19% considered ‘This would result in more tax evasion by businesses’. Figure 19: Risks from sharing large business information with consulting companies Information Sharing Survey \[45\] Scenario three: Small business information shared with Government departments Businesses thought the most likely risk would be the potential for the misuse of data Respondents were then asked how likely certain risks were to occur if Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about small businesses with other government departments.  Yet again the potential for misuse of the data was considered a likely risk by the majority of respondents. o Just under two-thirds of respondents (64%) thought ‘There is potential for misuse of the data e.g. by the media’ was a likely (4 + 5 - extremely likely) risk.  Around half of respondents thought that ‘This would lead to privacy breaches and data leaks by the people and organisations Inland Revenue is sharing the information with’ (53%) and ‘some businesses may be disadvantaged if data is shared’ (48%) were likely risks.  Over a third of respondents (37%) claimed that ‘someone could identify who is who when looking at individual business data even if anonymised’ is a likely risk.  There was some likelihood of risks to Inland Revenue with: o 46% stating ‘This would lead to a loss of confidence in Inland Revenue’. o 46% stating ‘This would lead businesses to withhold information from Inland Revenue’. o 19% considered ‘This would result in more tax evasion by businesses’. Figure 20: Risks from sharing small business information with other government departments Information Sharing Survey \[46\] Scenario four: Large business information shared with General public Potential misuse of data and data breaches and were the most likely risks Respondents were then asked how likely certain risks were to occur if Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about large businesses with members of the general public.  As shown in the other scenarios, the potential for misuse of the data was considered a likely risk by the majority of respondents. 69% of respondents indicated that ‘There is potential for misuse of the data e.g. by the media’ was a likely risk.  Around three in five respondents (58%) claimed that ‘This would lead to privacy breaches and data leaks by the people and organisations Inland Revenue is sharing’ was a likely risk.  Around half of respondents indicated that the following risks were likely if Inland Revenue shared business information about large businesses with members of the general public; ‘Some businesses may be disadvantaged if data is shared’ (54%), ‘This would lead to a loss of confidence in Inland Revenue’ (52%) and ‘This would lead businesses to withhold information from Inland Revenue’ (50%).  There was a strong likelihood of risks to Inland Revenue with: o 52% stating ‘This would lead to a loss of confidence in Inland Revenue’. o 50% stating ‘This would lead businesses to withhold information from Inland Revenue’. o 30% considered ‘This would result in more tax evasion by businesses’.  Two in five respondents (43%) stated that if Inland Revenue shared information about large businesses with members of the general public ‘someone could identify who is who when looking at individual business data even if anonymised’ was a likely risk. Figure 21: Risks from sharing large business information with general public Information Sharing Survey \[47\] View of Inland Revenue Non-Government Organisations and Business Information More than two-thirds have trust and confidence in the Inland Revenue Overall there is a high level of trust and confidence in how the Inland Revenue uses business information.  69% of the businesses said they have trust and confidence in how the Inland Revenue uses their business information.  The level of trust and confidence varied by business type, the most trusting was significant enterprises (79%).  The least trusting were self-employed business people (65%) and SMEs (66%). Figure 22: Trust and confidence in how Inland Revenue uses business information Information Sharing Survey \[48\] Business believes Inland Revenue does not share information with non-government organisations  Nearly half (44%) of businesses were confident that Inland Revenue does not currently share any financial or business information it holds with non-government organisations like university researchers, or business and economic consulting companies.  A very small percentage (3%) were sure that Inland Revenue does currently share financial and business information, while 10% thought they ‘probably’ do share financial and business information they hold about individual businesses.  There were no significant differences among the key business audiences. Figure 23: Awareness of Inland Revenue sharing of financial and business information with non-government organisations Information Sharing Survey \[49\] Higher level of trust and confidence in university researchers than with consulting companies Businesses placed a lot more trust and confidence in in how university researchers would use the anonymised business information provided by Inland Revenue.  38% of businesses had full trust and confidence in how university researchers would use anonymised information.  Only 18% of businesses had trust and confidence in how consulting companies would use anonymised business information. Conversely a majority had no trust and confidence in how consulting companies would use anonymised data and 30% were neutral. Figure 24: Trust and confidence in how university researchers and consulting companies would use anonymised business data Information Sharing Survey \[50\] Sub-group differences  There were no significant differences between the subgroups and their levels of trust and confidence in how university researchers and consulting companies would use anonymised business information provided to them by Inland Revenue.  However, not-for-profit businesses gave a higher level of trust and confidence than the other five business sub-groups for both university researchers and consulting companies. o 47% of not-for-profits said they had trust and confidence in how university researchers would use anonymised individual information. o 24% of not-for-profits said the same about consulting companies. Figure 25: Trust and confidence in how university researchers and consulting companies would use anonymised business data – sub-sample differences Information Sharing Survey \[51\] Businesses consider they own their data and consent is required to share it with non- government organisations  The vast majority of respondents (91%) agreed that they considered their business and financial information is owned by and belongs to them. o Moreover 75% strongly agreed with this statement.  Four out of five respondents (79%) agreed that their consent is needed for their business and financial information to be shared with non-government organisations such as universities and private business organisations. Only 9% disagreed and 12% were neutral or unsure. Figure 26: Trust and confidence in how university researchers and consulting companies would use anonymised business data Information Sharing Survey \[52\] Sub-group difference  Significantly less not-for-profits agree with the statement ‘I consider that my business and financial information is owned by and belongs to me’. o Only 72% of not-for-profits agreed with that statement compared to 91% of all business.  There were no real differences in the levels of agreement between the sub-groups for the statement ‘My consent is needed for my business and financial information to be shared with non-government organisations such as universities and private business organisations’. o Agreement with that statement was between 77% and 82% for all the subgroups. Figure 27: Trust and confidence in how university researchers and consulting companies would use anonymised business data Information Sharing Survey \[53\] Appendix A TOTAL SAMPLE BY WAVES\* Total sampled Wave one Wave two n= n= n= Significant Enterprises 80 39 41 SMEs 100 52 48 Microbusinesses 100 45 55 Self-employed 100 44 56 Not-for-profit 100 59 41 TOTAL 480 239 241 \*Waves were included in the survey to shorten the overall length Information Sharing Survey \[54\] Appendix B Understanding Attitudes to Business Data Secrecy – March 2016 INTRO \[You have called: %KEY% in market: %MARKET%\] Good morning / afternoon. My name is %INAME% from UMR Research, an independent market research company. I am calling on behalf of Inland Revenue. Recently Inland Revenue sent your business a letter about research we are conducting on their behalf. Can I please speak to the \[NAME\] / the owner or manager of this organisation? Currently there is very limited sharing of business information but there is interest to make more of this available. This survey is being done to gather the opinions of owners and managers about the sharing and other new uses of information collected. Your details and answers will remain completely confidential. We report summary results about groups; we do not identify which individuals have said what. This survey takes about 15 minutes. Is now a good time or can we make an appointment for another time. REINTRODUCE AS NECESSARY Good morning / afternoon. My name is %INAME% from UMR Research, an independent market research company. I am calling on behalf of Inland Revenue. Recently Inland Revenue sent your business a letter about some research we are conducting on their behalf. This survey is being done to gather the opinions of owners and managers about the possible sharing of information collected for tax or other purposes and how Inland Revenue manages data privacy for businesses’ information. Would you be interested in taking part? This survey takes about 15 minutes. Back ground information only if needed: - This is genuine market research. I am not selling anything. - The survey does not involve asking questions of a confidential, financial nature about your business - Sharing more business information is being considered in response to requests from government, businesses and academics. And to bring NZ into line with what is available internationally. The findings from this research will provide input and guidance to IR. Check quotas 1. Self-employed n=100 2. Micro businesses n=100 3. SMEs n=100 4. Significant Enterprises n=100 5. Not-for-Profits n=100 Information Sharing Survey \[55\] A Qualifying questions Q1. Can I begin by confirming that you are the owner or manager of the business? 1) Yes, owner Go to Q3 2) Yes, manager Go to Q3 3) No Go to Q2 Q2. Thank you very much for your time, but I need to talk to the owner or manager of your business. Can I please speak to that person? 1) Yes Reintroduce and start at Q1 2) No, not available 3) Make appointment 4) Refused Terminate Termination Statement: Thank you very much for your time. B Trust and Confidence in how IR handles information Q3. Using a scale of 1-5 where 1 means you have no trust and confidence and 5 means you have full trust and confidence, how much trust and confidence would you say you have in how Inland Revenue uses your business information? C. Current awareness of information sharing Q4. To the best of your knowledge, does Inland Revenue currently share any financial and business information it holds about individual businesses with non-government organisations like university researchers, business and economic consulting companies? 1) Yes, definitely 2) Yes, probably 3) No 4) Don’t know 5) Refused Information Sharing Survey \[56\] Now, thinking about Inland Revenue sharing different types of individual business information with different organisations and people. \[RANDOMISE Q5A,Q5B,Q5C,Q5D\] Q5A How comfortable are you with Inland Revenue sharing the following information types with \[Other government departments\]? \[MULTI-RESPONSE\] \[RANDOMISE 1-4\] 1) Taxable Income 2) Tax paid by the business 3) GST return data 4) Profit and loss 5) Employee numbers 6) None of the above 7) \[DO NOT READ\] Unsure Q5B How comfortable are you with Inland Revenue sharing the following information types with \[University Researchers\]? \[MULTI-RESPONSE\] \[RANDOMISE 1-4\] 1) Taxable income 2) Tax paid by the business 3) GST return data 4) Profit and loss 5) Employee numbers 6) None of the above 7) \[DO NOT READ\] Unsure Q5C How comfortable are you with Inland Revenue sharing the following information types with \[consulting companies\]? \[MULTI-RESPONSE\] \[RANDOMISE 1-4\] 1) Taxable income 2) Tax paid by the business 3) GST return data 4) Profit and loss 5) Employee numbers 6) None of the above 7) \[DO NOT READ\] Unsure Information Sharing Survey \[57\] Q5D How comfortable are you with Inland Revenue sharing the following information types with \[members of the general public\]? \[MULTI-RESPONSE\] \[RANDOMISE 1-4\] 1) Taxable income 2) Tax paid by the business 3) GST return data 4) Profit and loss 5) Employee numbers 6) None of the above 7) \[DO NOT READ\] Unsure D Trust and Confidence in how non-government organisations handles information Q6. Using a scale of 1-5 where 1 means you have no trust and confidence and 5 means you have full trust and confidence, how much trust and confidence would you say you have in how ... 1) University researchers would use this anonymised individual business information 2) Consulting companies would use this anonymised individual business information INTERVIEWER NOTE IF ASKED WHAT ARE CONSULTING COMPANIES; CONSULTING COMPANIES ARE PRIVATE CONSULTING COMPANIES LIKE DELOITTES, KPMG, PRICEWATERHOUSE COOPERS, NZIER, MOTU E Initial Reactions to Information Sharing \[Unprompted\] Q7. In principle, using a scale of 1-5 where 1 means you strongly oppose, 5 means you strongly support, how much do you support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with... (REPEAT FOR EACH) (RANDOMISE ORDER) Repeat Support scale if necessary. 1) Other Government departments 2) University researchers working on Government projects 3) University researchers working on projects for private companies 4) Consulting companies working on projects for the Government 5) Consulting companies working on projects for private companies 6) Members of the general public Information Sharing Survey \[58\] Q8A. What do you think would be the main benefits for New Zealand businesses overall if other government departments were allowed to use this information? UNPROMPTED PRECODES DO NOT READ o Lower compliance costs o Improve business productivity and/or efficiency o Improve sustainability and business growth in some sectors o Improve Government decision-making o Help New Zealand businesses to be more competitive internationally o Improve New Zealand business and communities generally o Innovation and development of new products and services o Don’t know o Probe - Anything else? Q8B. What do you think would be the main benefits for New Zealand businesses overall if university researchers were allowed to use this information? UNPROMPTED PRECODES DO NOT READ o Improve business productivity and/or efficiency o Improve sustainability and business growth in some sectors o Improve Government decision-making o Help New Zealand businesses to be more competitive internationally o Improve New Zealand business and communities generally o Innovation and development of new products and services o Don’t know o Probe - Anything else? Q8C. What do you think would be the main benefits for New Zealand businesses overall if consulting companies were allowed to use this information? PRECODES DO NOT READ o Improve business productivity and/or efficiency o Improve sustainability and business growth in some sectors o Improve Government decision-making o Help New Zealand businesses to be more competitive internationally o Improve New Zealand business and communities generally o Innovations and development of new products and services o Probe - Anything else? Information Sharing Survey \[59\] Q8D. What do you think would be the main benefits for New Zealand businesses overall if members of the general public were allowed to use this information? PRECODES DO NOT READ o Improve business productivity and/or efficiency o Improve sustainability and business growth in some sectors o Improve Government decision-making o Help New Zealand businesses to be more competitive internationally o Improve New Zealand business and communities generally o Innovation and development of new products and services o Probe - Anything else? Q9A. What do you think would be the main risks for New Zealand businesses overall if Government departments were allowed to use this information? PRECODES DO NOT READ o Breach of individual business privacy o May disadvantage my business (my competitors might get access to this information) o Low confidence that Inland Revenue will keep my business information confidential o Misuse of the data by the media o Data breaches o Impact on quality tax information provided to Inland Revenue o Probe - Anything else? Q9B. What do you think would be the main risks for New Zealand businesses overall if university researchers were allowed to use this information? PRECODES DO NOT READ o Breach of individual business privacy o May disadvantage my business (my competitors might get access to this information) o Low confidence that Inland Revenue will keep my business information confidential o Misuse of the data by the media o Data breaches o Impact on quality tax information provided to Inland Revenue o Probe - Anything else? Information Sharing Survey \[60\] Q9C. What do you think would be the main risks for New Zealand businesses overall if consulting companies were allowed to use this information? PRECODES DO NOT READ o Breach of individual business privacy o May disadvantage my business (my competitors might get access to this information) o Low confidence that Inland Revenue will keep my business information confidential o Misuse of the data by the media o Data breaches o Impact on quality tax information provided to Inland Revenue o Probe - Anything else? Q9D. What do you think would be the main risks for New Zealand businesses overall if members of the general public were allowed to use this information? PRECODES DO NOT READ o Breach of individual business privacy o May disadvantage my business (my competitors might get access to this information) o Low confidence that Inland Revenue will keep my business information confidential o Misuse of the data by the media o Data breaches o Impact on quality tax information provided to Inland Revenue o Probe - Anything else? Information Sharing Survey \[61\] E. Attitudes and behaviours towards Information Sharing WAVE ONE will be asked scenarios One and Two Q10, 11, 12, 13 I am now going to tell you a situation where business and financial information could be used by university researchers. Remember, the information would be anonymised and no business could be individually identified. Business information on small businesses (up to 0-5 employees) working in the building sector is used to identify the potential for growing locally and internationally. This could be shared with the building sector and support given to help grow the sector. In the following questions please keep this situation in mind when thinking how individual business information could be used. Q10. Which of the following types of information about small businesses in the building sector would you be comfortable Inland Revenue sharing with university researchers? Yes/ No/ Depends DO NOT READ 1) Taxable income 2) Tax paid by the business 3) Level of tax debt 4) Employee numbers 5) GST return data 6) Broad geographic location 7) Profit and Loss 8) Other type of any information \[Please specify\] 9) None of the above \[Do not read\] 10) Refused \[Do not read\] Q11A If Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about small businesses in the building sector with university researchers; how likely do you think the following benefits might occur, using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means extremely unlikely and 5 means extremely likely. \[RANDOMISE\] REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1) Efficiencies identified that leads to increased profitability for small businesses in the building sector 2) Improved information is made available to small businesses in the building sector who are then able to make better investment decisions 3) New products and services are identified that help small businesses in the building sector to grow 4) Government is more informed about small businesses in the building sector and is able to provide better support to small businesses. Information Sharing Survey \[62\] Q11B If Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about small businesses in the building sector with university researchers; how likely do you think the following risks might occur, using a scale from 1- 5 where 1 means extremely unlikely and 5 means extremely likely \[RANDOMISE\] REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1) Someone could identify who is who when looking at individual business data even if anonymised 2) Some businesses may be disadvantaged if data is shared 3) There is potential for misuse of the data e.g. by the media 4) This would lead businesses to withhold information from IR 5) This would result in more tax evasion by businesses 6) This would lead to privacy breaches and data leaks by the people and organisations IR is sharing the information with 7) This would lead to a loss of confidence in IR Now we are going to think about situations where individual business information could be shared with the private sector such as business and economic consulting companies. Business information from a number of large corporations in the building sector could be used to identify the key drivers of profit and efficiency. They will look at things like the impact of capital, and the use of labour. This could be shared with those businesses not doing so well to help them increase profit and efficiency. In the following questions please keep this situation in mind when thinking how individual business information could be used. Q12. Which of the following types of information about large businesses in the building sector would you be comfortable Inland Revenue sharing with consulting companies ? Yes/ No/ Depends (DO NOT READ) 1) Taxable income 2) Tax paid by the business 3) Level of tax debt 4) Employee numbers 5) GST return data 6) Broad geographic location 7) Profit and Loss 8) Other type of any information \[Please specify\] 9) None of the above \[Do not read\] 10) Refused \[Do not read\] Information Sharing Survey \[63\] Q13A If Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about large businesses in the building sector with consulting companies; how likely do you think the following benefits might occur, using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means extremely unlikely and 5 means extremely likely \[RANDOMISE\] REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1) Efficiencies identified that leads to increased profitability for large businesses in the building sector 2) Improved information is made available to large businesses in the building sector who are then able to make better investment decisions 3) New products and services are identified that help large businesses in the building sector to grow 4) Government is more informed about large businesses in the building sector and is able to provide better support to large businesses to grow internationally Q13B If Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about larger businesses in the building sector with consulting companies, how likely do you think the following RISKS might occur, using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means extremely unlikely and 5 means extremely likely \[RANDOMISE\] REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1) Someone could identify who is who when looking at individual business data even if anonymised 2) Some businesses may be disadvantaged if data is shared 3) There is potential for misuse of the data e.g. by the media 4) This would lead businesses to withhold information from IR 5) This would result in more tax evasion by businesses 6) This would lead to privacy breaches and data leaks by the people and organisations IR is sharing the information with 7) This would lead to a loss of confidence in IR Information Sharing Survey \[64\] WAVE TWO will be asked scenarios Three and Four Q14, 15,16,17 I am now going to tell you a situation where business and financial information could be used by government. Remember, the information would be anonymised and no business could be individually identified. Business information on small businesses (up to 0-5 employees) working in the building sector is used to identify the potential for growing locally and internationally. This could be shared with the building sector and support given to help grow the sector. In the following questions please keep this situation in mind when thinking how individual business information could be used...... Q14. Which of the following types of information about small businesses in the building sector would you be comfortable Inland Revenue sharing with other Government departments? Yes/ No/ Depends DO NOT READ 1) Taxable income 2) Tax paid by the business 3) Level of tax debt 4) Employee numbers 5) GST return data 6) Broad geographic location 7) Profit and Loss 8) Other type of any information \[Please specify\] 9) None of the above \[Do not read\] 10) Refused \[Do not read\] Q15A If Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about small businesses in the building sector with other government departments; how likely do you think the following benefits might occur, using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means extremely unlikely and 5 means extremely likely. \[RANDOMISE\] REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1) Efficiencies identified that leads to increased profitability for small businesses in the building sector 2) Improved information is made available to small businesses in the building sector who are then able to make better investment decisions 3) New products and services are identified that help small businesses in the building sector to grow 4) Government is more informed about small businesses in the building sector and is able to provide better support to small businesses. 5) Lower compliance costs for small businesses in the building sector when dealing with government departments Information Sharing Survey \[65\] Q15B If Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about small businesses in the building sector with other government departments; how likely do you think the following risks might occur, using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means extremely unlikely and 5 means extremely likely. \[RANDOMISE\] REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1) Someone could identify who is who when looking at individual business data even if anonymised 2) Some businesses may be disadvantaged if data is shared 3) There is potential for misuse of the data e.g. by the media 4) This would lead businesses to withhold information from IR 5) This would result in more tax evasion by businesses 6) This would lead to privacy breaches and data leaks by the people and organisations IR is sharing the information with 7) This would lead to a loss of confidence in IR Now we are going to think about situations where individual business information could be shared with the members of the general public. Business information from a number of large corporations in the building sector could be used to identify the key drivers of profit and efficiency. They will look at things like the impact of capital, and the use of labour. This could be shared with those businesses not doing so well to help them increase profit and efficiency. In the following questions please keep this situation in mind when thinking how individual business information could be used. Q16. Which of the following types of information about large businesses in the building sector would you be comfortable Inland Revenue sharing with members of the general public ? Yes/ No/ Depends (DO NOT READ) 1) Taxable income 2) Tax paid by the business 3) Level of tax debt 4) Employee numbers 5) GST return data 6) Broad geographic location 7) Profit and Loss 8) Other type of any information \[Please specify\] 9) None of the above \[Do not read\] 10) Refused \[Do not read\] Information Sharing Survey \[66\] Q17A If Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about large businesses in the building sector with members of the general public; how likely do you think the following benefits might occur, using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means extremely unlikely and 5 means extremely likely. \[RANDOMISE\] REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1) Improved information is made available to members of the general public which encourages New Zealanders to invest in the building sector. 2) New products and services are identified that entrepreneurial members of the general public can develop to support the building sector to grow. 3) Members of the general public are supportive of Government programmes that support large businesses to grow internationally. Q17B If Inland Revenue shared anonymised individual business information about larger businesses in the building sector with members of the general public, how likely do you think the following risks might occur, using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means extremely unlikely and 5 means extremely likely. \[RANDOMISE\] REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1) Someone could identify who is who when looking at individual business data even if anonymised 2) Some businesses may be disadvantaged if data is shared 3) There is potential for misuse of the data e.g. by the media 4) This would lead businesses to withhold information from IR 5) This would result in more tax evasion by businesses 6) This would lead to privacy breaches and data leaks by the people and organisations IR is sharing the information with 7) This would lead to a loss of confidence in IR Information Sharing Survey \[67\] F. General risks and benefits of IR sharing Q18. Now that you have had a chance to think about the risks and benefits of sharing anonymised business information, I would like to ask you again ... In principle, using a scale of 1-5 where 1 means you strongly oppose, 5 means you strongly support, how much do you support Inland Revenue sharing anonymised individual business information with ... REPEAT FOR EACH RANDOMISE ORDER REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1) Government departments 2) University researchers working on Government projects 3) University researchers working on projects for private companies 4) Consulting companies working on projects for the Government 5) Consulting companies working on projects for private companies 6) Members of the general public G. Safeguards and Frameworks Q19. How strongly would you support sharing anonymised business information with non-government organisation if the following safeguards were in place, using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means strongly oppose and 5 means strongly support. \[RANDOMISE\] I. The safeguards meet the standards for privacy similar to the Privacy Act for individuals. II. All financial and business information will be anonymised and no individual business will be identifiable. Q19A. How strongly would you support sharing anonymised business information with members of the general public if the following safeguards were in place, using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means strongly oppose and 5 means strongly support. \[RANDOMISE\] I. The safeguards meet the standards for privacy similar to the Privacy Act for individuals. II. All financial and business information will be anonymised and no individual business will be identifiable. Information Sharing Survey \[68\] H. Attitudes to information sharing \[Prompted\] I would like to ask a few more follow-up questions. Q20. How strongly do you support the sharing of business and financial information in the following situations; using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means strongly oppose and 5 means strongly support? READ LIST REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1) the sharing of the information to help a particular business sector grow (e.g. grow local or international market) 2) the sharing of the information to aid Government policy and decision-making 3) the sharing of the information to aid one specific business (e.g. help them develop an innovative product; or move into a gap in the market) Q21. Thinking about the following statements, using a scale from 1-5 where 1 means strongly disagree and 5 means strongly agree, how strongly do you agree with these? REPEAT SCALE IF NECESSARY 1. My consent is needed for my business and financial information being shared with non-government organisations such as universities and private business organisations. 2. I consider that my business and financial information is owned by and belongs to me. Thank you.