Beneficiaries of an estate under administration are not entitled to estate income unless it is specifically stated in the Will.


Beneficiaries of an estate held in trust may be entitled to the income of non-discretionary / fixed trusts.

On this page:

## What is an estate under administration

When an estate is under administration:

1. The deceased person's investments and assets (forming his estate) are administered by a personal representative.
2. The income generated by the deceased's assets is considered estate income.
3. The beneficiaries are
    **not entitled** to the estate income unless the deceased had specifically stated in his will that certain assets be given to certain beneficiaries immediately upon his death.
4. If the personal representative distributes the income during this period, it is estate income in the hands of the beneficiaries.

## Determining the period an estate is under administration

The period of administration starts one day after the date of death of the deceased person and ends when the legal personal representative has taken all steps to ascertain the residue of the estate and to complete the administration of the estate.

The facts of the case determines when the administration period of an estate has ended. The end of the administration period will be regarded to be on 31 Dec of the year in which the Grant of Probate/Letter of Administration is issued by the Courts, unless the legal personal representative of the estate advises IRAS otherwise.

Example: If the date of death is 15 Aug 2023 and the Grant of Probate/Letter of Administration was issued on 30 Nov 2024, the period of administration will be regarded to be from 16 Aug 2023 to 31 Dec 2024 unless otherwise advised by the legal personal representative of the estate.

## What is an estate held in trust

When an estate is held in trust:

1. The estate is no longer under administration and there are some more investments and assets left in the estate. These are held in trust for the beneficiaries.
2. The trust is administered by a 'trustee'.
3. The income derived from assets belonging to the trust is trust income.
4. Beneficiaries may be entitled to the income of all non-discretionary / fixed trusts.
5. If the income of discretionary trusts is distributed, it is trust income in the hands of the beneficiaries.

[Pages**How to calculate estate income tax**](https://www.iras.gov.sg/taxes/other-taxes/trusts/working-out-estate-trust-income-tax-by-trustee-and-beneficiary/calculating-estate-income-tax)[Pages**How to calculate trust income tax**](https://www.iras.gov.sg/taxes/other-taxes/trusts/working-out-estate-trust-income-tax-by-trustee-and-beneficiary/calculating-trust-income-tax)